The National Archives
(c) crown copyright
Catalogue Reference:kv/4/466
Image Reference:1

THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
314) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958 JULY 2010
Klop came to see me. He wondered whether
there was any thirs further bhat he could on
I said that I thought there ought to be
some Ashcal characters W.1 om he could very
well sea He then as.eu whether by any
chance we knew the whereabouts OL HILGER,
formerly a representative on the herman
Embassy who had been in Moscow roughly from
1920 O Warus. As it seemed to us both
that it would at least be interesting to
discover precisely what ieu the Russians
to make a pact with the Germans in the earl.
days of the war and what caused Germany
to attack Russia in 1941. We ascertained
from Stewart Hampshire that HILDER is at
present held by the Americans. Stewart is
going to try and lina a plausible excuse
for getting him over here.
I saw the DG about HOOPER. He thinks that
we should send a copy of the dossier to
that as soon as he has readit we should be
have a joint discussion as to how the case
can best be liquidated.
July 31st
Victor is bac.. for a day. He has fixeu up
an arrangement with Wing Of the LRC who is
preparing exhibits for the MI5 museum. We
discussed the joint intelligence scientific
committee and agreed that we shoulu be
permanently ra riesented. Vietor i Bals that

alarm and to freeze up on Leasa-bend.
Milino and I had a tal.. wi uh Hawli about
the future OL CSDIC. He will have to make
recommendations this month about the closin
down or all cams in this country. We sai
that in the present state oi ani airs we
did not think it mattered since we could
now send military personnel to 020. t was
however essential that one or other I u
should keep some sort 01 Cardpen here
ior the more important cases; as they woulu
be of CI nature it seemed to us that 0.20
should probably carry the oblisation.
I saw Maltby for a moment. He tal.eu a
little about the future of RSS but told me
1.othing I did not know already. He is I
think anxious that the organisation should
continue on its present lines and not be
merged with GC & CS.
Peter Hope came in to see me. He is now
attached to Joe Stephenson's office in
Paris. He is irom all accounts doing very
good wrk and I gather that the British
Embassy are very pleased to have us there.
Stopiorou tells me that Hooper's colleag
from CO The Hague who was eviden.
a party to Hooper's operations with the
Germans, died in 1943. We shall not there-
fore be able to get any corroborative
evidence from him.
August lst
Stratton came in to see me. He has just
returned from India olluemobilisation, only
to find that his firm will not have very
much for him to go for the next year.

were particularly interested in the werewol
organisation and Dick told them that he woul
give them all the information in our pos-
session. The Russians are concentrating
on the Hitler Jugend as they think auring
the winter months they may become active.
The atmosphere was a bit stilted at iirst
but gradually sostened under the influence
of different kinds of vodka and immense
quantities or food. The Russians are still
sceptical about Hitler. Dick was shown
all the evidence, namely wiat were
alileged to be Hitler's teeth and the charrea
remains of Eva Braun. He told the Russians
that in his view Hiuler was almost certainly
dead and in any case it was a mistake to
broadcast anything to the contrary since
the illusion, if it were an ilusion, that
Hitler was alive wauld stimulate the
underground movement. Actualy Dic. haa
a report the other day that Hitler was
residing somewhere in the British zone.
raid was stageü but without any results.
The whole incident is being kept very quia
August 2nd
I had a talk with Alec Kellar who returned
last night from the Middle East. He has had
long discussions with oficers in Pales-
tine and Cairo about the possibility, subjec
to very rigid safeguards, or the Palestine
Polies being put in the know about OATS.
The dang er about having any body 11.e Giles,
a somewhat ambitious policeman, au fait
with inflamma bie material on the sira, is
obvious. At the same time the military
feel that the identirication 01 certain
personalities which can only be eifected by
à certain amount of Kowledge being imparted
to the police, is or paramount importance,
since in the event of an upheaval it would

reduced before long and a large number
would consequently be available. Pour more
girls are to go out east.
THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
UN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958 July 2010
1 suggested to Charles
that I might approach Harola scott and
see what could be done. He was quite
ägreeable to my doing this. I pointed
out that our overseas commitments would
by and large e bound to stand whatever
Findiater Stewart Said, but I undertook
to review them all and try to put up
a comprehensive survey for the DGS
approval.
I attended a meeting in the DMIS room with
nellar, Marshai--Cornwall,Viv., Ryan of CICI
y and certain other M.I.stain orlicers.
meanwhile CICI would continue
to run these agents in a semi-overt
manner and would also collect overt intelli-
gence as before. CICI's main office would
retire to Kermanshah but would leave four
good officers in Teheran who would either
be a British Military Mission or be attached
to the Military and Air Attaches. It has
already been decided in Potsaam that both
ourselves and the Russians will evacuate
Teheran. I sussesteu tiat we might perhaps
Qo a deal with the Russians and sugbest to
them that as our liaison in Teheran had been

Job
Milch nters. bomber he. OP
planned assaults on industries, particularly
bottlenecks such as ball-pearings and
chemical industries. The attack of the 12th
May 1944 caused the first serious shortages
of indispensible basic products and was the
greatest anxiety Inr the future conduct
of the war. Fran August 1943 onwaras,
Speer and Milch had pressed for the cons-
truction of fighters. Nevertheless the
High ommand orderea bomber production to
continue as they were of the opinion
that it was only by means of retaliatory
attacks that the allied assault on Germa
towns could be slowed up. This accounts
for the fact that even in 1945 the construc-
tion or 4-engine bombers was ordered once
again. Moreover considerabad more impor-
tance was attached to the lak programme
in the battle against the bomber's. It was
Elven higher priority than the fighter
programme. This was switched on the orders
of Hitler himselt. It was not until Aarly
1944 that air attacks became decisive.
The attacks on the che mica industry were
most difficult to deal with since before
activity can be recommencea at à chemical
factory the entire plant must be restored
in at least one phase of manufacture in
order that the chemical processes waich
for a self-contained unit might pass
through all its stages. The American
attacks which followed a aerinite system
of assault on industri l targets really
caused the break-down of the German arma-
merts industry. Speer believes that
strategic bombing alone, if it had been
directed at the chemical industry, would
have sufficed to render Germany dei ercceless
Further targets of the same kina were to be
found in the ball bearing industry and in
power stations. In the armament Erld War

LRC On the second day I give them a talk
about relations between our main unction.
espionage, subversive movements and security,
explain to them what we think the pos twar
1 Orm is going to be, and in whatway we think
they can make a contribution. They then so
down to see tae registry at Blenheim. Ir
my talk I told them why we had set up the
LRC, the reason being that we were uealing
with a centralised organisation and, more
important still, it was necessary to have
time thoroughly to Silt a man's story.
Such facilities do not exist at the port
in wartime and still less in peacevime wher,
visitor's woulu resent being extensiveiy
examined. There is no doubt that the 1.0..
appreciate the new development by which tne,
are being placed in closer contact with
ourselves. They have however a good many
complaints against SCOS and somewhat resent
not having been brou_ht into the picture
3 years ago. I Saated very lightly over
this by saying that we realised that mistan
had Deen made in the past but that we hoped
that in future relations would be on a
different basis since we should now be relyi
entirely on 1.0.s in the first instance.
This did not mean however that we expected
them to do our job. They could however made
a very big contribution by letting us
Ilow of any cases where they could not l'ina
a plausible excuse for a man's visit and were
quite certain that he was not coming TOT tile
purpose stated. They asked particularly that
they might be informed about cases which
they reported. I said that we hoped to be
able to meet this request through our
Regiona. Oblicers who wou d be visi ting
ports from time to time. We were nowever
up against certain human cirliculties. One
01 them was that the investigation of
reports was in a large percartage i cases

The argest of these factories at Hanover
remained intact. II it had been destroyed
construction on U-boats would have beer.
abandoned 4 weeks later.
Speer states that an attack on electric
power stations if on a sufficiently com-
prehensive scale, would have had devastating
eilects. The jailure i 60% of the total
electric power production would have
suficea, and is the most eiiective mean
of brining the whole of inaus try and public
life immediately to a standstill. This
and the gas industry are the only spheres
where it is impossible to create reserves
and build up stocks between the prouncer
and the consumer which can postpone the
efl'ects 01 bombing for several months.
As a result of the breaching of the Monne
Dam the Ruhr Valley was 'looded and the
Iresh water pumping station in the Ruhr
was put out of action by mud and silt.
Despite this however adequate supplies
of water were restored after a lapse of a
week. The simultaneous destruction of
the other Ruhr Valley dams would have
resulted in a considerable drop in output
in the Ruhr. For the year 1943-44 it is
estimated that 1 million to la millions
people were employed in ARP and bomo damage
repair work. Speer thing that mixed bomb
loads of H.E.and incendiaries were the most
effective both from the point 01 view of
destruction of property arid morale.
According to a Jap BJ, the Jap An.bassador
was informed on the 13th July that unless
something deiinite could be said about the
urpose oi Prince Kongvers mission as a
special envoy from the Emperor, it was not

wil th a wide range of frequencies. In April
1940 he was suspected of complicity in a
burglary and his housewas searched. He was
found to be endeavouring to eat a torn-up
card which he had pulled from his pocket.
This card was a print or an enlargement
from a micro-photograph of wireless Cypher
instructions. Also a plain-language code
and instructions for the use of secret ink.
In the house was found a mathematical slide
rule which had been converted into a simpla
substitution cypher of a type familiar
to us in early espionase cases. The New
Jersey police released LOHRY apparently
ithout comment as he was not connected with
the burglary case. LOHRY was them employed
by the Arundel Corporation which was cons-
tructing an American Naval Basa at San Juan
in Porto Rico. While there he was sound on
orie occasion to be leaving the works in
TOOS Session of a detailed blue-print of the a
dry dock area and railway communications.
He was detained as his expianation of the
Igeitima te interest was accepted. In Jan.
1943 he was automatically draited into the
US Armed Forces. It is said that he announc
ed his intention at this time of deserting
and passing his information to the enemy.
On November 28th 1944 he was interviewed,
apparently for the first time, by the FB
when he denied ther whole of the above story
but nevertheless committed himself. The
father when interrogated confirmed many
of the details.
According to statements by General Blumentrit
and a Naval Captain Assmann, Rundstedt was
concerned essentially with an assauit in the
area of 0.B.West. They supposed that the
main point of contact would be at the Strait
of Dover, aiming at both sides of Calais.
The points in favour of this supposition

Rundstedt no longer reckoned with a second
landing near Calais because, according to
their appreciation, the British and American
had no need to take this risk once the land-
ing on Normandy had proved successful and
they were of the opinion that all available
troops should be moved into Normandy. This
was not approved by the OKW who were still
afraid that the main operations would be in
the Calais area. The above is or course
further proof of the efficacy 01 the Garho-
Brutus deception plan. P/W states that
Informa tion about England was extremely
scanty. On the evening of the 5th June
there was an important announcement to the
Resis tance Movements i 10 m which the Germans
realised that immediate danger threatened.
Owing to this announcement Alert Stage 2
was given in the 15th Army area between
8-10 pm. The Army, Navy and Air Force yu!
Services produced better results about the
Army and Air Force units but could not
follow their movements suificiently clearly
to draw ary derinite conciusions. P/W did
not know anything about the Diving of formati
-ons as this was not within his sphere. The
bombing of the bridges over the Seine betwee
Paris and Rouen and the bridges over the
Loire between Orleans and the river mouth
signified to the Germans that the area
of Normandy and Brittany was being
isolated. Travel bans were fairiy quickly
known. They were partly regarded as decep-
tive measures, above all the diplomatic ban,
News of the renewed diplomatie trairie
between England and Sweden caused some
interest as it was thought that this indica
ted the conclusion of allied invasion prep-
arations. This may refer to the proposal
that the air line should be reopaed.

Vesey talked to lie about accommodation for
the LRC persomel. Wheri Barter boes he
would have to waste his time kicking his hea
at the LRC. I am trying to see ii it is not
possible to fit the LRC stai into BJ.
Malcolm Cumming rinus it coveriet to keep
them where they are as a levar against the
Orlice on Works, from whom he is tryins to
get accommodation ior the transier of
Blenheim.
THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958 Jun 2010
Buster is a little worried about the
interrogation O1 SCHELLENBERG at 020. There
have been so many charges owing to the
approachine transier 01 020 Overseas on
Aug.15th that the interrogation has not
been very productive and questions put by
the War Room have not been answered. Buster
has taken this up with Stimson in Tin-Eye's
absence on embarcation leave.
Harker tells me that the Jugoslavs want to
give us all 'uecorations. The difficulty is
that as Irom June 9th Tito has cancelled
all previous oruers and an ounced a series
01 new ones. It is doubtium thererore
whether the King's orders are still Valid.
In any case, as the DG put it, the whoie
business in relation to its importance to us
is not worth the time at trouble caused by
the correspondence it entails. Persorlay I
am not aware ol having uone any third for the
Jugoslavs. I should not be surprised in the
whole thing were not inspired by Tricycle.
It may be too that the Jugoslavs hope for
reciprocal treatment.

I had a long talk with Clayton about the
Iuture of 0.C. I have asked him to get out
a memo showing what on present evidence
our Iuture organisation hould be. He shou
also state the number of wil'icers required.
I regard as firm the com i tmelts it the
Caribbean, Malta, Gib., Fangoon, Singapore,
Earpt, East Africa coverilt West, and "outh,
Aden, and possibly Cyrpus, e, con aru HongKu.
It seemed to me that there was no particula
point in waiting lor the result of the
Findlater Stewart enquiry. Il we could
Eet DSO scheme approved by the C.o. we
could ther. 50 to the Treasury. This woulu
eriable us to make lirm oliers to people
lixe Kirby-Green. I told Clayton that I
doubted the advisability of having other th.
a purely A.Branch administration officer to
eai with colonial matters. If we had an
0.C on the lines envisaged by Ide it
would I think have to work on the basis of
limited knowledge, which woula be unsatis-
factory, or ultimately absord most oi the
office. It seemed to me that we should have
an intelligei.ce section to deal with the
Caribbean area, with the Mid East, Far East
and African areas and that the produce of
DSO points should be fed into these section
By una large I thinc Cla/toi. agreed with me
He understood that it was essential
that the person responsible lor the area
should know his DSOS and all the people witi
whom they had to deal in their area, and
that this work could not be divorceu irom
the purely intelligence product.
We have received a paper iran the J.I.C.
with proposals thatGermant scientists and
technologists should be allowed to as tabuisi
themselves here wit their wives and famili
under certain sateguarus. Io is tent that

their claim to the two provinces 01 Ka2 and
Ardahan in N.E.Turkey. This attitude, com-
bined with continued prees and radio criti-
cism or Turkish pro-fascists etc. sugests
that the Soviet Govt. ultimate aim may well
be to bring Turkey, like Russia's other
neighbours, within the Doviet orbit.
Meanwhile Jugoslavia's press and radio
attacks against Greece and in particular
against Greek treatment of the slav
minority in Greek Macedonia have recently
increas eu in violen:ea. D aria, Roumata,
and Albania have now joined in with similar
attacks on Greece and this gives the impres-
sion that the concerted campaign is under
tive direction of Moscow. The Jugoslavs
accuse the Greeks or having been responsible
for frontier incidents and shooting on
the Jugoslav-Greek Irontier. Even if the
incidents have in l'act taken place, they were
OL minor importance though the danser exists
of more serious clashes at any moment. The
Jugoslays have sufiicient forces in the
area to invade Greece alone her northern
1 rontiers and to seize Salonika. The
Russians have i or ces in Dungaria estima teu
at 15-18 divisions, and the Bulgarians
about 17 divisions. They could easily
seize Greek Thrace and eastern Macedonia.
Moreover a consiuerable number of Russian
troops have been reported in Bulgaria along
the southern frontier. It is doubtiul
wheta er Jugoslavia or Bulgaria would under-
take an act of aggression without Russian
encouragement. The problem theraiora is
mainly one of Russian intentions. It may
well suit russia's book at some siven moment
to encourage Jugoslav and Bulgarian aspirat.in
to the Aegean coast either separately or a
as a XIZİMk supporting action coinciding

120
even to satisiy Poduing ton who himseli paiu
a visit to France. This visit was delibera
ly facilitated by BLEICHER who was able to
persuade his superiors that it was wiser to
permit the SOE officer to returi. TO Brgland
thincins his organisation was in onuer, than
to arrest him and bring the organisation to
ar end. Under the alias O Col.Herri,
BLEICHER suggesteu to membar. O, this SOE
group that he himsell Show be brought to
England. It is not as yet crear wheunerth
this was ari attempt on his own part to be
l'avourable terms with the British, who he
believed would win the war, or whether it
was a bola penetration move authorised by
BLEICHER'S superior orlicers. BLEICHER also
ran with similar success at least 2 W/T
agents for SIS who were arrested in 1943. .
The Japs have opened tentative peace nego-
tiations through their representatives on
the Bank of International Settlements at
Berne, the Swedish Adviser to the Bank, and
Dulles, said to be a representative of the
US President in the capacity of special
adviser to the American Legation. the Japs
are pressing ior some guarantee for the
safety of the Japanese Imperial family and
the national structure. The Americans are
still sticking to unconditional surrender
but are throwing out hints that this
would not necessarily imply the removal
of the Japanese Imperial family or the
national structure.
THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENTUUR SECTION
314) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958 July 2010

22
he never really got going. The diii'erent
uepartments showed little enthusiasm for
co-operation as they were very reluctant
to offer and release their high-grade
communications for the purposes of deception
In Jugoslavia the German Minister Dr.Neubach-
er intended to provide arms 1or about 40,000
volunteers of Mihailovic in order to win
the movement over to Germany and to use it as
a lighting unit against Russia and Tito.
This plan failed owing to the strong resi.
tence of the Wehrmacht which had no confi-
dence in Mihailovic and his organisation,
though it was increasingly inclined to trust
to information that Mihailovic was pursuing
not so much a pro-communis tas a pro-British
policy. As regards Russian espionage Schel-
lenberg mentions the notekappelle. This was
the name of a wide-spread Russian organisa-
tion for espionage working in Berlin from the
end of 1942. to the middle oi' 1943. Some
high German officers and oflicials occrying
important positions were involved in it.
A Major on the Gereral Staff of the Luftwaife
called Schultzer-Boysen was the principal
figure. There were others in the Air Min-
istry, the Economic ministry and the F.o.
One Semenov in the Russian Legation in
Stockholm was concerned in putting over
deception material under the direction of
a central ol'lice ir. Moscow. This was
eventually discovered by W/T monitoring
by Amt 6 specialists at Wannsee Institute.
There were two Hungarian agents called
Lobmeyer and Eltze woning under diplomatic
cover wito were in W/T contact with London.
(Source Nero). Many reportswere received
from the Spanish SS and Fo including all the
Duke of Alba's despatches. Schellenberg
always suspected Mueller, head ol' Amt.4, of
being a Russian agent and spoke about it

194
The head of the Turkish Intelligence Service,
Naci Pekel, collaborated with the Germans
in running ageats across the Caucasus into
Russia; through the interception of Turkish
telegrams the Germans learned that the Russia
had protested to the Turks about these
activities. Schellenberg alleges that
in the middle of 1944 two men were sent by
Mil.D (sabotage) to S. Africa. They each
received $5,000. Both were Germans and
had lived in S.Africa before. Their
task was to sabotage ships. They set ou
from Spain.
acti protestere German
The British Soldatensender West was very
successfully directed and had a most
demoralising effect at the end of the strugel
on German civilians and soluiers alike.
The famous Richard KLAIT who was in charge
of the Sofia Meldekopit was never wholly
trusted. It was found that he got his
intelligence from a Slovak lawyer and Prince
Turkul. The latter had a White Russian
line to Moscow. Schellenbers asserts that
he a contact inside the British Embassy in
Madrid. He has the highest aumiration for
the British Inteliiser.ce Service but clearly
kriow's absolutely nothing about it.
August 8th
I discussed with narr, Allen the Dualey Clark
proposal that we should not only pubiich some
official document about our deception during
the war but also put out a film on the
subject. Dudley Clarke argues that a good.
deal is already know about deception and DAS
and that the truth will leak out and that it
is therefore much better to get the credit
for what we have done byxax45x issuing
some officiat publication. To my mind this

requisitioning whatever they want, and leavin
the rest to the quasi-communist German
regime. Lekoett thinks viie t they may well
decide to stay in Germany permanentiy.
There are still 3 million people ir. Berdiri
out of a population of 42 million ana house a
and food problems durint this winter are
likely to be appalling. Legsett is aute
determined to take the 1.0. exam. If he
fails however he might like to consider
a job here. Meanwhile he would lice to
go to the Control Commission either to the
Economic Dept. or to C.I.
I had a word with Joe Archer about the pro-
posal to bring German scientists and tech-
nologists to this country. He thinks it
important that they should be contined to
research and development and not allowed
to stray into the field of design, which
would inveitably lead thing in to contact
with industrial firms where they would learn
our future pro.ramme.
The DG has agreeu to my setting Scherr back
to take over the contacts in b.16. eanwhile
there is a serve to bet Kirby-ueeeri to run
the International Police ir. Tarsier. this
is being resisten. Kirbureen does not
want to do the jow and cannot be spared
I rom uib.at the moment. Ultimate/ he wound
like to be DSO Caribwean.
Highes talked to me about the laxity or the
Post 0ifice in prosecuting people who use
wireless without a licence. In 9 cases out
of 10 they condone the olence by giving
the man a licence in oruer to regularise
his position. I have suggested to Hughes
that he should get out a memo on the subject

certain scientists to go to Moscow. I said
that I had been away but that it might well
be that pe ple of the type of BERNAL, who was
a member of the 0.P., were not considered
suitable to send to Moscow as they had been
right in the middle o scientific develop-
ment here and would probably spill the beals.
I promised to find out more and let him
KNOW
He then showed me Ribbentrop letter to
Winston which has been wandeu o konty.
k curious thing in the covering Letter was!
that he referred to the P... as r.Vincent
Churchill. This seems almost incredible for
an ex-Foreign Minister, and it has been
suggested thatpossibly it was not Riobentrop
at all who had written the letter. The
letter stated thirt Ribbentrop wished to
convey personally to the PM what he described
as Hitler's last will an testament. He
said that in fact neither he nior Hitler had
ever wanted a war with Kniglarid and that he
himself had always resurdea England as his
second home. He was sure tot the only
future ior Europe lay in close collaboration
between Ending and Germany. The letter was
full of inconsistencies but in the present
distorteay.state of the German Inind may
conceivably be sincere.
I talked to John Warriott about the case of
Barnett and Roland Bird. I think he is
more or less persuaded that it is better in
the circumstances to say nothing. He mas,
as I have, complete confidence in Roland's
integrity.
Buster tells me that he is quite reudy is
his practice allows to put in hall me 'rum
Sept.onwards and I wished him to do 80.

which they did not know which might bother
them so they confined themselves to
reporting any real acts or sabotage and
many imaginery ones to Soe, who expressed
themselves as being thoroughly pleased with
the results. Many of these reports presumab
-ly appeared in Sitreps. The Germans also
penetrated SIg to some extent by allowing
to remainat large two of their agents,
called Apollo and Brutus (Not Our Brutus)
Brutus was finally arreated byt apollo
was allowed to think that he hau sot aw
with it. In Dece. 1943 or Jan.1944 he was
allowed to go back to England in order that
he might inspire coniidence. SF arranged
1or a careiud watch to be kept upon the
Wireless Signals 01 aircraft operating
i rom the station whence agents were des-
patched. Tiney Kilew almost invariably
when an agent was coming because tre re
was always a trial ilight during the
afternoon. Like ourseives, the uermans
scrutinised carefully the trac.S 01
all low-flying aircrait.
AQgust 8 thn
I attended a meeting o.. the JIC' at which
the paper on German scientists was ais-
cussed. Generaliy speaking our compro
suggestion was accepted, amely that the
scientists show.d come here for a limited
period during which British scientists would
be working alongside them. The idea would
be that they should absorb their ideas and
when the Germans had been suced dry we
should eliminate them from the picture. We
also suggested that the Germans should be
kept out of design and not permitted to
visit iactories where they would get access
not only to the work that is being done but
to our future programme. It was so gested

be ver anxious to have them in a position
w.jere they can report the movements of
ships. I suggested that this matter should
be dealt with other than through Censorship
channels.
Milmo came to talk about his successor. He
thinks that Martin Forrest should take over
his section and the duties of B.IW. I am
arranging this with TAR.
I went to see Newsam about the German scien-
tists. He began by saying that the Ho
could not express views to the Chiel's or
Start and they could only talk through the
Home Secretary, at a Cabinet Meeting. I
pointed out that this was not likely to be
very eii'ective and that it would be lar
better if the HO views went forward in
consolidated form to the Deputy Chiefs of
Starf. I suggested thereiore that Newsam
should come to the next meeting 01 the JIC
which he agreed to do. I have so iniormed
King-Salter.
Serpell of F.Division has made an interestin
discovery with regard tours. de PFEIFFER
about whom we had a certain amount of troubl
She was employed in PID and had had
access to B.J.s. She wanted to rejoin her
Spanish husband of German origin in Spain
who had been threatening divorce if she d.d
not return. It now seems that shough one-
Mervyn BELL in PID shewas placed in contact
with Claud COCKBURN who assed her to collect
ini ormation for him on her return to Spain.
It has further transpired that
Mrs.de PFEIFFER's sister, Miss Paul, married

to get him to change his mind and Pror. Dale
went so far as to say that he would blow
the whole business if in a matter which
affected scientilic development throughout
the world the PM persisted in maintaining
his attitude. Ultimately the PM was
persuaded to accept the message from BOA
and agreement was subsequently reached with
the President. Meanwhile we and the
Americans have concentrated on buying up
al the stocus of uranium on wnich we
could lay our hands. There were apparen
-ly certain stocks in Austria for which we
made a bee-line when the Germans Collapsed.
We got this stock and also all the leading
wcientists and their papers. 12 of them
have been brought over here. Pro.. Darwin
thinks that all, with the exception of one,
have extremely valuable contributions to
make. Probabiy if the Germans had been able
to make the jump that was ma ue by ICI they
might have produced the bomb in a lar
shorter period than the USA. Tae real
important factor in the whole matter was
the new approach to the subject discovered
by ICI. Other stockS 01 uranium are in
Canada and in the Belgian Congo. There
are also certain mines in the Urals, but
nobody is very clear as to what they are
capable of prouucing, or in fact how far
the Russians have got with the winole
proposition. About 18 months or 2 years ag
the question arose of bringing the Russians
into the whole scheme. There was a good
deal of argument for and against, and finally
it was decided against, and the first that
the Russians knew about the successiul
development of the atomic bomb was at
Potsdam, where they were told that one of
the bombs would shortly be dropped on the
Japs. They had in fact, rior to this
agreed to come into the war against Japan,

194
it woula be a pity if this were misinter-
preted as trying to puii a rast one over
SIS, tactics which were quite out or the
question in a man like Findlater.
Cecil had a long talk with c. who was aso
in the club and curiously enough had no
idea who kindlater was. He did not know that
he was head of the Home Deience Executive
or indeed what the Home Defence Executive was
nor did he realise that findlater sat on
Chief's of Staff Committees and attended
Cabinet meetings when proposals arfecting
his work were raised.
I saw Leggett and told him that he had the
opportunity of taking what would probably be
a G.2 job with C.I. on the Control Commissior
as liaison Oificer with the Russians, or
going to the Economic Branch of the Commissic
as a G.3. He prefers to take the CI job.
THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958 July 2010
I spent the afternoon at Barnet. M.E showed
me over his excellent general search dept.
Hd is aiming at having a complete library
in which will be recorded by countries
the various types of trail'ic on the air. The
record will give the times, irequencies,
stations, and peculiarities, In this way
it will be possible to monitor at a moment's
notice. His methods of indexing are very.
elaborate and provide at least 4 or 5 chances

AUERst 10th
I have asked Jim Hale to take up the case
of Emma LINDHORST with the H.O.
I attended a meeting at the FO with
Howard in the chair at which Viv.,AF, Rex
Leeper and Bromley were also present. It
was todiscuss the proposad that we should
assist Greece in setting up a Central
Information Service to deal with foreign
intelligence and home security. I had
pointed out that the Greeks had so far
asked more for advice than an adviser and
that with all the political complications
it might be better to deal with the question
on an ad hoc basis. We could then feel our
way to some morenpermanent liaison. This
was generally agreed and Viv.is to go out
with Leeper at the beginning 01 Sept. for
a preliminary discussion in order to
ascertain precisely what is required. I
gather that there is a move to get the
Greek PM over here at the time of the 1irst
inter-allied conference in order to show
the Russians that the present Govt. intenus
to pursue the same policy towards Greece
as the previous one. We evidently in tend
to retair. our hoiu on Greece anu to see
that it does not come within the Russi.
orbit.
At the 12 o'OLOCK meating Cecil mentioned
two individuals,COOK and CRŽAN, who accord-
ing to a report from the field were trained
in sabotage activities by Groening, the same
man who trained Zigzag. It is not known.
what their mission was. They returned to
the Channel Islands in 1943 possibly vo
report something about them from some of t
characters in Ast Nantes who have a ssed

ultima te solution may well be that a Regent
will continue for the next 5 years until
Prince Baudouin car. succeed, on the King's
a baication. II the Aing were to return
now there would undoubtedly be civil war.
A plebicite would probably result in a
50-50 vote. De Ganzhol is on the side of
the King, who has on several occasions Deen
very near to abdication. He apparently
agrees to abdicate in the evening but revers
es his decision on the following morniro.
There is to be a meeting this afternoon on
contraband control at MEW. The idea is to
cease control in Gib. the W.Indies etc.,
and we are opposed to this until we have
got the GIS remnants in neutral countries
back into Germany. As luck would have it
an agent of the GIS who was at one time
destined for the USA was on his way to the
Argentine and was picked up at Trinicad
today. He was identilied by a member of
the FSP This will considerably strengthen
our case.
Baxter came in to say goodbye today. He will
be a great loss to us, although the LRC is
now reducea to very small proportions.
Keilar is having long conversations with
Gort who apparently likes his new Ministc..
He says that like himseli he is not an
intellectuat and that they therefore get
on well.
Creun came to say goodbye. He is on his
way back to Canada and hopes to get into
External Affairs. He is still however open-
minded and might be gtd to join us.
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
314) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958 July 2010

140
his tracks and he had to put out after
the revolution. By and large however he
regarded the work as unprositabie.
August 13th
Dick came down to Tring on wunday, when we
had a long talk about the future o1 the ori-
ice. He seems Bairly satisiied that most
people in SIS agree that overt liaison
should be carried by ourselves on C.I.
matters. I outlinei to him the subses-
tion that in future the oivice should be
divided into territorial blocs, the Russian
bloe to include not only the Russial sphere
01 iniluence but also the CP and movements
01 the Leit and the Germania IOC to include
Fascists and movements ou the night The
other blocs should be I think a Mia East,
a Far East, a Carribean and possibly and
African bloc. 0.C. Wound disappear, DSQ.
coming into the appropriate territorial
bloc. This did not mean of course that
any Russian activities in the Mid East wou
not be passed to the Russia.. section lor
information and consultation. Equally it
would probably be necessary to maintain
AM thony's section dealing with the Embassies
and Legations on a technical basis. Dic
seemed to agree that this was the best
arrangement.
I talked to him about the CP and the
differences of view about kee ng a close wa
watch on all Party members. We came to the
coclusion that it would probaby. De neces-
sary to continue this work on as detailed
å basis as manpower would allow. Dick
- himself has recently veer faced with a very
difficult case. An Ollicer or sergeant in
the FSP who had been doing extremely wood
work and was very keen about his job

THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958 JM 2010.
Luke came to talk to me about Mrs.Paulson,
the widow of Paulsen who worked for B.LA
he has been looling after one oi the B.LA
houses in which urs.RUSER has been living.
Mrs.RUSER is now going to stay with a
relative and will go back to Spain as soon
as her son can get her there. Meanwhile
under agreement we have been looking after
her. Mrs.Paulsor on the other hand and her
son cannot remain a permanent commitment.
I have suggested to Luke there ora that he
would have a talk with her and find out
what her plans are for the future. She will
have to leave the present B.LA house
which we are giving up on the termination
01 the leas.
Lee tells me that the H.O.contemplate the
total abolition of the exit permit not only
for British subjects but ior aliens as well.
I said that as iar as we were concerned the
only danger spot would be Palestine after
the termination of the Jap war. I have got
Alec to wire out to Palestine in order to
discover whether they have any entry permit
system. The only other possible alternative
would be to declare Palestine a military

I saw D.M.I. about the proposals for dealing
with members of the Jewish Brigade who wish
to take their leave in this country.
We were prepared to accept any British
subjects after rei'erence in the case of
Jews. Foreigners in the Brigade should
however in our view take their leave on the
continent. DMI was prepared to accept this
arrangmment provided it had the backing
of the Colonial 011ice.
I spoke to Dick about a request that had
come to us from M.1.1 for a GSOT to be
employed with the British Mission in Holland
Dick said he ulready had a mar. called Rhodes
ealmarked for this job. He thought he would
be an excellent candidate for a jou similar
to that 01 brook-Booth, and that he would
probably be prepared to stay on as MIS
representative in Hortaliu is we were ultima i
ly given the job 01 conductin.overt liaison
August 15th
Today and tomorrow are anounced as V.J.Jays
Gort came in. He had seen finala ter stenart
and given his views about the Security Servi
He will undoubtedly have expressed his appre
ciation or Kellar's services but apart from
this I do not think he is very sound about
the organisation.

Tulo
The interrogation of Her ert WICHMANN, at om
time Einz marine in Hamburg, has given us
some interesting information. ne iirst
Joined the Abwehr at the end on November 19
He says that Canaris was displeaseu with the
worx uone against Einburnu uuring the 2 years
prior to 1939. In WICHMANI's view they
had gone practically nothing. Autemuts that
he made to get nolu 01 members O British
crews Sailing to Hampurs were unavailing.
A certain amour oi insormation was apparent-
ly obtaineu irom the publications Rwader
"Yachting" ali "The Navy" which were on
interest to the construction dept. 01 the
OKH. He reiers to a Dutch art ueader named
RELCH who made 2 trips to England in 1938
to recruit agents but iaitea. The Ger-
mans apparently studied the papers very
closely for the names or people wanting
Geruan business connection. For their
internal communications in Holland they useu
newspaper kiosks which provided uncontrolleu
delive.y for mails. Expressing his opinion
on oificers in the German wavy, WICH..AN says
that the young ones are inclined towards
Russia who they think will need them as they
have few dailors at a moment when they
would oiviously expand their lavy. The older
officers incline thowars this country.

At the daily meeting Thomas mentioned the
case of a PZW wao had ultima tely turned out
to be a German. His story which is generally
believed is that he sot mixed up with some
British P/ws and being clad ina khaki shirt
he got into a P/W camp where he had remained
for 18 months. He seems to have satistied
all his colleagues that he was British althou
he has spent most of his liie abroad. We
have now got to take steps to rou a him hi
and get him baca to Germany.
I had a short talk with Hill about his work
and congratulated him on what he had done.
I gather that the BOLSOM Case is going quite
well and that two more coniessions have been
obtained. BOLSOM himself is extremely
rattled. The War Reserve policeman who was
getting £2 a week for watcaing BOLSOM's house
has been sacked. Chief Inspector Barrett
who is handling the whole business appears
to be doing very well and as far as we know
there has been no leaza e through police
channels. Barrett however takes all papers
home with him and is anything is typed in
the office it is done in his presence. Hill
wants David to stay on with him ior another
month. He is anxious to return to his own.
business lairly soon but would stay on on
a half time basis until we know what our
reorganisution is going to be. Il at that
stage we could make him a reasonable olier
he might be prepared to remain on permanent.ly
I Lunched with Hocher-Lunu ol the Norwegian
Intelligence and another re resentative of
his organisation who is going to Roumania.
Rocher-Luna has returned from Norway Ior a
Iew days. He sa, s tuat everything is going
quite smoothly na thau he does not anticipat
any trouble Irom the left. There is evident-
ly a reunion or the Communist aru -abour

148
services. At th same time he asked himsell
the obvious question "What was being done
on the German side in the deception of the
enemy?" The answer was disappointing.
Neither on the political nor the miditary
field ,not to mention the economic, could
any trace 01 deception be found. The linda-
mental cause was the absence of a Reich
General Starf which worked on a global
basis. The execution oi SCALEELENBERG'S
plan was still completely in its iniancy
by the end of the war and the different
departments showed little enthusiasm ior
co-operation, as they were very reluctant
to to offer and release their hibraue
connections for the pur oses or deception.
In Turssey SCHELLENBENG saiu considerable
support was received Irom the Turaish Secret
Service who supplied Caucasians,Geor.ial.sett
who were smus-led into Russia by the Germanis
through the Caucasus. This lea to violent
protests by the Russians throush the Turks.
Fritz Kremer in Sweden he believeu had some
men in England, mostly Swedes, who reported
on the aircrart industry. (This may be
a refere ce to the reports from CERVELL) whic
reached him through the Swedish General Stai'.
August 16th
I had a talk with Ryan about the future
of CICI and its officers.
August 17th
Italied to Milmo and Forrest It was a recu
that Forrest shound ta..e over Mimmo's job
until he was demobilised.
THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958 July 2010

150
whether this would be enough to retain
his services. I said that I thought who-
ever ran General Search should have ireedom
of access to intelligence depts ana I
outlined to him precisely what our require-
ments were, namely (1) a knowledge oi the
intelligence network of potential enemies
(2) the detection of illicit wireless I rom
this country, (5) some sort 01 policing of
the ether against tearage of our iniormati
services. Lastly we were interested in /
the breaking of certain services which had
a bearing on security in this country. For
all these reasons IIa.lt that we ought to be
represented on the Sigint Boara. C. aid not
weem to be convinceu about this, as he said
that the Sigint Board uid not assess
priorities. However he will think it over.
August 18th
A character called MULACK has been reported
on by one BISCHOFF Ol the Abwehr, MUDACK
was despatched to Canada in 1940. He is a
naturalised Canadian of German origin. On
arrival in Canada he told the RCMP he had
been back to Germany to settled claim again
--st the Germani Govt. He was closely
interrogated andowing to his past connec-
tions with the NSDAP in Canaua was
interneu for the duration of the war.
The police are now anxious to prosecute him
il they set suliicient eviuer.ce.
Newsam rane up to USA whetherwe wouka abree
to aliers who were on a visit or tmporary
visa being allowed to go out on the country
without an exit permit. Britis subjects
would have to have similar lacivities.
I said trat as far as I could see there was
no objecti It, but that I would have to
consider the matter and pass the enquiry

fesumably and the lition Admired
I attendeu a meeting at the Admircity where
we discussed the abolition on Press ana
Censorship and the system 01 D.Notices which
presumably have to come into Iorce againi.
I pointed out all the ineiticiancias and
dancers of the system and said that I
much preierreu the Air Ministry methou OI
teling the press Waat they could publish
rather thai. What they could not It seems
however that it will be necessary to give
the prass Some broaa directive as to
matters on whichwe showu like discussion
with them before publication.
Thorriton rang up to say that the DPR had
jibbed about the reiusal to grant leave to
this country to alien members of the Jewish
Brigade. He thought there would be trouble
if Palestiniar.s were excluded. I explained
to him that Palestinians were not legally
British subjects though they were British-
protected subjects. Most of the Brigade
however consisted of aliens, Poles,Germans,
Austrians etc. We thought that a division
between British subjects, irrespective of
the shape of their noses, and aliers, might
very well be made. Thornton thought that
making a distinction between Canadians and
Palestinians might Lead to trouble. He
did not semm to realise that Canadians
were British subjects, and wher. I told him
that they were he asked me whether this was
purely a war measure. He seemed astonished
to hear that Canadians could not be refused
entry to this country whereas citizens 01
the UK. could be refused entry to Car.ada.
We had a meeting in the DGs room to discuss
the abolition or certain DRS. The only ones
that we were seriously concerned about were
80A which we thought would have to 60 unless

Cussen and I went to the meeting calleu by
Admiral Thompson to discuss the abolition
of Press and Censorship and the importance
01 indicating to the Press whau we wishea
to keep secret. It was decided that each
Service should issue a broad directive
and that the old committee of P.U.S. Should
be reconstituted.
Cayzer and Clay Doni uiscusseu with me Clay-
ton's memo apout the future 01 Our DSOS
abroad. I said that belore proceeding
further we ought to arrive at som estimate
On toe eeout of our DSO points and of the
Persoriel required to run them. These
Iigures and the pre-war 1igures wound bive
us some sort of estimate.
Milmo tal.ed to me about getting KALTEN BRUN-
NER interroga teu by Klop at some suitable
place. We agreed that this Shou be done
with full safeguards.
I dined with Barty. I asked him for his
estimate of the balance sheet of SOE on
his experience in Italy and elsewhere He
said that he thought So had done some good
Jobs and some very bad ones. In Italy
they were wide open in the Milan area
but had other stations which survived un
the advance. Broadly speaking however he
thought that the sup ly af ans and ammuni-
tion to partisans unco-ordinated with
an immediate military peration was à Waste
of time. Partisans could not hope to operac
against regular troops or ever be more than
a slight irritation. The only ell'ect 01
our operations in Jugoslavia hau been to
builo-up Tito, wino was now a thorn in our
sides. His activities at the very most

156
out at any time. He wanted to low the
precise date on which I expeeted him back.
He thought it should be either Oct. 7th
or 17 th. The extra days were on account
of the leave he had ta en in this country.
Denis Page came to see me He is going
out to handy to take Ionides place. I
gave him a full account as I could about
QICB and the various personalities in
the area.
August 2514
The DG Sawharry Allan, Briscoe anu my sent
and asseu us to urait a further letter to
the DNI about our subceste representation
on the JSIC.
The DG and I saw Maxwell and Newsam about
the proposal to brinb ovar Germani scientists
We covered the ground very carerunny, giving
all the arguments already enumerateu. we
went further and discussed the desirability
of getting some policy about incorporating
aliens into industriessueh as the machine
tool industry where they could obtain Tuli
information about our war potential. Newsam
undertook to raise this matter also at te
Chief's of Stall meeting.
ins Imathere th war P
I had a tal. with Horroc..s about the fucure
organisation and outlined to him my ideas
on the subject. He dia Lot seem to be in
disagreement and said that he could not set
the DG to make any move until after Fina-
later's enquiry.
Ian Wilson came to say goodbye. He has
put up a note on the Tricycle group with a
recommendation that Tricycle,Dreadnaught
and Freak Shoula be given some sort of
a ward.

something todowith the scheme subseuunetly
revealed in the telegrams might sub.est thad
BEDAUX was behind the whole thing. The
telegrams showed that the Germans had made
a very determined effort to lure the Duke
of Windsor back into Spain from Portugal
and to prevent him i rom taning up the post
that had been offered to him in the Bahamas.
The Germans never appeared in the picture
but through the Spanish Foreign Minister
and the Spanish Minister on the Interion
they sent agents to the Duke who was staying
in Lisbon as the guest of Esperito Santo
SILVA, the head of the bank of that nama
which of course is known to us as an
agency for the transmission o1 Iunas to
German agents. Various statements are
attributed to the Duke by these agents which
are not of a very Savoury kind. Although
it seems doubtful whether the Duke Was
scheming for his ow. restoration, it is
iairly clear that he expeesseu the view,
which I understand he has expresseu else-
where on a number 01 occasion, that the
whole war was a mistake aru that 11 he
had been King it never would have happaneu.
He clearly ra Cher Teit himsalir. the role
of mediator, if his country had finally
collapsed, but he did not think that
the moment was opporturie lor any sort
of intervention. He seemed to believe that
he widerstood the Germani people far better
then anyone else. The Germans went to very
great lengths to persuade him not to embark
for the Bahamas aná SCHELLENBERG , who was
in Lisbon at the time, was reporting to
the Ambassador and organising acts of
intimidation such as the sending on anony-
mous letters with bouguets of flowers to
the Duchess warning her that the offer of
the appointment ir the Bahamas was merely
a plot by the British to do away with him.

done. The other enquiry that we could
make would be to take a look at any tele-
grams sent to the Banco Espirito Santo
around 15th August 1940 since in the
light of our personal knowledge we might
find the code telegram referred to. I
expiained that we had been interested in
t is bank for otherreasons and that there
might therefore be a record in our l'iles.
I gather that Censorship obtained during
the early days of the war a talegram
from Mme BEDAUX to the Duchess in the
Bahamas which seemed to be of a singularly
com romising nature. There were a lot
of blanks in this telegram but the sense
of it seemed to be that the question eitner
of the uke's mediation or of his restora-
tion was discussed at some previous gate
and ume BEDAUX was anxious to know whether
he was LOW prepared to say yes or not.
I gather that the Dure is conins here on a
short visit to his motaer ir. the near
I uture and that he will ultimately settie
at Ca d'Antibes, although various jobs
for him have been under consideracion, such
as the overnorship ou Madres ana Abbassaud
ihr Washington, etc. lor ali ou which he
would saem to be sigularly unsuited. bevi
is au ladt with all the iniormation
given above and is endeavouring to
recover the copies and iiims of the tele-
Erams in question, since it by any chance in
they leaked to the American Press, a very
serious situation would be createu.

I b
2
and ask him to go into the question as
being directly relevant to the work of
the Security Service.
Stopford was shown Vivian's reply on the
question OI HOOPER and agrees with our view
that there is no possibility of our amplay-
ing HOOPER in any capacity in future or
of giving him an recommendation to a
commercial firm.
At the daily meeting Bird produced a
letter from the German N.A. here datau 107
or 1938 to Einz Marine in Berlin or Hamburg
indicating that a Mrs.Crooks, apparently
cook to a British admiral, and a man called
Bolt, would constitute useful agents. Our
files show that Mrs.CROOKS was only in
contact with the Germans by a visit to
the Embassy when she signed her name in
a book. She had been approached i rom
Denmark. BOLT has so far not been positive-
ly identified, but a mall of that name has
Just returned i rom Germany where he has
been more or less at liberty throughout
the war. If he i, identical it would seem
unlikely that he ever did anything, otherwise
he would have been lent here or sent here
during the war. Another List a 150 supp
by the Naval Attache gives the names o.
certain people who should form the nuci
O an Anwher station in Holland in the event
of war. The list includes Gustav LACHMANN,
Hans SELIGO and others who are known to us.
I have asked Bird to try and ascertain
whether we could get into touch with the
ex-N.A. and Mind out whether LACHMANN had
in fact agreed to carry out this task or
whether the waole arrang ement was one which
had not got further than the N.A.S minu as
a good idea.

163
August 25th
Dick telephoned yesterday to say that HILGE
was being sent back to Washington on
Wednesday. The only chance was for KLOD
to go to 21 AG onsunday when he would get
2 days clear interrogation. It might
be that HILGER'S departure could be post-
poned if the interrogation was going well.
We decided that klop should as arranged
tackle KANTENBRUNNER today and leave on
Sunday.
I had a talk with Charles and Cayzer about
DSO points particularly seeretaries.
Two are required for Hong Kong, 2 for nandy
and 2 for singapore. The 2 ion Nandy are
urgently needed. Nothans appears to have
been done since Dixon wrote nearly two
months ago, and the situation is getting
desperate. We also arranged with Miss
constant to get out inancial de laius"
about the various DSO points abroad so
that we could put up an estimate in conjuric
Dion with our memo on the subject which we
hope to get approved by the Count the
Treasury.
The De showed me a better that he has had
irom 0.obviously drad tea by Viv.,objecting
to Roger Hollisis visit to the USA, which
he says will tend to relegate his liaison
with the FBI on communism to a secondary
position and causa unnecessary Quplication.
He thinks that the acceptance by the Dg of
the FBI's invitation without prior
consultation is all the more deplorable
owing to its being taken while the wind-
later enquiry was still being coriaucted.
Finally he says that li he has to acquaint

a bout Amt 4 in which we were very
interested. KALTENBRUNNOR endeu up by
saying that he would tell us everything
that we wanted to know. It was decided
that klop should leave for Germany tomorrow
and that Stewart Hampshire should continue
with KALTENBRUNNER.
August 27th
I had a Word with Craul'ard about his memo
on possible trenus in Iuture German
espionage. I said that I would like to
have these memos passed through me as
I felt they ount to be considered in the
light of all the information available.
I felt by and large that they were al too
speculative a ria ture to warrant distributid
outside the office. Information that we
have received showed that in fact the
Germans had no set plans for the future
or that at any rate such plans as they
had were completely in the air owing to
the general break up of the Abwehr alid SD.
It followed therefore that for the moment
there was nothing really proiitable to
say. Matters would doubtless crystallise
in due course when we could devise plans
to meet the sitation.
I went down to 020 where I saw Stimson
and Scott-Harston. I arranged that
SCHELLENBERG should be questioned about
his activities in Lisbon in June and July
1940. If necessary it should be made
clear to him that we had definite intorma-
tion that he had carried out observation
on the Duke and Duchess o Windsor. I
was anxious to lind out precisely what he
had done in this respect and what he knew
about the plans of the Germans. I save
instructions that there was to be no

policy of aggression through minorities.
Where minorities c.istea they were stimulated
and where they did not exist they were
created. He aia not know about the 4.0. ara
was particularly interestea ir this aspect
of the case. I told him that I would let hin
have a copy of Curry's memo. I also recom-
mended to him that he should co sult M.1.14
wao blew a great deal about the S.S. anu
Gestapo and the para-military organisation
It is felt that once criminal conspiracy
15 proved the other problems 01 indiviulua.
brutalities will ialt into line. Personally
It ink the wnole procedure is quiteadread-
ful. The DPP had recommended that a Fact-
Finding Committee should come to the concius-
ion that certain people should be bumped ofi
and that others should receive varying terms
oi imprisonment, that this should be ut to
the House of Commons al.d that authority
Shound be given to any military body l'inuing
these individuals in their area to arrest
them and inflict whatever punishment had
bee.. decided on. This was a much clearer
proposition and would not bring the law
into disrepute. Winston had putthis forward
at Falta but Roosevelt lelt that the
Americans would want a trial. Joe supported
Roosevelt on the perfectly I'rank grounds
that Russians liked public trials for
propaganda purposes. It seeins to me that we
are just beinis draused down to the level
Oi tlie travesties of justice that have been
taking pdace in the USSR for the wast 20 yrs.
A notorious British renegade ramea COLE has
bee run to earth in Paris as an American
Captain in C.I.
Colleage came to talk to me about a prospecti
Freich abent naineu
with whom he has
got i..to touch through a Geruall ábent being
run by M.Division. The case 100KS promising.

PULY THIS IS A COPY JOTO 167
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
3(4)ACE THE LO RECORDS
ACT 1958
Tansze came in to say goodore. He seems to
be going away quite sa tisiied. He has a
job with the Daily Express to write Hickey!
column. He has been giver. Some slight
retaining fee, nu will keep in touch with
the orlice.
Roland Bird came in to discuss the l'uture
of the War Room. It is proposed to cur-
tail some on its functions and to reauce
it to about 12 in November.
R.J.looked in to see the papers about
German scientists. He said that I'rom
his own knowledge or britiski, American and
German scientists, he could say that in
pure science we were second to none and the
people who were coming over were really
engineers. The Germans were to Some
extent ahead or us in jet propulsion, liquid
fuela, Laval asdies and supersonic weapons.
He entirely agree with our view that
these so-called scientists should not be
allowed to bed themselves down. here
inaiinitely. He could not see why they
should not conduct their experimmnts in
Germany under our supervision.
He then talked about his owr. iuture. He
is ir tenuing to retire Iron FIAT and thinks
that the office should 11t him iri. He
is apparently writing to the DG iu this
sense. Personally I camot see how he lits
ir.
Allen ol G.P.O., Hughes and Sclater came,
to discuss the Post Office attitude in
regard to the prosecution or people trans-
mitting without licences. We Sa lisiied
Allen that thepresent position Wus Iar

.
169
papers al though he thou ht he might have
some difiiculty:
Jim tells me that he is taking a
continental tour to visit our d eu
opposite numbers, after which he will be
retiring I'rom the oilice. I a. ned him
wiat would happen to his divisioni, Dut he
had no very adequate an.swer. I saiu that
in fact it meant that old Alzey aru co.
would be coming to me.
Miss Bagot came to talk to me about a
Document received I DO SIS which indicates
that th Czechs are setting up a military
C.E. and E. Bureau and also a dept. under
the ministry 01 the Interior at the head
of which will be col.barlik, assisted by
a Capt.Pichler. It is to deal with
"political and security political matters".
The bureau will have repra.sentation in
Toreign countries, including London, under
a Col. Krcek. It will report on
subversive activity 01 all sorts and to
enquire particularly into al German
activities at home and abroad. Kreek
works through a Major Llas. He also has
a contact with Major Zhemchiuzninov,
Soviet Military Mission in boncoli.-
August_29 UH
Mr. Howe, who has taken over Courington's
job, called on the DG today. He was
formerly our Minister in Abyssinia. The
DG told him that we had the impression
that his predecessor thought that his work
had nothing to do with us. Howe-clearly
knew that this was Codring tor's view.
The DG felt that security was one and
indivisible, and made it quite clear that
if the leakage in Ankara hau come to our

Aur ust 30th
Keilar has had a word from Ryan saying
that Alan Roger and Carstair's will accept
the job in Hong Kong and that Thistle-:
thwaite is prepared to come to London.
THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
314) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958 JUL_2010
Colledge now wants to go to the Education
Dept. of the Control Commission for a year
and then return to his university at
Liverpool. This is rather a disappointment
as we have been training him for a
permanent job in the dept.
Vesey tells me that Markee has had an offer
to go to PCO Paris. He wants to return
to the Security Service later il an oppor-
tunity presents itself. I have recommended
that he should go.
ats Service lates to returnier
Finzell, the Australian looked in. He had
had a fairly successiui time although he
had experienced considerable difficulty in
getting about Germany. His bestlind was
at Friesing, where there were recorus 01
the Auslanas Institut. The most interesting
document was a recommendation by the NSDAP
to the FO dated 1942 about the future of
Germans in Australia in the event on a
Jap invasion. It was thought that either
all Germans should be brought back to the
Reich or that they should be segregated in
Tasmania. There were also listo OI various
people in Australia who were prepared to

THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958 June 2010
Harr/Allen talked to me about a peper
which is coming up to the Chieis oi Stari
about the future 01 intelligence. It
relates mainly to JICs and to some
extent to secret intelligence activities
of SIS. There is practically no mention
of the Security Service. I tolu Harry
that I thought that 4 points ought to be
made clear: (1) that whever SIS hay
representation the Security Service or its
aquivalent ought also to ba represented.
(2) that the Services should be aware that
in the last 6 years the Security Service
has carried out their CI uuties il this
country which at times was very much a
zone 01 the armies. (3) that wher. He
Ammies proceeded overseas the security
Service not only planned the whé 01.
their CI for them but proviueu taen
with all the ney personnel. (4) What

THIS IS A COPY O
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
Gwyer arrive TEBE RECORPS
there penis an oi'iicial emaior ni.
services ran the WO
Cayzer came to talk to me about ar.
assistant DSO Ior Rangoon. He hus one or
two people in miru. He is coins to put
wotne case or Kiru-Green which is still
hangint lire.
Oraviura came to talk to me about his
departure. I tolu him that I thought it
would be some time berore Gemalt e-piotice
throuh comercial Tiems 600 on ius ieet
agair. anu that by any lal'se I thought he
woulu De well auvised to get the ICI job
il he could as it would not be possiule
offer him any thing here or a particuarly
exalted kind. It was necessary moreover
to let younger people have a chance. He
seemed quite sa tisiiec.
I luriched with Romie Haysor. He is
going to take over when Dick leaves ir
6 months, with the option on either side
to continue. keanwhile he will be
training a successor. He told me very
coniidentiall that the present DMI
was goin, CO SIS and had beer tr/ins to
bet
DO BO with him.
Whether anything has materialiseu with
regard to
I do not know. I cu
imagine that his presence in SIS would
be very welcome as he has consistently
and severely criticised that Organisation
ever since he came into intelligei.ce.
the Control Commission is betting on its
Lees but Ronnie Says there is liot much
policy for the future, Nobouy nas jet,
considerau What is to becoma ultima tay
Oil the many people who have been arrested

177
that he was prepared to waive the objectior
that he would normally have made, provided
Stephenson with his knowledge on the
Whole local position was prepared to
concur.
beutember 4th
TAR vroucht mahs to see ma touuy.
Iner has been a citise toute petween
Col.Verneuil and Peter Hope. Hope had to
Collect the renegade COLD Irom the French
kone, aria asseu Gerrain, Col. Verneuil's
A.D.C. whether it would be all right ior
him to employ BST. Tae BST o not r.01-
mally operate in the French one which is
Col.Verneuil's preserve. Germain said
it would be all right if they kept their
heads down." Verneuit appears to have
discovered this later on and now refuses
to collaborate with Hope. Lemans says
it is really a matter of interal politics
but that we ought not to leave things as
they are. He volunteered to endeavour to
straighten the matter out. I said that
Trevor Wilson was going to try and do this
but I thought that it might be a 8004
thing if they collaborateu. Lemans I
believe is to remain behind here as the
liaison ciiicer for DSDOC.
Niall MacDermott lookeu in. He is on
Leave for a i ew Qars and will de lunching
with me tomorrow.
At the Dus meelinto 023 yuestion ou policy
with regard to theáumission o adiers who
hava colla Dora le with the GIS 'Was uis-
cussed. The casus of the two paliarus
were mentioneu, Wizo were cuniis to the
corMerance on civilaviation and in spite
on our protests had been aumitted by the

September 5-6 th
Away with a cold.
Two P/Ws from the .F. Tamed Amis
SCHWARZE aru Hermann DAI SKI, think that
tue w/Tespionage system and the ability
una training 01 Eberts in this country
leit much to be desired. They believe
that we relied on thartity rather thar.
quality. Their eriticisms are as JOLLOWS:
(a) the frequency, day and time at which it
is intended to re-open communication should
not be announced in elear or in a very simple
Cove at the end of a transmission but shout
be embodied in the eneyphered text of a
message. (b) where lixed times I Or command-
cation are pre-arranged these should not
follow a regular pattern such as Tor example
as always appearing at 0800 hours on a
Monday. (e) Procedure, choice of call
signs etc. should resemble as closely
possible that most arequently used in the
particular scene of operations. for axample
the exclusively British custom or' ha ving
calisigo consisting of letters Sudou oud
Conspieuously in the Balkans and Italy
where German Army proceuure loca
eikkvilian and mai la procedure amitted
mixed call its consi, pins On olla heter
and 2 figures or 2 verlap Liicure.
The practice Di British agents in france
en Beledim was sourder II. i. respecu
(4) no redundant si ELLIS, &reetings, Cour-
tesies or sign-011S should be indubeu 111
(e) agents should not be required to appeal
on the air is a matter ou routine. I tua
agent has notning to report he should
remain silent. (1) in order to prevent link-
ing of certain agerts with a particular
station by intercept, the practice oluri-

for money and was sent $20,000 through
Tricycle. Busch thought Tricycle was col-
trolled because he sent reports on the
eufeet oi bombing which could be on taineu
a i ew days later are the newspapers. Busch
reasoned that i Tricycle was COL.LrOlieu
Tate was probably also controlle. His
colleagues however were quite satisie
wi tla bota these agents. (b) Dusch was
also rather suspicious about the incident
when Tale reported that he had been in
trouble with the police. Berlin only bot
I rom Hamburg Tate's military reports but
on one occasion Busch mariaged to set hold
of his lile. He was horri ieu to ind that
Hamburg had giver. Tate the names and
addresses of Mutt and Jeli, who were young
Norwegians already sent to the UK.
Colores von DAWITZ, the head of the glish
sections at the head uarters 01 the lui'twarte,
apparently agreed with Dusch Chat Tate was
controlleu but despite that view Vouched for
him on the principle that it was betser to
have a working agent that none atau.
de occasione was bo the name
Speaking on Snow, Busch decided that he
was controlled and when he wired that a I rier
of his (namely Celery) was travelling to
Lisbon and should be met. Raritzau went Co
Lisbon and brought the man back to Hamburg
ir triumph. Busch wax solsceptical that
he gave him the code nalue o Haues. When
Brade went to Hambur to meat llades, the
letter framly aumittau that he wao ar 48 ent
01 the British Internisance Service but
wurted to Work IOL Germany. He was slver
money and sent back to the UK via bibuu, Dut
ng news was ever received from him. An.
interesting iact is that Busch hau ar oruer
at the bekimine of 1941. Ua lorw&P SUL
Snow's weather reports to the personal
secretary | HESS. I HD Was spending a

783
Aircrait instructory. Buschon returning
from Stockhom in 1944 was able to read the
files covering the period prior to the
invasion and formed the impression that
Ustrois reports covatained with those of
Kraemer. Thus Kraemer inventeu 5 new airbome
divisions Waich he moveu about from the Wash
to Scotland, or to Italy, whilst Ostrobava
news Oi Ship movements which bors this out.
Busen coneluced that 5. Though USTO had been
genuine previousiy he was LOW under contro.
Aruamer in 1939 serveu with the AddDentrop
bureau in London. In recent months he had
been travelling to stockholm once a month
Trom Berlin, returning with ina orm- tion con-
cerning alliex alrcrait production ii,uras.
Kraemer was finally stationed, permanentiy in
Stockhoon. Accorad.ng to him his sources of
information were Siebtried A.Or Aba, ani
official of the Swedish Air Line in London
who provided intormation on the need tor
transport for ball bearines and on the
British aircraft industry. He also had a
ne twork_known as Siegt'ried B. consisting 01
pilots from planes reporting Or wina t they
saw in the UK. Kraemer used German and
Greek mythological names in his reports but
the basic source was always the same. Josephil
is a neutral diplomat in London. Buscht vieweu
Kraemer's sources with greve suspicion, par-
ticularly when he obtained replies to ques-
tionnaires aliegeuly from London in 40 hours,
even on days when weather was too pau to
permit Ilying. Busoh came to the COX Outsion ti
that Kraemer got his information Localty.
Wher reporting or. British air losses during
reis Kraemer, aceorains to Bush, made use of
the Swedish press and also rot access to the
cuiiciun reports from Barn, u rom which he
compiled his own. The General Salt perieveu
in Kraemer implicitly.

185
even consistent assaault on Typex though
what went on and why in this lieli is STILL
largely obscure. () there is no eviuence
01 the degree of importance attached by
the OiW to intelliga.ce from "Y" sources,
A considerable number of documennes relating
to cryptographic matters were apparently
discovered by aveug in. The schliersee Lake
naar Munich./Atenebram i rom Lisenhower
Gated 22 aug. States that up to date
65,000 personalities 01 CI interest have
been arrested in the Americar. zone since
March 1945 ind uding over 5,000 associated
with the GIS. The rate oi arreeta S1WS No
signs I decrease. =
A P/W Dameu Erich MANSEBILD @ CZRIDUZIK
made a statement on July Juun 1945 bout the
death oi Hitler and Eva Braun. Mansielu
was a criminal assistant in the su and was
in charge of the guard at the Duker occupied
by Hitler in the Reichs.anzelei Oil April
27 th 1945. He saw a certain amount oL
commotion at the emergency exit at about
1600 Dours Oxi that date and went over to
see what was happening. He met Hitlers
personal adjutant,Gintsche, and immeidately
following him were 2 $.6.011icers carrying
a bouy wrapped in a blanket. Both legs
were exposed almost to the knees as well
as a portion of the right arm. The rest or
ti e body was covered by the blanket. Mans-
feia claims that he recognised the body as
that of Hitler and that a portion of the
black trousers, which colour only Hitler
wore there, was also visible. Imediatey bell
-hind the man carrying the alleged body Ol
Hitler was ais SS.Olicer Jansen who was
carrying in his arms the body o woman
identiiled by Margields that Iva Braun
It was clo blied in a black dress, the one
which she was wearing between 2 and 3 a.m

closinh. The on Chara OSDIC he
I attended the JIC when a proposal was put
Forward for the continuation of CSDIC here in
order to deal with certain characters at
present in Ashcan. The position is that
CSDIC are closing down one of their camps.
They think however they can deal with any
important prisoners in the other. In some
cases however it may be more suitable IOT
the people to be interviewed in Ashean. When
SHAEF is abolished Ashcar has I think Bot
to be in charge oi the Americans or ourse.
or become part of tae quadripartite Contro
Commission. The meetins Telt that it had
better remain in our hands or those i tile
Americans.
TheD.G. Spoke to me about the Capel-Dune repor
on overt intelligence and suggested that I
should show it to Findlater-stewart.
He also talked to me auout Courtenay's report
on OICB, and the proosal that it should form
the nucleus of some production agency in
the post-war period. He was quite agreeable
that I should discuss this with Vivian.
Grogan talked to me about the future of
Censorship. He thinks that as I rom AUS Usubtn
onward his section Cart withdraw Irom the
Prudential. Meanwhile he is not very Sat.
fied with the progress being made by the a.
Eovts. He would be visiting the continent
shotly to report. As regards his own luture
he would like to pack up some time in august
but would be quite prepared to work on a hall-
time basis or quarter-time, attending any
meetings relating to censorship which might
arise.
Brock came to tell me that SCHULTZ, a German
Mid East spy who was exchanged lor a British
agent (incidentally the only occasion where

187
Gib. speculation in the OiW was intense as
to what the audied objective was. Some
thouyat the ending would we in the south of
Franee, poners mogught the Genoa da.
Anabher view was that we would hard between
Rome and Naples, break through to the furia vie
Coast an unen O11 up the Geria Torces in
the south. bästly there were some who
thosht that the 4 CONVOYS Woul proceed 50
Eocal points ont une African coast
emain there, thenew pinnang at the
al forces and compellins Wam to start
and iiontBetween July 7th-oth the german
submarines were concentrates Wetween bierta
anu Sicily with a tima. Lau operational parge
of lighters and sive-bombers ete. Attacks
on tae convons Wound tharalore come only when
the ulter were approacu in the Sicily-Bizerta
Erea. Spearani Saur were at that time
travelling in a train from Berlin Lo Munich
in a large party to a meating wiwin Hitler
ana at each station Admiral tucns who was in
the party received the latest intelligence
as to the situation. The COL.Vojs aquearea
to be continuing southward and excitement
became intense 29 they meared the eage 91
the submarine area. The Leading COLVOY
was äue to enter the zone, Saur Said, at 4.00
the 7 th July and shortly after that time
amiral Fuchs in great excitement was handed
further report. Instead of the expected
news 01 sinkings 01 troopships however the
report was to the arrect that at 4.15 the
alllea convoys had altered course be aute south
and were heading torAlgeirs.Only one
officer in the OKW with whom Saur naa
previously discussed the matter Trecasta
landing at Algiers. There was blowever a
certain relief that the landings had takeri
place there rather than in Italy.

in the making of atomic bomos, and to report
in detail. It is diflicult to see what
action we can take. My suggestior. is that
as soon as we get a scientiiic adviser we
hould ascertoir. wlio are in the know in
this country and then set them to collaborate
with us by ini oraing us immediately il they
think that anybody is becoming too inquisi-
tive.
THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958 July 2010
I askeu Cussen whether he coumu pare
Patterson Tor DSO Gib. im we bert Kirby-
Greer to the Caribueur. He Saiu he woulu
like tokhin it over.
Prestige rang up about Wiliam JOICE Ir the
case was throw. Out on the grounus that JOYCE
as originally ar. American citizen anu had
Committeu no orience against the USA a5
they were not in the war until arter he had
become a German citizen, JOYCE should be
detained inder the Royal Prerogative. I said
that that seemed soune but thet he had better
speck to Cusser.

inform tion. If they did not like his
advice and iniormation they would as in the
case of the coverrior General and Commander
in Chief Gibraltar, complain to the DG.
September 10th
I saw Findlater about the future of SIME
and the proposed discussion of the subject
by the JIC He said that this was a matter
hich was definitely on his plate anu he
was so informing the JIC. Il necessary he
would attend the meeting. Later in the
day Roberts alter a preliminary discussion.
with the Junior JIC made it clear that he
could not possibly function as a suw-section
of the JIB. It was necessary for him to
report direct to the Communider in Caiei anu :
indeed Gen.Paget hua insisted that this
practice should continue. His views were
apparently accepted and he is 10 actend the
meeting on the JIC tomorrow.
I also had a tak about RSS. inulater has
I thinx made up his mind that it should be
brigadeu with the GC & OS with a certain
amount of inde eridance and that whoever uealt
with CI should have a seat or the bigint
Poard. AS ragards the policiris Us the ether
We thought that he woula have to consiuer
this in conjunction with the Service bi nals
Dept. He asked me to write hini a letter on
the subject.
THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
314) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958 July 2010

793
the sum would be considerable, probabiy some-
where in the neighbourhood of $125,000 p.a.
whereas if the personnel was supplieu by the
Services the officers could be paid from the
Services vote. I said that I appreciated
this point but that payment partly on a
Service and paruly on a civilialı basis aid
raise most complicated administrative head-
aches. Rush brooke then raised the question
Bf SIMs equivalent in the Far East. I out-
lined to himn our plans about the CICB which
I said had been worked out in a very tenta-
tive way by ourselves and SIS. They were how-
ever entirely im embryo, since CICB was lor
the time being at any rate a military commit-
ment. We did however see that organisation
eventually in Singapore, in liaison with
Australian Security and DIB, and being
supplied with inoma lion i'rom our DSOS
in Hong Kong, Hangoon, Ceylon and wingapore
and by C. from sources in. Inao-China, China,
etc. Nobody seemed to think that the iciea
was a bad one and I was asked alter consul-
tation with sir bindlater Stewart to produce
a pa per both on the inture 01 SIME and CICB.
It was decided that SIME and Security
Intelligence generally Shoaid in no way be
subordinated to the JIB. Previous papers
therefore on this subject will be cancelled.
There will be two recommendations, one oli
JIBs and the other on Security Intelligence
organisations.
I saw Findlater at 3 olclock. He explained
that his enquiries had now reached a stage
where he was in some dificulty. SIS were
claiming that 907 of the work done by sections
V and IX related to matters abroad and had
no particular bearing on affairs in this
cour try This was said I think with partie-
ular reference to Section IX. They argued
for example that intelligence activities by

in the direction of SIS agents abroad. This
could be done through our seconding a
circula ting section to SIS. Findiaten said
that he proposed to have a joint meeting on
this subject with SIS and oursevies next
week.
We later discussed SIME, Roberts being present.
Findlater agrees with all our recomendations
and has a sred us to prepare papers which he
will consider or bunday next.
Alec Kellar and I saw Euude Hastings um 801
his greement to giving us the services 01
STALBO for peaui ne baek Hebrew records. He
Will be putting in 3 or 4 hours a week.
Kim came over with a series on telegrams
received from theWestern Hemisphere on the
Subject OT Russiari espionage. The sist of
the story is that there has been for some
considerable time a Russian espionage organ-
isation working unuer à vol.orgen. ZUBOTIN
the Soviet M.A. in Ottawa. the Russian 5
have succeeded in planting agents in
External Affairs, the High Commissioner's
OI l'ice and also in the atomic bomb circles.
This information has come to light owing to
one or Zubotin's subordinates bringing in
whole heap oi documents to the RCMP. For
some reason or other the intornant has been
held with the documents, which disclose the
presence ofat least 16 agents who have been
identified. The principia aberta connected
with the atomic bomb is a Cambridge physicist
sent out to Canada in 1942, named flan Nunti
MAY. We had great liuity 11 lentilyang
this man as his intials were given as A.L.
May and he did not appear to have been verted
especially for Tube alloys. ga bocuments
in Ottawa indicate that MAY is to make

197
September 12th
I saw the D.G. and told him about the MAX
case. I told him that wa were having a
further discussion and I would let him now
the result.
we had two
hall 300
Shut Wien
I spent the whole morning talks to Col.
Einthoven om genere matters i lecting our
WOIK. He had tworequests to make (1) that
We would give about halldozer DI his men
la course in this country and 12_shut Wiien.
things settle down we mighu have a purch
Orrier in our records SCCLLO. I reply was
that regrettably it would be impossima at
this moment to give a course to 601 his.
Officers, but that as SODII as we settled Down
In to our peace-time organisation we should
be very pleased to 20 50. He said that his
difficulty was to keep these Ollicers on the
hooks until some thing as linally settled
about his own organisation. He had in mind
that they might be kept busy doing a course
over here. I told him I did not think we
should be in a position to do this IOT
at least a month or two. As regards the
officer in the records section, I tried
tactfully to turn this off on the the Dutch
Liaison Officer in this country by explaining
that the FBI had an oilicer here in the
capacity of legal attacha at the Embassy and
that he was constantly in and out discussing
various problems with us and seeking intorna-
tion. I the Dutch wished to have squeone
here on similar terms we should be only
too delighted to receive him.
Albert has beer. ouiered a partnership by a
solicitor's wrm and wishes to leave. Text
month. I said that I thought he owght to
accept the offer.

We had a meeting with the DG today to discuss
a rather petuient letter fror Russell. DG
was rather inclined to agree with Russell's
view that Ceylon could be written oli as a
DSO point in peacetime. I said that I could
not see how Ceylon air lered from other Turtres
areas such as Cip.ana Malta. It had one of
the biguest naval bases in the Empire
there was moreover a considerable amount od
unrest in the island. De seeme to thin that
it was not our desiress to carry out any
investigation into such movemar. to. I made it
clear that normally DSOS did not to this but
that they did stimulate the 10CUL police
and on the iniormation they received could
make the necessary adjustments in security
Ideasure.. DG linally agreed that if wa
were to be only concerned with the security
01 the la base he saw na objection to
keeping an ADSO. He thought however that it
was desirable to get Russell. Daca for
consultation
I had a tabi with Dick on the telephone. He
seemed to be a little worried about the
future of the Findlater Stewart enquiry. He
had rather got the impression that SIS were
building themselves up and that things were
getting rather of the rails. I said that
this was not my impression. I thought that
Findlater was sold on the idea of one res-
ponsibility for I activities and for overt
representation abroad. The only point that
was worrying him was the bridging of the gap
between Overt and Clandestine activities.
He had evidently had a volley from Viv.who had
given him the impression that go to the work
done by Sections V and IX abroad was no con-
cern or M.1.5. This however Was merely the
oja narrow conception, that unless an asent.
Oi a forei.g. power was coming to this com try
MI5 were not interested. It was proposed to

I have had a talk with Herbert who has
returned from Germany after interviewing
FELDMANN. FELDMANN confirms almost every-
thing that Giskes said about Hooper. Feldmann
did not apparently altogether trust Hooper am
thought that although he had os tenibly
been dismissed by SIS he was in fact continu-
ing to work for them.
I saw Kim and Joh. Marriott about the Soviet
ease. Certain adicional particulars have
come in although we are still in the dark
on many points. We finally agreed amongst
ourselves that MAV should be allowed to
come although we thought that the meeting
might well we cancelled. We alwhite Hailiax
and Jumbo Wilson thought MAY bhould not
be allowed to leave Canada. We arai tad a
telegram íor C. to send, the terms of which
he agreed to on the phone, and the project
was finally given a blessing by the D.G.
although he took the view that more might be
gained by knoc.cing MAY DII in Canada anda
confronting him with the agent. Personally
I there there is much to be said for this
course of action but Marriott and Philoy
were so keen about trying to develpp things
at this end, where little progress has so iar
been made, that we felt on balance tht it
was better for MAY to come. I pointed out
however that the difficulties of ever
getting a case against MAY WOULd be very
great since unless we actually caugnt him
passing the documents to an unauthorised
person no action would lie. Meanwhile MAY
would be collecting further ini ormation from
his various contacts in this country, and
passing it on.
Trevor Wilson looked in to tell me that the
incident between Verneuil and Hope had been

203
I had a talk with noger, John Marriott and
Kim. I suggested that possibly Herbert might
go out for a week or 10 days while Roger
finished his holiday. We came to the conclusi
however that as we were committed to sending
an expert on soviet espionage Roger ought to
Morton - Ejans
I had a talk with M.E. He said he presumed
he would be leaving on his demobilisation
in 2 or 3 weeks time. It looked to him as if
Ais organisation would be broken up and
in any case he no longer wished to stay with
SIS. I asked him if he would be prepared
to accept a job with us if we were in a
position to offer one. He said quite
emphatically that he would. He was looking
round for other work but so far had had no
attractive offers. I told him that at the
moment we were precluded from saying anything
definite but that I felt fairly confident we
should have a job for him to do. He seemed
quite pleased at the idea.
I had a talk with Harry Hunter and discussed
the shadowing Of MAY, who is due to arrive
on Monday. It was agreed that Hunter should
send someone up to Prestwick.. II MAY broke
his journey and want to Cambridge we would
n notification from Prestwick Sena Someone
down to Cambridge to house him. It seemed
however likely that he would come to London
as he had booked a room at an hotel.
Einthoven came in to say goodbye. He seemd
very pleased with his visit.
September 15th
John Noble tells me that Columbine has been
offered a job with PWE in Mid East but woud
much prefer to go back to Germany and take

i tion had beer. mate, presumably by viv,
to indaters tewart, Cna u 90,6 oi the word
wone by Sections V and IX abroad had nothing
tu do with the Security Service and was con-
cenned mainly with matters which ailected
only the FO I was anxious to KNOW how iar
talis was true as it uia hot as iar as I knew
accors with the l'acts. they both said that
this statement could only be made on theevery
narrow basis that the Security Service were
only concerned in cases were some action
was directed against the U.K. In lact the
old Cowgill complex. This view vas also
confirmed by Klop whom I saw the other day.
He said that the whole tendency in Lisbon
was to keep information away from the local
FO representative.
Dr.LIEHBR has been picked up. We may at Last
be able to get the true story about wr's.
Krait as he stayed with her on one of his
visits before the war.
September 17th
Fish came in to pay his respects. He told me
triat BOAC were setting rid ol Juninas. He had
discovered that Poli.h pilots 01 BOAC had
been placed in charge of diplomatic bags and
Jhat one was missing and hau never been
recovered. I ased him to tell me the date
on which this was had been despatched as it
might be that we had letters in it. I could
not understand how it was that we were not
inlorued about this incident by the v.0, whose
bat it was.
I had a talk with Joe opencer who is taking
over F.0B and F.20. He has been iniormed
about the MAY case but John Marriott will
continue with it at any rate for the present.

War Room. Wher SH ASF disbands at the end 01
this month it is thought that the War Room
should not become part of the Control Commissio
but should continue to function as at present,
OSS, SIS and Security Service acceptius res-
ponsibility jointly or the work
June 25rd
Burt is going out to fetch Amery Daca in amet,
10 ways time.
Mills has telegraphed about theiuture of
vetting personnel for alled armies. AS
Com op Guthrie's section which iormerly dealt
with this matter is packing up there will be
a bit ol a Loop-hole as visas will not in
future be required. I do not know that this
very much matters in individual cases. What
I cannot see however is why many cases 01"
allied personnel joining alried armies should
still come to this country. We have more or
tess succeeded in stopping the coming from
Stockholm. It seems ausurd to allow them su
to come from America. I should pave thought
that they ought to stay where they are until
they could be received by their own countries.
The only exceptions are of course the Poles.
I have as ed Lee to arrange a me e cing with
Diploek, Barry, D.4, Baxter and Byt'ue.
At the daily meeting we discussed tae-question
of Polish transmitters. 11 the Polisin vovt.
in London is to be dispanded they can no
longer go on transmitting although there may
still be a case for the Polish Forces of which
there are some 120,000 here, in I vady and in
Germany. The position here has never been
satisiactory since the P...years ago save
Sikorski parmission to transmit in his own
cyphers. SOE through whom they had been trans-

copies of which would be given to us it we
desired them. I have arran ed or Herbert
to go down on Thursday next.
MAY has turned up and has been housed by B.6.
He flew from Prestwick with Bayiield of the
ROMP and a representative or B.6. Bayiield
has given me a short note or the case. The
agent whose cover name is CORBY, was cypher c
clerk to the MA. A few months ago he care-
Lessly lert drafts of two cour idential despat-
ehes lying round where they were fouma ya
charwoman and turned over to the Embassy
officiels. He was consequently recalled to
MOSCOW, and fearing that he might be liquidate
decided to rat with as many documents as he
could lay his hands on. He claims wat he
was sickened by evidence of intrigue and
espionage directed against Canada ater that
country had done so much to add the Soviet
Union in her struggle against the Nazis. Be
that as it may Corby decided that his salva
tior lay in publicity. At 9 Olcrock on the
evening of Sept. th he went to the "Ottawa
Tribunal," and there spoke to a woman reporter.
She thought thia suory two hot to handle and
aavised him to go to the Justice Dept. Next
day, accompanied by his wira anu chindle went
to the Justice Duilding and spoke to the
private secretary to the Minister. He also
showed him documents which he lau extracted
from the M.A.S sade which he and the attache
alone had the combination for. The private
secretary as ad Corby to wait and speak to
the Under Secretary of State for External
Aftairs. However orby was Iinaliy turned
away with veiled accusations that he was
after all in possession or stolen documents.
Again he tried the press, this time the
Ottawa Oitizen, and was referred to the RCMP.
He must have become somewhat Illatered by
this time because the only thing that emerged

209
Of guaris in the vicinity or Corbis apart-
mert. Meanwhile Corby himself is in a shack
by á laxe llo miles i rom Oitava and is being
constantly moved rounu.
September 18th
Luke tells me that van der BERG, a friend of
Koessler, is in trouble with the Belgian
uthorities and wants Thornton and Fanto to gi
ive evidenceon his pahair. Thorntor
apparer.tly does not like the idea.
Marlin Forrest came to see me about the
liquization on 020. I said that I en tirely
agreed that we would not receive any more
peple Irom the field for interrogation here
alter the beginning of October, when we
WOUL proceed to close the Camp down as
soon as the intarrogation of those who
remained was completed.
I.1.B. is to close down on 31.10.45 alter
which we shall have to make other arrangements
for the receipt of censorship material direct
from the theatres concerned. In Germany for
example we can rely on the control commission!
THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
314) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
| ACT 1958 JULI 2010

2 11
& whole Il we in MAY pa sui rib documents on
uct.7th we should norwally ieel bounu to
arrest him since it might be our only Chance
O settira Case va reval. til. him
'ora a considerable time i rom ruceeuir.b to
Aussic, which he cows acu Visildu i.. o.
This means that simultaneous action wit have
to oa taka: iri con action with some spent
in Canada anu America urces. they are CODE
lowed to Ur'l. 31/ i. criminating Locuments
that they may have. (Altis 1. O Course
on ühe assumption thaboney ang davo.
autes 47 Daen wueu by one wovial tuvaonicies
Ii Erre. I are me OSW wat uireu
as a wide.. cim it wit Singceive eval
tgach the Case Cuu w ten n. Chet 18.
to see the star gut Di Dne' l'ex- De we it
tirereira wan 0 have DTOWPUUWI wilde
Aussialis Or not? Parsonnau ry 1 Cubic
wouu De very Sauülasy. Il me ha roureu
Up & bangol our peonie ir. MOSCON The Wun
without yues col. 150 husa rosauution
or else demaria their pour giflesh in some
other way.
s
Sclater tankeu to me about his mana or i
Security. He is going to show is to the
wignais Broches of the Services. alcu iin.
it their reactions.
THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
314) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958 Juny 2010

Canada and USA but it was or course to be
kept up to date Dy Constant Raport for the
Western Hemis here to Wii eh MAY would normal-
ly have access.
Axers had not been MAY but was expecting to
o so some time this weer. He wound celu
him that as the contract for this installation
had not yet been placed there was to particu-
har point in the commitvee meeting & that
in any case he nei fiutyet made by his mind
what was required. He thou_ht that m ight
then ask whether he could see yol the
Montreal reports in Oper that he com a eep
himself up to date AKERS said that allnoush
These reports containaa inkormition value
to an enemy. Io particular Orte Wesel VO
contain anything likey Do we epoch-mexing.
The process of development iad au LOVE Deen
very even una greuun. I sustas ley thererore
or his consideration that we mi.at mark
afyaoeument et was biver be HAI in wave 16
was hartuen over by him and photostudu. I.
wa aventually at the photoSat in the possano
-dori or he agent we sho tam wa awe
to say that he must have received it Irom Y.
It was decided that it woulu ultime dety ve
necessary to exclude NY as dar as it was
umanly possiole to do so from any atomic
researeh. Makints thought that this was of
considerable importance since if the Americans
thought that: MAY Was still going to be in a
position to get inom tion on a tomic research
they might decide to cease collaboration
wit ourselves on the whole project. Maks
also thought that every possibie precaution
should be taken to prevent MAY Irom getting
out of the country arra worse still going to
Russia. I saiu that it was illicult to have
it both ways. The man ha a beer brought back
in order that we might develop Soviet contacts

review has been projected to the years 1955-
1960. The interests OL the Britis Empire
are considered as a whole. Impurial security
is described as being in its essence a
problem Ol preventing other power. I rom impos-
ing their will upon us. This required bath
political action and military strengule.
Under military comuni tments it is stated that
our strategical policy must take account 01
a) the possibility of war wil the USUR,
(b) the need to ensure against the resultanee
of Germany and Japan, (e) the possibility 01
armeu conillet wi th minor powers, (a) the
maintenance or internal security, (e) the
obligation to place arieu 1orces at ubie uis-
posal of the world organisation. The worlu
organisation is in no way to be a substitute
TOP the buruet i Hautalund OUT owa armad
Borces. onclusion the committee are intat
our over-riding dalelice commitment is to suna-
uard the Empire winst the possibioity ou
hostile USSR. Our primary objective must be
to avoiu a clash but it is felt that the
strouser We ale ANOWL to be the more hely
we are to benieve this sect. Ihlia D e
could not secure to world-Wide interest hair
ST soviet beression wil ohout the heup !
powerful allies. In this respect the support
war of the USA is vital. We shoud pro-
vote close association. De tween the British
Empire and a stronger France. In order that
a world Organisation shall evenop on lines
wich will provide the maximum contribution to
Imperial security, we should induce the USA
to undertame dedinita military responsibilities
in those areas in win our common intarests
lie. The relative importance which should be
eccordei in peace to areas which might be
seriously threatened by the USSR is as JOLLOWS:
first priority must be biven to the
defence oi the UK which is the heart of the

I Saw Cadogan at his request. He is worried
about the possibility of MAY get ving away to
Russia. I explained to him our uilema.
Il we cannot set a card ugainst MAY he
remains a perilariert menace au ultimately
it will proba. Ly be impossible to prevent ham
from going to Russia. Il we to 10W hun
about Berore vet. 7th his suspicions
may be roused and he may be inci ined to
erain irom making any contact with the
ussians here. I said that we wou do what
we could to look aar we aerodrome where
the woviet planes came in and a su look into
the question of ships. This has in fact, Deer
done. While we ears exercise some reasonable
control over the rezart, the shipping
position is most impossible since 200
stalis have been disbanded and the ships
appear to come in at almost every port.
If we circulated MAU 9 paotograph to 1.0.5.
the gari woww undoubtedly be blown.
Cussen has just returned in the JOYCE trial.
JOYCE is apparently condemned to death, as tar
As I ear See almost entirely on a point DI
Law. Une juuga munced that JOYCE by virtue
01 the lact that he held é valia British
assport, had been domiciled in this country
etc.etc. weu allegiance Do H.M. anu that
Als allegianee was not alrecta og his
going overseas and in Iact lasteu 101
as the Fassport was vasid. ht wie jy had
to decide was wie thor JOYCE had adhere to
the king's enemies which one vistence that hau
Ho Jillieuc in voin * Cuaa wir
probaby ko to the House on LOTUS.
September 20th anys 21st
Away for two days wità con.

219
to wish in trouble waters have si interest in
aboravating them. Hitler was interested in
this statement in whien a ter existau VI
an idea to buy It Woviet Russia in the event
of dermany attacimy Polana. The Davet veyt.
was dasappointed by the unsaulistaetory pro
Eress on the negotiations between Britain and
France regaraino tre COLCLUSi
military
arreement. nussi wished to irda harsell
rom the threat. I iminert bertar agression
Orao ver the prospect on a wropean war wich
talin hand predicted for years and which he
expected to create a si. Uusien tavuulawiato
the interest the moviet Union Dow irom
Dhe point OI view or their podvicau aspire-
tions and their hopes fearains the rauense
Ou revolutionary movements in the countmes
in question, Was. Opereu tp t tir hacer o
courge had not reckoned with Poiana Weins
Valuuished wii unin 10 ways. He had nowevem
Deliaveu, according to ciben a Lo -UP&WE:
-Outi trench Wariare in Purce. Apart Lle
these Terences 23 nove ort. wolu bet
abree thingspace to recover rom the eifects
01 the 1957-38 period when about 30, ou ine
his soviet woman had been eliminated. She
would also have a iree hand in the Baltic
States and would obtain without firing & Sot
what Peter the creat bus Tough to tor 21
ears. There was also a respect GI batang
Bessarabia.
Ribbentbop by signing this pact Openeu d in
for Russia the winuow to the west. It is not
surprising there one that when in the early
days 01 August 1939 Court Schulenberg, che
Gerezan Ambassador, put forWETU proposals for
a non-agres. io. pace the discussion OILY
lastau 23 minutes, and nobemure was brought
to Moscow to put bio signature to watt Wade
alread Iult accompli. Whe: ne baw bawin

221
Ori 13.4.41 aitar bae sio na tlne o ühe pavast
agraneut with Japan, Stad appeareu ol.the.
railway station in order it was alles au 10
tase leave ol Matsuoka. Probably nowever in
order to tell the vera Ambassador te
Assistant M... who were both there that carmal
enu the Soviet Union were I'ri OLLS anu must
remain friends. To Schulenberg Stalin remark-
ed further that he (schulenbere) ought to see
to 112 tnat German-wovelet Trieship was
maintained. Stalin's attitude was probably
comtected with the German military successes
in the Balkans. He was obviously in it very
nervous mood and thereal trdid every uning to
meet German coma uas. As late as May the
Soviet evt. caused Tess to publish a scoate
ment in which the rumours about Gepal Warlike
preparations were dealt with. He.. a pumours
were denounced as endeavours to poison the
a tmosphere wetween Jovit Russia au vernal.
It was adueu the cuermany was lider t o
concentrate her troops waere he puedsed. It
Was Dilyon 21.0.1 in the events that
MOLO toy asked taa derma. Ambas DJOB O Canta
Orifim, pointing out repeaidu att sy bematic
ortier viut Dion uy-cintu circralteon
the 101 lowing day senuleerd Calle Un
Molotov in order toate unay u weruar
Govt. cons.derau Elle Goviet tro concentra
Dions rear the Germani eusten. Frontier in
auniissable als heu mecided to laite couters
measures. Molotov replied that he inter-
preteà this statement est declaration or
war in view of the inet that cermat aircruit
had already since lg hours bombeu russian
areas such as Ouessa, Kiev and Minsk.
A JIC paper on the future 80E assigis
them the holiowing tasas: (a) to collate,
examine and assess ini ormations Deurillo on

223
to compare the good oldays of the Nazi
regime, with the present cerrable conditions.
People say that unluer the hams even in Wal-
uimeration Caras were loiroured, witerets
FLOW even the restricteu nation scade is not
met. The second theme is the emergence 01
the inevitable irreventism. expressions of
amazement and Eries that the purest German
soil snould be handed over to the barbarous
Poles. The German Social Democrats are quite
reared to face the present situation and to
write about it but in oruer to put things in
their proper perspective taey must admit
tina t conditions are ball and are not lisely
to improve for some time. Whenever they
attempt to do this their articles are censored
by the Russia on the brainas that they are
Showing pessimism among the population.
Sciater incarns i rom Aami paitvi mans that
evidence is now availabue: U S urat tell
DOOR code was booker! by the Gernians. The
enemy were able to breat this after the
inspection of 8,000 broms, which is a very
much lower igure than it was imagined would
be necessary. The navy had to be out the
whole report as to the position. Oi elemy sub-
marines it this pher Own Do the tarbe
aistribution necessay ang apparently the
ermans were able to break this continuously
but what they could not unders barnk was how we
made these reports so accurate. They thought
that it was owing to some technical device
OT which they were not Wane. The Germanse
did not think for one moment that it was due
to the insecurity 01 their cyphers.
Kremer has now acmitted that his main source
of information was count Toggenbers who had -
a number of specia sources. His reports
were pased on uier the cover name of

225
il. Was Lecessity to talen to Cuca
I iris that acu round beheth 1.eg
an audits that taley Boulevit will
le t zt an . D CORE 1. W other
ocument evi sicer wndcami Deu
it. tum in case it. c .
THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
314) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958_Juu 2010
septemuar 2=th
huve tona sei. Med OT. B Cor s
Ceuogan with covering Lelut Jusstils
tea le should get the agreement ou Baterial
Ainars & the woundert. Bill COINS
B ol ronised To Cliate
UV W
Veered to Dake tu rap, Wirbe elion
We iniui. ledne, in Cartel Il ve
A PAR!. tauet I own er word. Do
Mark's oro tier. He is used in promotion
Loren I been throux - L. fe is
a lice chap uw hul verilu v c. Ele

Buster tells me that trich PIOIFSR is likely
to produce quite interesting material. He
has also told us about the French lavet 0.1'ice.
w210 was corresponding with a cover d ress
01" Mrs. BRANDY in Dublin. This cover address
came to light through the vessid JORDAN Case
and was passed to the French W.10 intercepteu
the N.O.S correspondence. For a sort time
the French tried to play the N.o. DACK DUL
this apparently was quicxi resiseu by the
Germans. The N.O. Was illatoy executeu.
PFEIFFER said laat he was one 01 the most
blatant spies he ever came across. He lirbt
werit to tae German Embassy anu was inatts
passed on to PI SITTER who taught he was a
plant He then sent Frenca nave cyphers
to PHEIFFER (nrough the oruinary post, but
when these were found to be senuine a mea'
-ing was arranged at an hotel in Antwerp.
The orlicer turned up at tne meeling in uit
French Navi univorm. PFEIFT coulu haruky
believe his eyes and avoided the rendezvous
as he thought it was probably a trap. Later
he made contact with the officer in his room
and received the whole trunk of documents
or considerable value, including a goou many
details of navel secrets whien we nau pussea
to the French. Incidental y the French never
told us anything about the case at the time
except that the man had been callint and execu
teu.

a
Dr. Krueger, El SIS agents Do the Germans,
t the later la commit suiole 14
prison, a that he had recalves Suns 91
mandy i rom the Game with tatt tot
wiscloseu. Hou eic continuen auuany the
dilega tiones qurd said that he would be wiivim
nemg in Replay H D viver we months
BELETY and want to never Do Conde teeltaan
with SIS OP Deves and to remain wat
Lad he was rele Bo D e Oxicia
Sucrets Co. We maua el to him that
watot elvett teemme vauty
elunег цар ,
I saw doe Stephenson. He is 11
possiler o A Spooner una de la de
majors al bus to the Year view u le
work he needs this is necesare real-
ises of course that he wa Bur's would have to
de me e Cold. I said that I greed with
nimas I thought it important that canuon
and poorers who meu WOTEL 30 WELL Bhou nou
be placed at any adsadventes vis a vis their
sus ordinates at the lar. Here Was I WOUL
what this sort of the counted Hort a great
deal in the police,
I Lunchen with Gyrii Miils touay he agreed
that he should go back to civil Lite u tar
1. boliday on Oct. 2u.
We have had a demand from the Far basit our
More boue b loer war 2Gol 2 660 21a,
a Goos, Shartinate upit sucrenie: 5
high-graus registry trained womer. There
is some iven that we al SIS ve Evl.
supply the Deale. 13. We
owever
What I had arranged Wi -W. I
taut
it would be
wae then we conta Depp
als Orican buk
u
time we
wisaeu Go nave
in their selection IT OM
tieservices.

229
be going into hiding again and leaving the
country for S. America, as he did not think that
at the moment Spain was a place for him.
He bade his former collaborators a fond lare-
well. The above is I think a perfect epilogue
to the whole garbo saga.
Alley came to ask me about funds for the
Polish C.I. I said I did not think that we
ught to make any grant for the C.I. Or the
Polish forces abroad. We shall contine
ourselves solely to the forces in this country
I Saw Akers again in Rickett's room. Roger Maxi
was also present. Axers said th.t he had not
yet got into touch with MAY. He had ascertuin-
ed tht he had left his hotel on Friday and
that he was not returning there. He had rung
up Kings College three times yesterday but
on each occasion the line was out ol order.
He will suggest to way that he should come
along and see him. He thought he could make
some arrangement to pass him a suitable docu-
mert from Montreal He would have it typea
with certain errors in punctuation so that
it would be positively identiliable as the
one he had passed to May, whether it was
copied or photogra hed. He asneu permis sion
to take Perrin, his assistant, into his
coniidence over the whole aitair. Perrin sits
in the same room and is thoroughly trustworthy
and discreet. This was agreed to. Wher
handing the document to May Acers could quite
naturally ask him whether he had auequate
means for locking it up. Ir that way he may
be able to discover whether May proposed to
eep it in his lodgings or in his room at
Kings College. This might just conceivably
give us an opportunity of ta vins a look into
the cupboard or desk after May leaves to
attend the meeting on Oct. 7th. I explained to
tele Pologra howay, what

231
and a la ter para. which indicateu trat the
responsidlity was with the ommanders-in-
Chier. ACSI thought that Micule East
being a zone ol latent opera tionis respori-
sibility shound lie with the Commanders-in-
Chiei. I said that the plain meaning of
the paper was that SIME should have a status
similar to that or DSO Gib. It wound be
responsible to the Commanders in Chier
for supplying them with auvice and ini orma-
tion but the direction and administration
would if the memo was agreed become the
responsibility of the DG OI the Security
Service, to whom complaints would be made
if the organisation was not considered
satisfactory. The general feeling of the
meeting was that they could not quite com-
mit themselves to the paper without referring
it to the Defence Committe Middle East.
As regards CICB it was more or less agreed
that its status should be similar to that
of SIME, whatever was ultimately decided
about that organisation. The Service people
generally seemed reluctant to hand over
control of a body w ich they regarded as
importartto themselves to a civilian organ-
isation like the Security Service. They
did not realise of course that we tacto they
did this 6 years ago and that they have
been almost entirely dependent upon us for
the build-up that they have got in the
Midale East. If they had got complete
control of the organisation and we relin-
quished all interest in it, they would
very soon discover that they were handling
something which they did not unuerstand and
which they were totally ill-equipped to
improve. It is the old idea that C.I. is
a job into which you can throw any ol'licer
on the retired list and expect to get
results. It is of course really a highly

233
conduct. I should careiully sift the
information of all informants and try to
assess its reliability by any cross-checks
that I could put into force. I should work
up a network of informants in circles which
I thought were ikely to be or any impor-
tance. I shoulu also make any use I could
of various forms of censorship. Lastly
I should have to rely to a considerable
extent on local police authorities. It
would therefore be necessary to ascertain
who in the Aripo could be trusted and try
him out by various meanis. Capt.vewis said
that he was aiming at getting two people
into each dienstelle of the Aripo and that
at the moment he was using their basic
recorås. He had a few informants and others
were being run by C.C.U. but so far without
any very positive results. Frontier control
was difficult and people could move about
freely from one area of Germany to another.
The strongest co: trol was on the Dutch
Frontier and ori the border between our zone
and the Russiai. zone. Censorship at the
moment was purely on as catch as catch can
basis. Certain mail bags were selected from
time to time and examined. If however a
letter looked suspicious there was no means
of getting hold of any further letters to
the same address. There is no telephone
cesnorship at all. As regaras personnel,
he was extremely shorthanded and very few
had any experience at all in CI matters.
In eact FSP section there were not more
than two who could speak German. He
seemed quite pleased with the discussion,
which he said had given him a number of
ideas. I told him that if there was
any thing else he wanted to know or if we
could be of any further help he should let
me know.

238
ourselves, RCMP and the FBI. If we wanted
guidance on matters of higher policy we
could get it ourselves Irom the 1.0. In
fact we had already done so. Stephenson
is apparently kicking up at the idea of our
communicating direct with the RCMP and cites
the British High Commissioner as supporting
his view. This of course is typical of
Stephenson. He came into the case through
xternal affairs and having set himself up
As the Great Panjandrun does not how wish
to be knocked off hi. perch. Every thing
that he does or does not do is a matter of
personal prestige and the organisation has
to suffer accordingly.
September 26th
I had a talk with Akers on the phone. He
Said he had dined with May last night. May's
whole demeanour was perfectly normal and
he showed no particular eagerness to continue
with atomic research although he was quite
ready to do the work if the University would
allow it. Actually he said that Kings
College took the view that it ished to give
a third of his time to the Committee that it
was proposed to iorm, that time coula not be
tanen out of his lecturing period but would
have to come out of his research period.
Asked about documents, May expresseu no par-
ticular eagerness to receive copies of
everything coming from Montreal. He did say
however that it might be useful to him to see
certain reports if he was going to serve
on the Committee. Alers as ed him what
means he had for locking these reports up.
He replied that he had a strong wooden
cupboard with a good lock at the University
but that is necessary 01 course he could get
hold of a steel filing cabinet. Asked if he
had papers coming over, he said that there

237
interview with May I have wireu to Carada
suggesting that we should put him wholly in
the picture. He will then I think cooperate
more thoroughly.
THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
314) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958 Juu 2010
rvice macular
to KILO
Lennox came to talk to me about a conference
wwhich he was to attend on the question or
aerial photographs. I said that it was
entirely a Service matter but that in they
decided that any particular area should not
be photographed we should like to know what
the area was and the reasons tor keeping it
secret. Lennox then threw out a hint that
it was very necessary to have someone who mov
about in fairly high circies and was kept
iniormed on matters of this sina. I said
"Quite".
Wick rang up to say that the DG had arriveu
quite safely and that he was spending the day

239
most human documents that I have seen. W-D
is a somewhat disreputable character nearer
60 than 50 who at one time used to put on a
music-hall act with what were described as
two sparsely-Clad females. He is said to
have illegitimate children in various parts
of the Globe. Apart from this he has a
marrieu daughter in America and a son in
Dire. Ostensibly he came to visit his son
having stowed away on a trawler at Antwerp.
ctually he came in a German submarine which
ut him 011 in a small boat which capsized
before it reached the shore. The following
are some extracts irom his account:-
When I asxed how I will be booght to Ireland,
the man said that he does not know yet, but
that it will be told to me before I would
leave Bremen. A few days later, wetheri went
to Bremen again to the last meeting, and
after the meeting another man escorted me to
my hotel to my room, and there I was then
told that I will be transported to Ireland
with a U-boat, but the ice is holding the
departure up. I will have to remain yet a
few days in Bremera, and during that time he
will give me my full and final intructions, and
all I read to know. He asked me to count
ny dollars in his presence, and so I did,
id then he told me that I should pack up
6,000 and some odd dollars in equal packages,
and put gumt paper round it to hold it
tight together, and stitch those pacxages
then in the underioduer in my overcoast,
across the back so no one can notice it...
That evening then after he had leit I pached
up my dollars and stitched 16,000 in the
back of my overcoat and the rest of the
dollars I put in pac ages too into my hand
coller (small suitcase) anu when the man came
to me the following day I then showed him
how I had done the job, and he said well-done.

241
might I had in me, to kick with my feet and
move my arms, and all certain by some kind
of movements of my arms, I started to go
upward again, and I felt then my head bumped
against the overturned boat to which I hàng
on then with one arm, and was then able to
get my had abuve water. The officer soa me
then and he said, hang on to the boat, hang
on, I touch ground. He had the boat by a
ope in front, pulling it with me hanging or
voit vomiting saat-water, towards the shore,
when another bis wave Tell over us, pltching
bout and the two of us, on the "Sacred soil
01 Eirel alive. The oificer and I, stood
there shivering, I still holding the handle
of my lost and drawried satchel in the hand,
and he told me then after we had put the boat
into the water again, that I should disappear
now as quick as I can, and he rowed then
out again, towards the U-boat, and I started
for inland in the dark, as quick as I coula,
but the stones were very slippery as if they
were soaped, and I fell very near every lew
steps to the ground into the stones, and after
I had gone about 40 or 50 yards, I fell again,
and dislocated and knocked out ny left knee
but as I had realised right away what was
wrong, I managed in the exiting state I was
n, to force and set my dislocated knee-
voint" back in its proper place, and I tighed
several Handezerchiers round it, and after
I had layed there for about an hour wet and
in the cold wind, I finally managed to rise,
and drag myself into the nearby fields in
the dark.......I stayed the whole day and
night, and the following morning in twilight,
I started to limp over wet fields, toward a
Church-towerit, visibie from beyond a hill.
When I came nearer to the Church, I reached a
main road and as I was limping along it, I
met a man on a bicycie, wiTom I asked, what

243
Before his departure he had been in touch with
GOERTZ who was to follow him a fortnight
later. He says in his confession however
that the man interned in Ireland as GOERTZ
is not the man he knew as GOERTZ in Germany.
September 27th
Houseman rang up to ask whether we were
repared to drait a telegram for JIC Cairo
ased on the minutes of the JIC meeting on
Tuesday where th future of SINE and CICB
was discussed. I agreed that we would do
this and submit it to the JIC Secretariat.
Telegrams keep pouring in from Security
Co-Ordination about the Corby case. Corby
says that the Russians are constantly talking
about world War 3, and that they regard the
SanFrancisco Conference with complete scep-
ticism, that the aeclaration made by the
Ukrainian Govt. that they were independant
and the fact that they took a contrary view
on some minor point to the Soviet Govt. was
all a put up job. It is of course difficult
to say how far this somewhat warlike attitude
of Soviet officials is due to fear that they
themselves will be attacited.
Adogan has wired toExternal Affairs in
Canada asking them whether theyare prepared
for a show-down with the Russians and ii so
whether they wou agree to take simultaneous
action with us. similar approach has
been made to the U.S.Govt.
A report from the field by an Abwehr charac-
ter who was acquaintedwith the Zigzag case
is interesting. He says two things of
importance (1) that the sabotaze carried out
by Zigzag was the only really successful
operation of the kind that Abt.2 carried out

245
being told everything and that he will in
consequence collaborate more wholeheartedly.
I had the feeling tht after his interview
with May he had begun to be somewhat sceptical,
Akers told me that Cockcroft would be
returning early next week and that in view
of the telegram received advising the
inspection of all documents coming in the
High Commissioner's bag thie DSIR he would
ike to consult with him before a final
Lecision was made and a plausible excuse were
round for planting on May documents received
i rom Montreal.
I had a word with Giles Ishall who is just
going out as DSO Palestine. He is a pleasant
person and has had a certain amount of
experience in the Middle East. He does not
however impress one as being a man withvery
great drive.
M.E. brought Hester to see me. Hester is taking
over from him in 10 days time, but will only
be staying till the end of the year. There is
no doubt that both Hester anu M.E. see eye to
eye with us in our views about the future of
RSS. I suggested that as soon as ME left
RSS I should make arrangements for him
have a frank talk with Findlater Stewart..
He was unable to do so whers F.S.visited
Barnet as G.P. ad Maltby never drew breath.
B-W came to see me. He had just returned
from Paris. He was a little worried about
Peter Hope beingcasked to take on jobs which
were perhapsda little outside his sphere. He
said that Hope himself was worried. I told
B-W that as far as I knew everything going to
him was bottle-nec..ed through Cussen who was
extremely careful about watching this. I
suggested therefore to B-W that he should
talk to Cussen

27
exceptional cases. They relieu entirely on
the ambassadoris stall to translate and senu
home whatever they considered to De QI
interest, but of course they only looked at
these I rom the 1.0. point of view. We had
on occasion obtained extremely useful
information from the Institute of Interna-
tional Affairs which was really the only
body to which we could turna
Findlater as.sed about our representation
on the J.I.C. I told him that I thought
that organisationally this was wrong, that
Harry Allan was as he knew responsible or
the factories and for port security. It
holowed therefore that many of tñe things
discussed at the JIC did not really concern
him. He was however extremely good about
this and whenever he falt that there was a
matter in which I was interesteu ha wound
suggest that I should go instead Ol him.
Findlater a. ed about iae Lory Security. I
said that in many ways this was one of the
most civilian Jobs that the-olice did blic
that it could well have been carried out
by our Regional 011icers. There wuis however
an important function to be periorme but
it could wat in my view be considerably
rationalised. We ought to concentrate or
new principles and new processes partic-
ularly when they were applicable to war
industry. It was of vital importance that
we should get early intimation so that we cou
institute sareguards and provide the hecessary
cover. This meant constant badgering of the
Service Depts. who were only too ready to
put everything on the secret list and dissi-
pate ourlenergies on things that did not
matter. It was in my view quite useless to
try and protect arlaments which had au ready
been issued to the troops.

October 1st
I had a meeting with Akers, Cockcroit, Hollis,
Marriott and Rothschild, when we discussed
the May case. In spite of the instructions
which Cockcroft had given that all documents
returning from Canada were to be subject to
inspection by DSIR, it was thought that it
could be arranged that something should be
passed to May which he might transmit to the
Russian agent on Oct. 7th. During this dis-
cussion it emerged that in the documents
which were on their way to this country in
the High Commissioner's bag there were 3
copies of a diagram relating to development
in America which May was certainly not
entitled to keep. They should have been
handed in at Montreal. First of all it was
difficult to understand why he should want
3 copies and secondly there was the rather
sinister fact that these particular documents
were not in the list submitted by May to
Cockcroft before his departure
We then considered the general project of
high-level deception. Both Axers and Cock-
crof't thought that this proposition was not
feasible particularly if the Soviet had
access to people of the type or May who would
very quickly see that the documents were
being planted.
In the list of facts about the British War
Effort Lord Keynes is reported to have shown:
1. total British casualties were two and
three quarters as great as those of the USA
forces, xxxXhixxxx with losses in killed and
missing 33 times as great;2. Members of the
British forces contributed twice as much in
man-years as did the U.S.forces, and this
does not taxe into account the services of

249
Send Walker although I do not know whether he
would be willing to go. What we really want
is someone to taue Courtney's place. We
shall probably be foreed to abandon the DSO
position in Ceyaon owing I think to some
extent to the machinations of Russell. The
Governor has apparently expressed strong
views that he thinks a security oficer would
be an embarrassment, particularly in the
event of Ceylon Ketting uominion status.
Cussen, Hollis, Marriott and I discusseu the
arrangements for the party on Oct.7th. We
agreed that inless very exceptional circum-
stances arose no action should be taken.
We should merely observe proceedings. We dis-
cussed all the contingencies thut might
arise. At the moment no decision has been
reached on a high level as to whether the
three Governments will face up to the con=
sequences of arrests here and in Canada.
Robertson and Mackenzie King areon their
way over and will talk the matter over with
Bevin and Truman does not wish to commit
himseli til1 he has seen Byrne who will be
returning from the conference here at the
end of the week.
October 2nd
Harry Allen told me that the W.0. were jibbin!
at our draft telegram for the Delence Committ-
ee Middle East on the future of SIMI. They
have got some complex about the administra-
tion of military personnel coming under MIS.
This of course has no substance and we are
going to try and write them 011.
I had a tala wi th Alan Roger who i. leaving
in the course of the next two days ior Hong
Kong. He should do well as seems very keen.

239!
Marriott showed me an intercept saying that
Engelbert Broder, an atomic physicist in
Cambridge who is known to be a Party member,
is in touch with MAY whom he is anxious to
dee.
I spoke to Howe and told him that as there
seemed practically no prospect of any
action on Oct.7 th it was really not worth my
while coming down to see him. He told me
that he had said nothing to Canning and would
not do so in themean time. I assured him
that as soon as things boiled up I would come
down and give him the whole story and he seem
ed qui te satisfied with this arrangement.
October_ru
Vesey showed me certain German documents which
had been sent over by NID Tor our inspection.
They relate to an Linz Marine network set up
before the war which will obviously be
worth care, ul study.
Cussen tailsed to me about the case of Scardon
and Spooner. Hill as put forward a variety
of reasons indicating that the proposal would
not be acceptable to the W.O.
attended the meeting called by Sir William
Palmer or BOT to discuss the extention of
the scheme for bringing German scientists
and technicians to this country which will
involve the bringing to this country of a
further batch of Germans. The idea is to
put them into industry which will not neces-
sarily be armament industry. It was stated
for example that the Germans had a new pro-
cess for making tissue paper and the services

253
I am honoured by being mentioned as a co-work
in MI5 and Curry is referred to as dealing
with NSDAP matters. Cookie is also of course
in the limelight. I only saw Stevens once,
just before the war. Generally speaking
German knowledge about our intelligence ser-
vices at the date of publication, some time
in 1940, or 1941 is extremely sketchy.
Opinion seems to be divided as to whether
5 is under Scotland Yard or the W.0.
THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958 July 2010.
October 4th.
Alley came to talk to me about the allocation
of funds for Polish security. It is I think
hardly in our interests to support the exist
ing organisation which looks after the secur

^[[Ainformation with him. He coula hand it over
to Forsyth or to Smuts himseli and then
discuss with them what our future relations
should be. hyde is quite prepared to go,
provided the DG will give his sanctions.
came to see me on the introduc-
tion of C. He is apparently in charge of the
security of Most Secret sources and is
ascertaining on C's behalf how the material
Ls handled in the various ofi'ices. I told
him more or less how it was handled here
and introduced him to Noble,Keliar etc.
In order that he could get further details.
He came in to see me before I ea vine and
expressed himsel as highly satislied that
adequate security precautions were maintained.
October 5th
The case of the renegade WOLKOFF in the
Soviet Einbassy in Istanbul has broken down.
In accordance with instructions he was
telephoned to at the Soviet consulate. The
telephone was answered by the Russian Consul
General on the first occasion and on the
second by a man speaking English claiming
so be WOLKOFF but clearly was not. Finally
contact was made with the Russian telephone
operator who said that WOLKOFF had leit for
Moscow. Subsequent en uiries showed that
he and his wife leit Dy plane for Russia on
Sept. 26th. WOLKOFF hau ovvered to give a
very consideraole amount of ini ormation but
much OL i tappeared to be in Moscow. WOLKOFF
estimated that there were 9 agents in London o
one of whom was said to be the head on a
section of the British counter-espionage
service". WOLKOFP said he could also produce
a list of the known regular NKGB agents of
the military and civil intelligence and of the
sub-agents they employed. In the list are

257
warrantit. The genuineness of the traffic
was often doubted and it was suspected that
the English Abwehr had taken it over but the
answers to personal questions made it quite
clear that it was still
with whom
the Germans were dealing. Pretorius says
that the outbreak of war in Sept.1939 found
Ast Hamburg very badly supplied with agents
abroad. They had no w/T or /W so that
censorship alone put a stop to their report:
"/W was not used until late in 1940. In
July 1940 a conference was called in Kiel
at which Canaris and other leading Abwehr
personalities were present including Pieckan.
brock, Wichmann, Rantzau @ Ritter, ana
Sensbueg. Canaris gave the orier at this
conference that all possible el'iorts were
to be made to recruit and train agents to be
cropped by parachute on England and that
such missions would be known as Unternehming
So far as Pretorius remembers some 6-8 agents
were despatched including TAT.who proved a
great success as a WT operator as cominuni-
catio with him was maintained right up to
1945. Paul Richter who was sent here early
in 1942 was a German Czech who wished to gaii
Tull German natio ality by undertaking a
mission. He was first to come by boat from
Holland and land in the Wash. The scheme
as subsequently rejected by Berlin and he
was dropped by parachute with or course the
resultswhich we know.
October 6th
We had a further conference, Marriott,Burt,
Hunter and I, on the staying or the operatio
for tomorrow. One man was to see MAY in at
the Totteham Court Road end, Hunter and Burt
established in the pub with one watcher, and
a car with one watcher would be stationed
down Montagu St. near a call-box with which

239
bound up with the policy of ourselves, Canada
and tmerica in regard to questions or sharing
a tomic research with the Russians. It would
made it a political dificulty to do this
both in the USA and Canada is there were no
publicity kiven to the fact that the Russians
had been operating such an extensive spy
net-work. If it were decided not to give
the information to the Russians I think that
bye and large our viewpoint was accepted
Chat it could only be regarded as a sign of
weakness if we failed to act. Norman Robertso
wondered whether the information about the
atomic bomb could be given to the Russians
on some sort of understand that there shoula
be greuter freedomfor British subjects to
move about Russia and in the Russian zone. ..
In other words that light and air shouild be
let into the country. I said that while I
thought the Russianis might agree to these
conditions they would never carry them out
in practice. It was a linost fundamental to
the continued existence of the USSR in its
present form that light and air should not
get into the country. Il the people realised
that they had been hoaxed about conditions
in western Europe in the last 28 years they
might see iit to overthrow taeir present
suiers, who were doubtless very conscious
Jf this fact. What we were really up against
was the one-party state, which could never
aiford to tell its own people the truth and
thereby constituted one of the breatest
meanaces to world security. It was agreed
that the FO should put up a note to the
Foreign Secretary embouſing Norman Robertson's
views and attempt to get a decision from
McKenzie King and also from Truman. We
stressed the urgency of the matter as other-
wise we felt the case would simply go cold.

271
Brig.Way and try to get some thing settled.
Meanwhile we are to have a meeting on the
whole question on Friday with the DG.
Malcolm Cumming came to talk to me about the
censorship or telegrams sent by cable com-
panies and wondered how far this was covered.
I said that we had previously covered it
He then asked me about the housir.
O1 B.6. He thought it undesirable that they
should be in a government building. It would
be preferable if they were alongside a lirin
of solicitors. I agreed that it would be
unfortunate ifit could be established that
our watchers were connected with the Govt.
Sclater came to tell me about a conference
with the Wireless Telegraphy Board which was
discussing the possibility of giving private
firms facilities for communication oi wire-
less within this country. We have been as .es
to put up a paper on the security aspects
or the subject.
Jugoslavs are still running a transmitter
which has been taken over by the Embassy.
THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
314) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958. July 2010

263
THE ORIGINAL DOCUMENT
RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT
UNDER SECTION 3(4OF
THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1968. July 2010

Alley came to talk to me about the Poies and
the payment 01 their Security section. The
D.G. has seen Warner who has agreed to put
forward a recommendation to the Treasury
that a grant shouiu be made until the end of
the year. We may thereafter keep on two or
three of the Poles on an agency basis.
October 12thS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
374) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958 JUL 2010
Miss Glass would be prepared to go to Italy
provided this does not interí are with a job
which she has been offered by Stopiord.
The DG held a meeting about the Far East
and the supply 01 stall. It was decided to
take the matter up with General Penney. The
DG. felt that the WO ought to pay at any
rateduring tne military period.
Albert Came in to say goodbye. He has mora
or less completed his task i.. BID/UK although
there are still Far Easter renegaues coming
hrough and a certain rumber Irom Germany.
I saw Swann ior a moment he had a talk with
a rumber of personalities in Ast Hamburs. Mhe
was no doubt that they were running a racket.
The operators had cone to the conclusion
that some of the agents were contro sed on
purely technical grounds. They reported this
l'act but were told to keep quiet, otherwise
they would get the whole party sent to the
Russian front.

24
Klop came to see me last night. He is
going to interview Schellenber. in Germany.
June 26th
Vivian as ed me to attend a meeting between
himself, Tim Milne and Inoides on the future
of CICB. Ionides had rather ambitious plans
for the future with regard to CICB and
apparently wondered whether Dixon was heavy
enough guns. He mentioned the lact that
Dixon had had trouble with COSSAC on Secoli
Front planning. I said that quite apart from
anything else Dixon was literally the only
man we had. If we had anybody of the calib-
re of Dica White and could spare him we shoulc
send him out. We had thought of Kirby Green
but he had a certain amount to do still in
Gib. and also had a sick wife who would not
be able to stand the climate and who needed
Looking after le re. I said that I had rather
been given the impression. by MacIver that
all the laminy wors had weer done and that
Dixon would only be required from time to
time to put a certain amount of oil in the
wheels. Ionides seemed to think that some-
thing rather more than tnis would be necessary
and that it needed an astute politician, and
that the passage might not be a very easy one
I said that Dixon had done well as an
RSLO, had survivea Swinton in W.Arrica who
was very sorry to lose him, and had since_done
well in E.Africa. The incident at COSSAC
I did not think was altogether his fault.
There were certain basic matters on which
it was quite impossible to get any decision
either out of the BGSI or the w.o. and with-
out which it wa. very difficult to do any
serious planning, Dick manageu eventually
to drive through thi. but of course he had
very exceptional qualifications. I was very
anxious that Dixon should not start oli on a
bad wic.et and I thought it quite lisely

267
are apparently a number of documents which
concern the Americans. John thirus that Cimp
ërman perhaps could go down and look at these
I told him to speak to TAR, and if he saw no
objection to go ahead.
Kellar is very worried about Ispal and Istria
the handling of which has now been giverr-
to Hastings who knows to thirg about the back-
lound. I said I would go with him and dis-
cuss the matter with C.
Dick and I went to see Findlater this arter-
noon at his request as he seemed to think tha
we were not altogether satisried with
yesterday's meeting. I told Finalater that
we had been somewhat handicapped by the
unreality of the situation. Were the
management and personnel thoroughly efficient
from top to bottom there might be some mean-
ing in Vivian's words. This however in our
view was not the case. Things were far from
satisfactory and we did not see any very
marked indication that they were likely to
improve. On the other hand we fully realised
that taat side of the question did not come
within his terms 1 reference and that he was
rely there to allocate responsibilities
and functions as between one orlice and the
other. We said that what worried us most
was the prospect of a huge section and IX
being built up or an extended charter
to cover British interests as distinct from
the security 01 British terriroty and the
enormous wastage 01 personnel and caruing tha
would be bound to ensue. This quite apart
Irom the fact that if the same subject was
dealt with in two places on the basis of
a territorial division we should, in spite
of the excellent personal relations that
existed, eventually get back to a state of
enormous Tity of Briti rests as a

Army would pay. He thought however that we
ought to get our own people in sir.ce alter
the military period was over the would go.
over to quasi-civilian status. Things were
moving more rapidly in that direction. than
we might imagine.
THS SA COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958 Jun 2010
Scott cane to talk to me about a reduction
in his pay on his demobilisation. I said I
would have a talk with Charles Butler, but
there were many difficulties with which he
had to contend owing to some people receiving
pay from civilian sources and others from
military.
Kellar and I went to sea c. about the aiili-
culties with Hastings who is now the
thority on ISOATS. Some difficulty arose
over the Admiralty whose representative in
the Mid East had to be initiated. . .
clearly appreciated the position und will
speak to Hastings.
October 15th
Thera is a questior. down in the House for
Thursday us in that the tame, nationality
and sentence or alt convicteu spies shout
be given. The only one that presents any
difficulty is the case of MENEZES. Oni

271
Cyril Mills came in to say goodbye.
Hollis brought me in a telegram Irom Canada
which seems to imply that at least one o1
the aests involved in the case over there
has had something in the nature of a warning.
Kellar has seen Paget about initiating naval
representatives in Mid East into ISOATS. He
took the opportunity of telling Paget about
the telegram about the future of SIME that
nau Deen auuresseu by the JIC to the Desence
Committee. Paget said that he had always
understood that SIM was unuer MI5. When
told that this was not the case, he said he
would certainly support any sugestion that
It should in future be controlled by us.
October 16th
We received from Findlater a copy of his
basic recommendations which he wishes to
discuss with c. alia the DG Defore puiting
in his final report. These are &S TOLLOWS:
1. MI5 exists for the purpose of the deiance
of the realm and for no other. 2. Tna Minister
responsible for it as a service should be the
Ministerol Delerce or if there is no Minister
OI Defence, the PM. as Chairman of the CID.
Only major questions would go to him and
go through the charies of the Chiels of Stall
with the permanent heads of such civil oliices
as are concernea. 3. The l'equirements ui
defence made it essential to maintain a
registry in MI5 of the present range and
character subject to periodical weeding of
obsolete matter and a constałt policy of
excluding the trivial. (This excluues any
question or returning the index on its sub-
versive side to Scotland Yara). 4. MI5
should not be amalgama ted with SIS either
wholly or in part. 5. MI5 is responsible

273
essential needs of the dept.receive due
consideration.
I feel that there is a slight discrepancy
between paras.5 and 6. 5 seems to indicate
that all the collation and appreciation should
be done by ourselves and 6 that it should
be a joint compilation, each uept.being
responsible for its own lielu.
had a talk with Horrocks about the prospect
or carrying all the caruing Ior Sections V and
IX and B. and F'. Divisions and having one set
of records. He seemed to think that this
was periectly possible.
I saw Burt and told him that we seemed to
have reached an impasse about the promotion.
of his officers but that I was still trying
to think of a way out.
I had a talk with Clayton who is getting out
a charter for DSO Burma. I said that the
strength of DSO Burma as an adviser to the Gov
-ernment lay in the fact that he would have
the resources of CICB at his back. I told
Clayton to get Banford's views on the charter
as he had beer, acting as liaison between
urselves and the BurmaOffice, and would be
able to express a view as to how our proposal:
would be received. I gather that the Burma
Oifice have little views of their own but
would accept those of the Governor probably
without demur.
I saw Turnell-Barrett who is going to Trini-
dad and MacMonalwho is boils as ADSO Jamaica
I gave them as much ini orma tior. as I could
about the FBI and other American Intelligence
organisations with which they might come
into contact.

273
employee ready to copperate and give informa-
tion. About 100 arrests were made almost
exclusively in Berlin. The depth or Soviet
Intelligence Service infiltration could be
seen in the case of an administrative inspec-
tor of the Air Ministry who gave away to
an intermediary tle most secret documents of
which only a Iew copies existed concerning
he strength 01 the Luftwaffe and the rising
production output figures. Even in the OKW
and the OKM there were onlicer's to be found
who were ready to cooperate dut of idealistic
motives. KOPKOW also had a lot to say about
the case of ROHDE-SCHWARZ. RHODE was apparent
-ly genuine but his communications were
intercepted and the Germans took over the
transmitter. This case was known to us as
Phoney I, and we were thoroughly aware that
it was phoney.
A JIC report dated 13th October deals with
the maintenance of Russian troops in Central
Europe. Certain recent telegrams seem to
indicate that Russian troops are to be moved
Irom one country to another not for reasons
of security or defence but in order to ease
the problems of supplying these troops. It
s known that the Russian military supply
system is very rudimentary and that ever
since they occupied central Europe their
armies have been living on the occupied
countries. As these countries rare gradually
being reduced to l'amine conditions the Soviet
Govt. may ultimately be forced to withdraw
their troops, unless they wish to see their
discipline break down to a dangerous extent.
If the Soviet Govt. are really faced with
the prospect of this dilema, it might
explain their present truculent attitude on
political matters. They would feel that
time was working against them and that they

277
THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
314) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
| ACT 1958 JULY 2010
3-W came in to talk to me about HOWS.
In any case a member ol
the CP communicating to some CP headquarter:
abroad is a matter ior F Division. Equally
inward correspondence would be an.matter.
I explained that we were responsibie to the
Home Secretary for HOWs and that in peace
time there had to be very stron, reasons for
imposing them. We were allowed to put on
fishing HOWS for intelligence purposes,
He said that he would have wall the names
and addresses care. Uity vetted and let us
know the full reasons in eachi Casa. He wou.
When discuss the matter with me again.
B-W is apparently open to any oilers and I
have sugbesteu to him that he might possib
like to go as DSO Syria. He woud I think
like to do this provided it uid not imply
any drop in rank. This may QI course be
difiicult
October 18th con
I saw the Dg with Roxer about the Corby casi
It seemed to us that things were riot settim
on, and that we were hung up for a high-lev.

279
Waring came to talk to me about visits of
aliens to factories. The present procedure
is that names have to be submitted to us
through the Ministry oi supply for vetting.
NID were apparently concerned about visits
from Russians. I said that I thought that
it would probably be difficult to resist at
any rate for very long the right of factories
carrying out secret contracts to receive
visitors without getting Govt.permission. -
I did think however that arrangements could
be made through D.Branch officers by which
we could be informed direct by the factory
when a visitor was expected. It would be
of particular interest to us to know first
of all what oficial requests had been made
by Govts. for information in cases where this
information had been refused. The D.Branches
could then warn factory managers and let us
know if anybody was making enquiries or dis-
playing knowledge to which theywere not
officially entitled. It would also be of
value to us to know what Russian visitors wer
particularly interested in, whether they
had information about the existence or cer-
tain types or armament which were still on
the secret list. It might even be possible
on occasions for D.Branch Officers to
accompany them roud the factories. I have
always been anxious that Branch work should
go further than ordinary routine matters,
and be of more assistance than they were in
pre-war years to B.Branch.
Dick, Hollis, Curry and I studied Finalaters
9 points. It became increasingly apparent
to us how difficult it was to disentangle
the functions of ourselves and SIS without
causing endless duplication. Curry is going
to make an attempt at a paper which we will
table before the DG Findlater and C at their

could only get a common set of files and
caras a great deal woulu have been achieved,
provided we were housed in the same building.
He agreed with this and thought that a
conimon set of files was a feasible propo-
sition and should be handed over to an
expert like Horrocks to work out the necessar
machinery. He said that he would try and
see if anything could be done in this
direction.
I talked to Hunter about his new establish-
ment. He seemed quite satisiied with the
terus. I told him that I thought he might
well have to increase the number of his
watchers and that I would see what we could
do about getting suitable personnel irom
the Army.
Hughes came in to tell me about lour Jugoslav
who came overhere with the Jugoslav delegatio)
to the Foreign Ministers Conference, and
remained here in order to run transmitters
whichare operating in the Jugoslav Legation.
I asked Hughes to find out whether this was
authorised and whether any attempt was being
made to monitor and break the communications.
1 got M. E. to come in and discuss with me
the desirability of our having representa-
tion on Sigirt. C. in conversation on the
previous day had suggested that represen-
tation on that level was not necessary and
that our requirements would be better met by
having a liaison officer with G.C.& C.$.
I felt that we should undoubtedly have a say
n the management and allocation of Y.sources.
Otherwise our interests might not be covered.
M.E. entirely agreed that this was necessary.

THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
314) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958
Juu 2010
Burt is just back from Brussels having
brought over Baillie-Stewart. He mentioned
the case of some Arabs who have been languish
-ing in a Belgian jail ior some time and
were beginning to ieel the cold. They are
think mainly Byrians who were operating
111 conjunction with the G.I.S. Kellar has
been trying for some time to bet the CO.
to make a decision to send them to the
Seychelles, possibly with the Muiti, if the
French can be persuaued to let him go.
At the 12 o'clock meeting touay John Gwyer
mentioned that he had two cases or some
interest waich he had not yet cleared up.
One related to an agent known as WELLINGTON
who is said to have been operating on behali
of Einz Wi.Bremen from 1941-44. This
information was of a very indifferent kind.
The other is ALLNOCH whom he thincs to be
identical with LLANLOCH.
Hughes said that the Jugoslav transmitter
had been authorised by the F.0. I have
Caled Hughes to find out if they are being
monitored.
Howard of RSS rang up to say that he thought
it was desirable to revive the RSIC.
Various problems were coming up which could
be suitably aired belore that committee.
I said that we had been thincing on rather
similar lines but that I would be glad to
have a note from him giving the various
matters which had given rise to his sugges-
tion.

286
and Jew-baiting is reported from Osnabruck.
Also in Osnabruck the 25% of the population
are said to approve of Leaflets exposing
Germans who collaborate with the occupying
troops.
The interrogation OI ut.col.RBILE o Leit-
stelle 3 West contains some interesting
items. He says that valuable results were
often obtained by Funk Abwehr. During the
vinter of 1943-44 the rur Uber Wachungs-
uienst succeeded in brea:ling coues used by
one of the most important transmitters of
the Polish intelligence service in France.
For months thereal'ter w/T reports from
Polish agents to England were interception
and understood. The same applied to orders
they received from England. The Germans
also learned that important military plans
were known to the allies and a considerable
number of names and cover names of members
of the Polish Intelligence Service were
discovered. The above is interesting in
view of the assurance that we had from SID
in the autumn of 1945 that Polish cyphers
were perfectly secure.
THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT WONDER SECTION
314) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958: JULU 2010.

10
June 27th
I save another talk to the 1.0.s on the
same lines as last week. They all seemed
very pleased with the course and the trouble
we were taxing to put them in the picture.
I went to see Cavendish-ben tinck about 5 mat-
ters. (1) the Poles, what was to be the
future of the 22 transmitter. which they now
operated in this country? C-B said that
within 2 weeks the British Govt. would
recognise the Lublin uovt. and that terei ore
all transmitters except for representatives
of the Lublin Govt. would cease. He was
a little vague about the armed forces. I
told him I would be talking to 0.later about
the transmitters which from our point or View
had never been very satisiactory. It had
always been held to be Gambier-Farry's busines
ana he never vouchsal'ea ary ini ormation. I
took the opportunity of pointing out how
unsatisfactory our po ition had been vis-a-
vis R.S.S. Saey were supposed to be our
technical tool but we never really knew how
tneir lorces were disposed. (2) I let with
C-B Walker's memo on pigeons. He is putting
this up to the JIC. O) I then discssed the
case oi Negrin and explained that some
time ago we had wanted to carry out obser
vation on his activities here but had been
prevented by Morrison. The case had been
strongly bac.zed by the F.0. and had I think
reached the ministerial level. I gave C-B.
a memo showing what the position was and the
extent to which Negrin was now being-backed
by Moscow. In this onnection I outlined to
him my theory about Soviet intentions to
build a bigfleet and to control the various
Narrows in the Baltic and the mediterranean.

seemed to me that BroOK-Booth might estab-
lish a link. He saic that he had called on
B-D but that he had been away. I am going
to write a line to b-D about this.
and kinchleum in the hand natione
I had a meeting with Harier,Bromley, Cussen
and Finchley Cooke about MONIZES. There is
a question down in the House askine lor
publication of the names and nationalities o
all people convicted of' espionage during the
war. MENSZES' name was excluded as we
did not wish to give any publicity to his
reprieve and wished the Germans to think
that it was possible lor their agents to
disappear without any public arouncement.
Both thes: reasons are no Jelig er valiu.
THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
314) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958 Jun 2010.
I dined with David Boyle who told me that
he had re-opened his business in ano ther plac
but intended to so very slowly lor the
present.
October 23rd
Luke was asking me about his release. He
wondered whetner he coula be sent on indefin
ite leave. I said that as Tar as I knew that
would be quite impossible. He would be quite
prepared if he has to stay to go to the Par
East for 6 months.
Curry came to tell me that Drew had as..ed hi

289
the line that he does not care what the
authorities do to him as he feels under
strong moral obligation to disclose the facts
THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958 JUL 2010
John Marriott and I went over for a conferenc
with Pir John Stephenson at which eville
Butler, Bromley and NormanRobertson were
present. We had to discuss a drait telegram
to Canada embodying the decision by the PM
and McKenzie King that all those in Govt.
service who were implicated in the CORBY
case should we interrogated anu il they
were willing, searched, provided that no
publicity resulted. Similar action would be
taken here in regard to MAY. Action against
the Soviet uipiomats would be difiered until
after the interrogations. We made it clear
that it would be quite impossible to interro-
gate 14 or 15 people without the matter leaxi
-ing out and that is simultaneous action were
desired it would at least be necessary to
detain the parties until the job had been
completed. Detention would inevitabjy lead
to publicity. It seemed to us moreover that
11 we were going to face up to the question
of publicity it would be as well to take in
Sam Carr and Rose the M.P who to a very large
extent were controlling the agents on behalf
of the Soviet Govt. Anybody who was not
taken in on the first sweep would destroy
his documents.. If the risk or publicity

291
could have a complaint against the Board
unless we knew what it was doing. C.aiso
offered to give us a liaison Ollicer with
Travis and argued that through that channel
we should always know what was going on.
I doubt it. I also asked the DG about
our representation abroad. He told me that
C. had raised a number of points but that he
had said that he was or an open mind and
I think prepared to give the matter a trial.
October 24th
I saw Brig. Way and Max Percival about the
establishment 01 CICB. They are going to
put it forward in accoruance with the
SBAC telegram as far as the male stall
are concerned. They doubt however whether
they now have authority to appoint ATS. I
said that AT grading was not very suitable
for the type of girl we shoula wish to send
out, that having to live in. barracks was a
severe handicap. Way talied to me about
the Russian wives of British officers who
were coming back from Russia. Some of them
he thought were particularly undesirable.
I said that if he could let me know their
names I should be grateful. He then spoke
to me about his own wire, a Russian who he.
married in Tashkent and is still in Soviet
territory. He hopes to get her out. He said
that possibly when she did arrive he might
be grateiul if we could keep some sort of
eye on her in order to ensure that she was
not got hold or anu persecuted by the
Russians. He thought that 11 she were
black-mailed she might not be willing to
tell him.
THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACÍ 1958 July 2010

THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED 243
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
detober 15 CPUBLIC RECORDS
TATT1950-22 JULY 2010
Alec Kellar brought a mari called Steward
to see me. He has just been demobilisea.
He did a certain amount of intelligence work
here and attended a course Delore going out
to N.Africa where he served in the TSP
as an officer. He was then ser.t to Syria
where he did well. He is very fond or
intelligence work and very anxious if possibl
lo continue in M.I.5. Before tle war he was
engagea in the wool export trade and travel-
leg a lot on the continent. He makes a
gooi impression.
Cayzer and Owen came to see me about Tilton.
They are thying to sort out his case as
he seems to be the victim of slanderous
reports from the Far East. the probability
is that being charged with I.B. duties
which nobody in the Air Force mderstood he
in curred tae enemity of a number of people
through his persistence.
At the stafl meeting we discusseu the
personnel required by CICB. A letuer had
come in from Dixon saying that there were
certain SO2 l'emale stall who would be avail-.
Die ir we could ta e them on aru pay for
them. It was finally agreea that we should
do this,
II raised the point about secretaries
who are put on to war establishment losing
their connection with this office. There
did not seem to be any very complete answer.
It seemed to me that they could perfectly wel.
be told that ir and when the permanent starf
were considered here their names would be
taken into account in addition to those
employed in London.

285
Balloon to get him the particulars. Balloon
has been told to stall on this ar.d to try
to discover any other things in which 01.KHOV-
SAY is interested.
October 27th
THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
314) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958 July 2010
I had a talk with Joh. Gwyer and also with
Harry Allen about the writing up 01 C.I.
in the War Office. There has already been
a joint pamphlet on security and another on
military security. Meanwhile someone is
supposed to be uealing with civil security.
It seems desirable that we should see the
documents alreauy written and probably
write the one or civil security ourselves.
John pointed out that it was very important
that something should go on record about
having a proper racoruing system on a
univorm basis. Experience had shown that
all the various corps had teir own systems.
Another point I thought ought to be emphas-
ised was the necessity or providing officers
in the liela with secretarial assistance.
It had been our experience that the use-
fulness oi oi iicers had been reduced by
about 75, when they had to interrogate and
then write out their reports in long hand.

vembannet
1945.

297
He said too that as lar as he knew the
whole business had the blessing of SHAT.
He was somewhat horrilieu to learn that it ha
had all beer. krow to the Germans who had
warned their units in the fieli at 9. pm
on the 5th June. I have how got copies
of the actual messages serio Irom the BBC.
The ori inals were a parently removed by
some brigadier QI SOB. The copies which
I have are not initialled as the originais
presumably were.
I had a talk with Newsam about the case
of Rudolf BAUDISCH, who wants to get his
mother and sister over here from Czecho-
slovakia. Newsam suid that it presented
certain diificulties from tha Home Orice
angle as it might create an awkward prece-
dent. People like Eleanor RATHBONS Wanteu
to bring all European reiugees to this
country and the 7.0, were doing their ut-
ILOSC to resist her onslaught. II however
I would write to him he would put the
matter up as a special case.
I also talked to him about KRYMOR one or
the Polish interrogators at the LRC whom
I wanted to get discharged from the Polish
Army, I explained to Newsam that he was
only sta, ing or with us for a few months
and that he would then be launched on the
labour market. Newsau saiu he thought it
would be possible to treat this aiso as a
special Case.
What is believed to be another Polish trans-
miter has come up somewhere in Northampton.
Communication is apparently with the British
Bone in Germany.
I talked to Stone about the case of FABISCH

299
In the report on the interrogation of Colonel
RISILE it is stated that weitstelle III
West had 50 much material available about
allied intelligence Services that taey were
nearly alwayswell-ini ormed about the develop-
ment 01 resistance movements in France,
Holland and Belgium. They could follow
almost exactly the work done by the Armee
Secrete, the FranceTineurs, and partisans
etc. It was observeu how strong the resis-
tance movements grew in 1943 and 1944 and
how they gradually became more dangerous to
the Germans, particularly ai ter their uni-
fication under the F.F.I. and after they
had obtained a considerabie quantity 01
weapons and sabotage equipment by air.
Ir. 1949 and 1944 certain document. Tell
into the hands of the SIPO. They gave the
important tasks which the active resistance
movements were to carry out on D.day and
days immediately after it. The SIPO had
discovered the existence of Plen Rouge, Pian
Vert and Plan Noire. It also ascertained
that resistance groups were to bergiven
code words and that sentences were to be
transmitted at certain times by the BBC
with the warning to the resistance grous to
be ready to carry out theirinvasion tasks
and to start on them in case of invasion.
TAK 3 West was immediately given order to
carry out active penetration and in a Thamber
Of cases was successful. About 25 BBC
announcements on the Ist June and 5 th Jure
were recognised for what they were and the
beginning of the invasion could approximatel
be worked out. On the evening 01 the 5th
Jurie at approx.21 hours Leit. West notilied
0.B.West,M.D.Frankreich, Leitstelles
and 2 West and FAK 3 that the invasion
Was due to begin that same nicht or at the
latest within the next 36 hours. RELLE
heurd that an enquiry was subsequently held

. 301
with the object of connusing the British
Secret Service. METTIG also stated that
Tito's radio trailic coutu be decyphereu,
in part, but that Mihailovic was entirely
penetrated. Ti to constantly warned kinaii-
ovic that the Germanis nad Iuf under tauding
of his cypher system through traitors. Il
1 true this is rather a remareable statement.
SOE are publishing an account of their
activities which has been compiled by
Lionel Hale. I 1ookeu carefully to see
what had been said about Holland. The
para. opens with the iollowing wores:
"Resistance in Holland had been sporau
knitfrom 1941-44. The work of special forces
did not surmount the disriculties tatil
1944 when renewed attempts on the last
pattern. were made." Since the whole of
SOE was wiped up from Sept.1941 to bet. 1943
it would seem to have been more a case 01
Uropping stitches than 100se ani tling.
KOPKOW conlirm the iniormation kiven by
RAILE avout earty jenowlege on the time of
the invasion, obtained through BBC announce-
merts. He ililer Omby in the timing of
the message received on the 5th June, which
he says was 1900 hours. The Germans had no
Knowledge on the target. KOPROW meri tions
the case or IOONIG, an SOL agent about whom
Field-Robinson had discussions with me at
the time. We could never believe it possile
that this man colla succeed in carrying out
his task in Germany and get back to this
country via the Peninsula within 10 days.
KOPKOW says that in a hotel in Hanover
objects were found belonging to a buitwalle
NCO who had been there several days, This
Was some time in the autumn of 1943. Alter
examination the conclusion was reached
that the owner of these objects was KORRIG.

303
being ordered to make touch witin Germany,
visited Schultze-Boysen in Berlin at the
German Air Ministry and save him a new coue
ana documents KENT was played back to the
Russians with the result that the Grand her
Ini Waris was arresteu. He turneu out to
be the moviet Russian TREPPER @ Jean GILBERT.
THEPPER came from Galicia anu ned the rank
of Capt.in the Red Army, TROPPER was
allowed by the Germans to escape in the
summer of 1943. Fuil use was made of KUNT
however who got orders to set up transmitters
in Marseilles and Paris. By this means
Soljait a Russia agent who had lived many
years in Paris was disclosed - He was a
Latvian Col. who had played a leading part
in an the International. Brigade in the
Ppanish Civil War. The Grand Cher received
extensive information tra a Frol.Basil
MAXIMOVITCH and his sister The Tormer was
at the time at the Sorbonne in Paris and the
lauter was a lady doctor also in Paris.
A certain Herry ROBERTSON (real name) was
responsible for the Grand Cher's connection
in France with the movilet Inteligence in
Switzerland He travelled continually Irom
France to swi usarlanā direct or via Germany.
ROBERUSON was arres veu.
Octover 30th
At the w.g.s meeting it was announced that
SCO3 Wera to ve Tinay wa thurawn in the
course of the next l'ew weeks. Imicration
are by no means ready to ta e aver bl I do
not think that we are lisely to get much
Service out oi them for some time.

305
to whom they canerve a ball. He mearu
that the JIS and other subversiva Organisa-
tions were in such a State of disarray that
it was difiicult to know what to aim at
until things began to taxe shape.
I showeu -W
Courtney's letter both about viol. La
about Ionides. I Saiu ielt that it wus
a Ereat pity that the show out there was not
beins run as a jointconcern, that all our
resources were not pooled. The only reason,
which to me was not a reason, I or I LD stand-
ing outside was that they were keeping
Special records of their own on Ultra
material. I thought that ultra material.
ought to be incorproated in the CICB record
just as it was in our recorus, with any sale-
guaras that might be necessar'y.
I had a word with Blatchley, who has just
returned from Trinidad. He was the person
responsible for detecting ZUHLSDORF, a
German S.D. man who was trying to make a
get away to America. Aiter all the
examina tions of some 700 passengers hau Deen
completea Blatchley recognised ZUHLSDORF
from a photograph and after à lair struksie
managed to break him dowII. He was travel-
ling or false pparish or - American papers.
Noble came in to talk about COLUMBINE, wno
wants to marry a Swedish biri who nurseu him
in Stockholm before his arriven here. Note
Suggested that it might be better for him to
wait until he set seulied it. Germany put
este insisteu, Sai Wa Duta COU DE

24
Victor brought Sersts.Schwarzer and Schoeten
01 12th A.G. Interrogation Group to see me.
He waited me to tudi to them generally av ut
C.I. which I did. I then arrange for them
to go down and see the recorus at Blenneim,
as I felt it might be helpiul to them to
know what was behind them in this respect.
The tendency oi 12 A.G. has always weda. TO
think that they could conduct interro-
Eations in the field and that tnere is
nothing to be gained from senain people
back. b. and S. entirely agreeu however
that once tactical inteligence hau bea
extracted there was every advantaša in
tac. ling the problem where the urleiers
and interrogators could consult with each
other.
June 28th
I had a talk with miry a vixon. I told ta en
what Ionides had said. Tim seameu to think
that Ioniues was rather inclin.eu to build
castles in the air anu to be a little vague
wh en pinned down to concrete lacts. I uiu
ot give away inui cution that SIS were a
little doubtiui &bout vixon's suitabilit
for the job. Later I saw acIver and Ioniusi
wher, we discussed the CICB JOD and Dixon's
suitability I think in general that Ionides
views are souna although I am a little
doubtiul whether at the moment we coulu do
more than make preparations. I impressed
upon him the vital necessity OI CICB or
its component parts concentrating on the
production of ini'ormation.

307
circumstances in which the inior'mation had
been given. Mearlwhile it appears that we
OLILY maue one shall payment to Sarah who wer
back to Stockholm in april 1945. On 14th
June 1945 however SIS posted him 500 kr.
in Stockholm. I think we must press tne
Swedes to state the name of the inuivisual
concerned. We may ther. offer to crear up
the position and tell them that we had omy
been concerned acout Gerial aberts enterine
tiis country.
I Said soodbye to doch blum Ol one Wer noom
and Mardin forrest. Ine latter is teine u
Ć Jou at Eton a master.
I Saw Dac. avour tha Case OI Grace AOLIN.
He is going to wire out to bene cu try
ainu get the position clariiicu. I wil then
Speak to the H.O.
THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
314) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958 July 2010

PUL THIS IS A COPY OLO
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
ment of atomic negearch RUB He PULSsta tea
that the full Acad058 of the atomic bomb
were knowri td our scientists. We knew of
course that all this information had been
given to Blackburn by OLIPHANT. Bavin I
gather has reduceu BLACKBURN to something
of a jelly ana is anxious that proceedings
should be taken il possible against both
OLIPHANT and BLACKBURN under the Urlicial
ecrets Act. He wants us. to explore the
position.
Newsam rang up to say that H.0. hau decided
to expel KUCHENMEISTER but to allow LACHMANN
to remain in thiscountry on the grounds that
he had helped us auring the war and that
he could not therefore be expelled il
German scientists and technicians who had be
beer. working against us were to be brought
here to settle down with their families.
He wanted to obtain our agreement to this
course of action. I said that I should have
to refer the matter to the DG and to Joe
Archer but that I would let him know as
soon as possible. We should of course de-
precate the action but we I'ully realised
the difficulty.
dined at 0 20 last night. They have just
got rid of all their prisoners and will
be closing down themselves within the next
month. I saw a Capt.l.P.Bagge who I gather
is an efficient Ollicer and would be quite
prepared to go to the Far East on a 6 months
contract after which he would probably wish
to return to civil life.
I had a talk with Cayzer and tola him of the
latest developments about CICB. He is
telegraphing to Dixon about Basse.

3U
Stopioru says I have recomiendeu that the
Press Attache in Stocichoim should return
to the charge with ROSEN and asa him the
man's name. We would then explain that we
had a great responsibility here uuring
the war in keeping an eye on the i'ast routes
between here and Stockholm and indeed not
without reason, but that we hoped that that
period was over and that SARAH's services
would therefore be no longer required.
We also discussed the proposed visit of
two Ollicers Ol Danish Military Intelligence
and 4 police onlicers. They are arriving
in about 10 days time.
THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958 JULY 2010
I saw Machell and told him that I could not
really justify his retention in B. Division.
We had a number of LRC ofiicers whom we
could not get rid or until their demobilisa-
tion and they could really carry the interro
-Eation of British subjects as well as
aliens. He quite saw the point and said
that he would make arrangements accoruingly.
Har er discussed security in connection
with atomic research with myself,Harry
and Victor. Victor felt that it was very
important that we should get a grip on
this matter. There was a great deal going
on and a considerable amount of publicity
but at the moment we had no very clear idea
of what the iield of knowledge was in this
country. I said that I had already written,

313
forward to the D.P.P. There is at the
moment no evidence whatever but there would
be grounds for an interrogation OT OLIPHANT
which might wel produce the required
results.
November 2nd
I told Dick that we should want him to go
to the Far East and got the D.G.S approval.
Archer tells me that after consultation wit!
the Air Ministry they view with grave concei
the possibility of LACHMANIN returning to
the aircrait industry. Tne, wound wike to
know waat restrictions can be placed on
his employment.
Wib.roe came in to say goodbye. He is leaving
at last for Copenhageri tomorrow.
and wist
I had a talk with Anthony Mitchenlanu Guy
Burgess about the luture Di Orange. It has
been deciled that Mitchell shalt run him
ir Tuture in conjunction with burgess, since
a 300 deal ol his iniormation relates to
Fascist activities abroad, and Mitchell is
the kind of person who is likely to get on
with Burgess.
Herbert of Censorship came in to talk to me
about the case of FABISCH. I explained to
him that FABISCH had been turneu uown by
the Control Commission (a) because he was
a German and (D) because his wife was the
daughter of a German General. The Commissi
tare a very strong line on both these point
As regards the letter that we had written,
it was grossly improper for the Establish-
ment Officer of the Commission to quote it,

i
318
THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
314) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958 JULY 2010
Bromley rang ug about the possible prospects
or proceeding against OLIPHANT and BLACKBURN
I told him what the legal position was and
that I did tot see any point in our doirs
anything until Downino St.made up their minds
that a prosecution was desirable, if the
necessary evidence were northcoming

317
Marriott showed me some recent telegrans
on the subject. 01 ELLI. CORDY has been
re-interrogated and reuers to an incident
whe.. the Soviet M.A. il lomuon pelerreu
to inform tion that he had received from
BILI relating to a British agent in Russia.
As the only organisations that can possibly
have been running a British agent in nuobia
čire SIS,SOE or one Briwa sh milially Mission
it seems unlikely that ILLI could have any
comection with ourselves. Nobouy ill lact
TOTO WS un thing WUout any agenu in Russia.
I shound coumt very much whether there was
one. The above does not necessarily throw
al y counts on the bord iidas O CORBY *
who may have got the story wrong
Ronnie Haylor Came in. W e ma. He told
me that Intelligence I.A. U I.. were now
to be wil ieu in One Inte121. ence Dureau.
number oi extraneous organisations had
been au sorbed and would probably De stad
üally liquidated. The enteet of uni. Dan
been to make the organisation somewhat top-
heavy. The M.G.1. Lethoniuge is at the head
01 it with Brig. Ford on the IA siue, who
is clearly redundant, and also biL wil iets..
who for the mowert wilt ue utáse vor Cue
MGI in his auseuce.
Ronnie saame to think that every thing is
goins fairly well in CIB. He asso leels
that the zone is broauly speaking Deins well
run. Miltov. have apparently Qare quite
a good job, very much contrary to his
expectations. A propos On this, there is
an interesting Chinese B.J. Arepresenta-
tive of the Chinese Military Mission who
has recently returned from Germany compares
our administra vion very favourably as
against that of the American, Russian ang...

way from their administration on their
colorial territories. French troops lived
on a better scale Germans onty guta
monthly ration of 200 kr. 01 metu, 100 ór.
01 Iats and 4 S. 01 wreau. Apart i rom a
Sillall numero onlicers QI & comme tivery
800u tupe, Freuch oificers and men COMOI.
eller veral homes to extOt ne au zupu.
THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
314) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958 JULY 2010
November 6th
I attended the j.1.0. While tha telegrami i Toll
the Dei erce Committee Mic East was discusseu
regaluiny the l'uture u CIME. Elmhirst
expressed certain misgivings all seemed to
imply that the Air Ministry had rather Weg
rushea The Chairuall lowever pointed out
that the matter had gone forward Irom the
JIC in the term 01 t Proposal to m e ...t

321
THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
314) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958 JULY 2010

323
THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
374) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958 July 2010
Cummingham has been appointed to succeed
Lord Gort in Palestine.
Morlagu brought me his report on tae work
of the W.Boara. I am retaining the original
uocuments and one copy nere. The other
copy is being sent to C.
Novemper 9th
Marriott showed me a telegram Irom Roger
Saying that in the Canadians went or the
deep end on the CORBY Case he thought wa
should do something about MAY on the grounds
Last in the latter had not already gone
completely to ground he certainly would on
hearing of the arrests in Canada. Moreover
the Canadians might not think that we
were playing our part. hoger is to meet
the PM, the President and Mackenzie King
in Washington, il required. They will be
navin a discussion on the whole case, al ter-
they have settled the little matter on the
atomic bomb, and its hanuing over to the
Russians or to the Security Council.
I gave a talk to two Ollicers 01 the Danish
2 ere Bureau and 4 Danish Security policemen,
most of whom had worked in the Resistance.
Altar describing to them the main features
01 Our work and ins inter-relation 1
security and investigacion, I save them a V
very briei uccount on our operationis imme-

328
in the Embassy should make periodical
inspections. So lar reasury saletion las
100 been obtained. G-PIS men. Would not
Of course know anything about mises, unless
they were properly trained by the BPO.
Col. radiora, who is low head of the ivilitawy
Intelligence School which was moved from
Natlock to Tarnham, Cane to ask whether
we could give him a lecture on the 14th
Dec. He wanted Hartis lecture on the GIS.
I suggested that possibly thinjeet
might be a littie out 01 aate seains that
the GIS had been Iersely liquidated. He
Saiu that as é cersain rumber of the
Oliicers would be going to the Britill zone
he thought it would be a bec enin or
them to bow Whathe game is act-Up: Wa
and to be samiliar with the oruinany GIS
Jargon. I then subbenteu to him that
there might be other subjects connected
with our WTA or whien he mist like us to
lecture irom time to time. He Welcome -
this with enthusiasm. His address is
S.M.I.,Pierrepont House, Haritham, telephone'
Frensham 21. I am asidins TAR to see
what can be done about the Dec.14th lectura.
le might voit himsem, or possible get
Hart or Roland Bird to give it.
Sclater tells me that RSS are behar å
Special unit with Dring apparatus ana
snitters to Palestine. Nobody seems to
have heard anything about this. I said
I would speak to C.
November 13th
I saw Ruiter. He has been at home or sick
leave but is going back to the British zone
shortly. He would like to we couldertau lor
the Security Service as a permalien.cy

oilicials have been identiniei am are being
arrested in suiiicient numbers to make it
possible (a) to deline accurately post-
Occupational aims of the G.IS., (b) to iden-
tily the bulk of the G.1.5. in Italy and
(c) to dislocate any possible attempt at
survival. The networKS 01 post-occupa liona
agents are for the most part broken or
incapable 01 independent action. So fartnere
is no evidence either of G.I.S. survival
of attempts on the part 01 captured
oilicials to double-cross allied counter-
intelligence. Lastly there are no cases 01
subversion directed by elements of the Q.1.3.
since the surrender.
AP/W officer captured in Paris on the 24th
August 1944 has given a certain amount of
Intormation about 3F activities. In par-
ticular he talks about Roger who appeared in
the GILBERT case and about Bodding ton. He
says this underground group under Paul
had liaison with London through a Capt. Elie
OT ELY, and the Abwehr had daily reports on
the objeet and missions of this group. The
Abwehr did not molest this group due to the
fact that the informua vion obtained was too
Valuable. Besides that the English were
parachuting weapons and equipment to thi:
group which the Abwehr either intercepte
or kept track OI so that they could lay taeir
hands on them at any time. Through lioger the
Abwehr was successiul in shadowing in the
summer of 1943 a British colonel Bottingham
(obviously bodding tory believed to be the
leader of the British I.S.section for all of
France, who was in Paris for 3 weeks. It
seems that wier Col.bottingham arriveu in
France he needed a carte d'identite winich.
Roger got ior him through the Abwehr Bureau
I.G. The Abwehr in this way was able to
get the colonel's picture and trace his

322
nobody is very clear. Presuma 17 the basis
of the whole thing is Tricycle. Freak Was
present at the ceremony dressed in & Mavul
unilorm with much old bratu. C.Was uecor-
ated at the same time.
Ine ving
explained that he could not actually ive
us the decorations ab they had not beer
made yet. They were om order 12. Switzerball
but we should receive them in due course or
the presentation on a document which was
nanue to eaca 01 us. The file Wa rather
nervous to begin with but nel teu taler ale
was Tul Oltada o various triviliauids.
I as ea his Air A.D.C. atter who ceremony w
what the situation was ir tas liclit on the
elections which hau put Tito in power py !
an over-wherminus majority. He saiu that
amo certainly a Republic WUWLU be
declared in the course on the next few
weeks but that in his opinion the King
would be as ea to return proDa Duy in about
5 years time. He saia the whole election
was à ramp but that nothing in the nature
oi a democratic election hau taler. piace
in Yugo-slavia for huureds of years. On
this occasion. there were two boxes. The vo-
ter put his paper ir a rubber ball concealed
in one hand and placed his hands one in
each of the two boxes on either siue of
him. He droppeu the ball into one, but
it probably made a noise alza iraicuted
clearly to Tito's representative starving
by as to the party for which he had voteu.
There were few who would not succumu to
this form o. 11.uimica vion. The ruralists
party had rei'used to vote and all their
votas had been counted lor the uovt.

329
of some sort or permanent civilialı sitemi
to give continuity to the or work. If such
StaIT'S were estab.ished there coutu be
promotion round the 5 Services anu I.
Everydowy was very sympathetic. I saiu that
I thought the Furia proudem won de the
outstandint amet e Dura ana wou
involve us into great deal DL work.
Further that in this collection all arutagua te
Waching Staf W WI the test
importance since we snotu naveo cover
hot cut Ausstiens ung .P. məmuers Out at
the satellite states. Maxwell as a
waat it was possible to wo wwen we nau
aiscoveriau Russian Spy. LL WOLI not
put a stop to such activities. This seemeu
to be rather a counsel ou despair and I
was relieved to line unat all the owner memo
-ers of the committee Tell upon him.
In the anteroom I saw Pilditch tale o DIB
and Inglis, tate ACSI. Gou preserve us irom
either of them ab Tuture LG.
"Dick, curry, Charles and I had a talk on
Curry's paper on the nature organisavion.
The paper emphasises the act that tae
responsibilities must be properly placed
on the heads 01 3 uivisions A Administra-
tion, and urgani sa thoni,B. Investigation and
C.and D. Security. There shouku we three
Directors and 3 Deputy Directors. The Deputi
however shoulde henus of sections and
shouia oiiiciate in the civi. Non only
uuring the absence or the directer. In the .
Same way the ODG SHu be a Senior rector
and should only operate in his capacity as
DDG in the DG5 eus ence.

336
that personal y I Was ir agreement. I did
however se certain uiliiculties wien we
considereu the relations O1 Kellar's section
vich IE. Tee section had workeu exurameny
well because alal was handing Now only
sacuri by, organisasi oli ana miristracion
Dut also inteligence. Ii IME was how
going to be a givideu responsibility witoin
the ovlice iu might teau to ciniculties.
Mach however W L depend on the co-oruiria-
tion at the top nu it might be that we
should have to me some verilice in order
to maintain the principles tai, uo W in
Curry's memo.
Cimperman came to tell me that a man called
WEBB on the Daily Express had asued him to
Supon him with spy stories, and he hau
said that he was hare solely in the capacity
01 liaison oi'iicer witn MI). We told him
to tell Webt that he cou not disclose
anything. Cussen hopes that this will choke
T.ebb orr. I tola Cimpermān I thought it
would be a pity il any emphasis was laid
on the liaison between ourselves and the
FBI as this might be awkward Nor us both.
He agreed and said that he would do avery-
thing he coulu to dump Webb down. He rang
later to say that he hau been successiu
ani that Webb hatt promiseu to wash out the
Whole subject.
November 16th
THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958 JULY 2010

333
At that time Stalin was in favour of arantin
ito Turkey large parts of pouthern Bulgaria
including the port or Burgas, all the Greek
Islands close to the Turkish coast including
not only the Dodecanese but ai 50 Mitilini,
Kios and Samos and a slice on northemi yada
including Aleppo. These promises were made
Hrst in. Moscow and were conlirmed in
Halikara by the Soviet Ambassador Vinobrauov.
The British Govt. is said to have been
aware of these proposals which were declined
by luricey.
The interrogation OT Rurusteut nas prouuceu
some luieres un informacione. The Pori
Catupaign was intended to start or 2 bus.
1969 but in the evening oruers wera siven
tohoid averything unustaut thought that
a peace feeler must neve bean mud by Masso-
During the break-through in France in Mey
1940 Rundsteat had at his disposal 5 Axmies
and 86 Divisions altogether. As the divisio
went forward across Belgium and France they
turned teil in oruan to meet a possible
attack from the south. Rundsteut en tioned
that the British must have ween surprised
at the sudden stop that was mane at wunkirk.
That" Said atseat"was done on the fuhrer
Dr'aers. He suddenly called a halt ang
we were all suspended. We were not allowed
to go forward more than within 10kms. 01
Dundirk. Whether he was already too muen
occupied with the second part, Ol' una campaian
against France, that is to say tlle Lurie
towards the south, or what caused him to
do that, I don t know. At any rate it was,
ir I may say so, a lucky stroke for you, or
il we had gone ahead T10 otthi i JOU WOUL
have been abue to get so man; away".
if I masa gone aheaat so mar

335
the first he heard of the plan to attack
Russia was in the winter of 1940-41. He
was insistent that such a cainpalun must
berin in May, after the Swampy psrdau.
This was not possible owing to the Balkan
Campaign which caused a 4 weens datay.
Rundsteat himsell was not e thusiastic about
the campaign. He had always lavoured an
understanding with Russia such plus naar
existed under vold Seeict. The Germans hau
teemendous uirtieulties with transport aven
in the summer. Runtis beat remember nowa
panzer division covered only 7 km in 1.2
hours. It is unbelievable" he said,
Hanyone who has not seen it does not believe
it. If it begins radining then that is
the end.
On the Normaliay bautia unastaut said that
alter the laring the love to reckon with a
second landing specially all on the Bart 12
coast Until he was convince that this
Was I the case he could not withuraw
great deal ironu that area, and i.ca wat
was established the ma VILLS on the uivi.sions
was considerably hampered by the destruc
tion on the Seine bridges. HG Was airaid
Or thrust in the direction of the lower
Rhine and the Ruhranu a10 of the proxim-
ity ol Our coast to the invasion coast
and to the Vul sites. - The latter however
were not it very serious consideration in
holding the German 15 th Army in ühe Pas ke
Calais. Rudsted aviuently thought that
the landing on the south 01 France was a
mistake, He thought that by putting those
lorees into the north we might have rolled
up the front su ner. When asked by his
interrogator alvout Gemmas withdrawals anu
why tneval was took place too late, Kuns batut
saia Oh, weil, that was the muhrer's eternal
principle 01 sta in put. Where I am I

337
come out on it. Other members of the missio
including DARTON Wzo according to Archie is
100% reliable, have had their suspicions aliu
in any case think that the whole mission
is something of a racket. Archie has
expressed his views very lorcioly within
the organisation or à Long time but without
any Success, except perhaps that the whole
thing is now being closed down.
Archie adviseu strongly against
it and his view was finally accepted. I
asaed him how it was thut Hill got appointed
to the Control Commission. He said that ther
was a demand for his services both i rom the
W.0.ana tne 1.0. Meanwhile he appears to
have freedom 01 movement. On the 24th uct.
he Called on SOE and inlormed Arcaie that
he was going on a private visit to Aussia.
He had had no uif liculty watever about
getting his visa. He as ed whether taere
was anything he could do for SOE or the siue
and whether they would be predareu in any
way to meet his expenses.
There has been a iairt racat succestion
Irom the Ambassador u. Graham whoud remai
on in Moscow as a member on hili
THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
314) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
LACT 1958 JULY 2010
I have arranged with
Archie to dine with him and Harton on Wed-
nesday in order to get some thing of the
atmosphere or the Moscow Mission.

339
THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTIMENT UNDER SECTION
374) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958 July 2010
November 17th
I hava Tong talk with Dick about tuture
organisation. He had throw a fly over
Curry about his running the Secretariat,
but Curry evidently did not think the job
would be more than that or a glorified Pa.
Dick wondered whether he woulu cot be a good
choice for C. Division, which is now a very
large one with 4 Sections and I course join
extremely important ariu delicate work. It
is essential that somebody should be in
charge to give advice who really sess the
value of records in a balanced way. The
appointment woulu fit in with the seneral
policy Of moveing people around a. iii-
trating oliicers with B.Jiv.experience
into other divisions. Another idea ire this
connection is that TAR should becola Deputy
D. Divi.ion..
I also talked to pics a 6000 uear about
SIME and CICB. It seems to me that even
il. waaca time we shou have to have cer-.
Tain number' or Army or bir borce uticar's
Gli the starts i t'hase organisations, which
to some extent would be collectors 01
Intelligence. SINNE were in. ICO ne principi
collectors of intelligence in mi jast
at this moment. In the services Tacuat
that they were boing to lose Iormation 25
a result of new malias ement they would Cleari
complain, What I thin it comes to istnis.
AS long US SIME is colering the securiu 01
the military area it will have to continue
on its present lines. Il tae whole area
quieters down, and I cannot see it uolle so
for some considerable time, we micnt conside

us some two years berore the conuiainty
and as moraoever we were by conti uing
manufacture and Supply it the boviet
authorities axpress request, the criticis
was worthless. Gen.Fireprace says the
Russian character uelights in a bargain and
they have certain star.daru reactions tog
kilt horse. Their first reaction is that
it must be & wrong tun. Theyr next reaction
having established tout the horse is a bood
one, is that there must be some veep-paid
scheme to exact appropriate colapersa tion,
and their third reactior! on Tinding that
the horse is both a good one and that
nothing is expected in return, is to classi-
Ty the giver a's & prize mug. The Rus. iur.
Llason Group, the British Military mision
in Moscow and even higher-placeu Ervi tish
organisations earned a strong repuva Lior.
as belongins to the thire category",
An interesting aspect of our relations
Centres rounu ta wunay o intelligence
on enemy organisations. The service which
was provided by w.. was of the holest
order in all departments Or Intellience
There was in London weekly meeting with
the Soviet Order 0 Baltie representativa
who was given the west Icra Lion on
the enemy wiminating LEK place at
the Auml Palty and the ir klistry.
Although there were supposed to be regular
meetings on a similar kind in Moscow they
rarely toolc place and when they did no
information was imparted. In one case they
asked for a sample 01 & tank which at that ti
time only the prototype eastel. A greut
deal of trouble took place over Russians
who were captured in the lield lighting
for the German forces. In Feb.1944. we
informed the Russians that there were large
numbers, working in the Todt organisation


32
of obtaining in ormation Irom the UK. It was
this that led to their hastily-prepared and
inefficient exploits in 1940 and 1941.
June 29th
I Saw Ingram before he lei Or Aardy.
Kellar brought Gort in for a discussion.
Gort is here for a lew weeks undergoing tr
ment for some 10101 dysentry. We had a
long discussion about the Palestine Police
Gort is clearly andious that Giles should be
brought into the Ispa I pieture, particulariy
owing to the cases of police corrution which
crop up from time to time. Apart from this Gi
Giles is a very sensitive person and ir ne
were to suspect that iniormation was being
withheld from him he would be even more diffi
cult than he is already. We pointed out to
Gort that once information of that wind was
in the hands of the police it was very
difiicult to control and their whole upbringin
woulu be conducive to their doing something
which might weil jeopardise the source. The
vien taken by the military was tirat it was
more important to keep a source which at the
time 01 a crisis would give an indication
or the time, place and scope of a possible
D-day, whi.h should on no accoumt be
sacrificed for the lesser advantage of
being able to uea with a corrupt policeman.
We then discusseu the new proposal that the
DSO should no longer have the same indepen-
dance but should come more closeog under the
I.B.stail that he is at present. I think
the I.B.Stail Tall that they want to get
Uneir plans well mapped out on the basis DI
ISPAL in preparation for the coming crisis.
This woulu mean that the Army would be the
controllers Of this source more than the DSO.

34
that we could deal with U-boat Ultra. The
Germans had beer informed but did not believe
it.
THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958 July 2010
I told C. the present state oi allairs with
regard to sooper and that as soon as we got
all the carus in our hands we should be
interrogating him.

abroad shoulu not be uivi lea up into dei 21.-
sive, C... and Subversive movendus. Att
members of the start or an organisation on
loreign territory should be able to deal
with all these subjects. this gather is
also is view.
There appears to be no chasca oi setting the
Japs out of Stockholm as Sweden is apparenti
tae protecting power ior various Duropean
interests in Japan.
The Tur ish Ambassador has dear having long
conversations with Molotov in Moscow about
future alliances. The fussians are pressing
not only for military bases in the Straits
area but also for a revision 01 the 1921
Treaty in which Russia ceded certain Armeniai
border territory to Turkey. The Russians
are sa ing that this treaty was concluded at
a time when they were weak and that it must
therefore be revised and the territory
returned to the HSSR. she Turns say that
the treaty was not one wnica the "oviets were
i'orced to accept and an unjust one, but rathe
a remedy of a former injustice 2012 to Iurrey
It was wenin himse.. I who saw the injustice
and repaired it. Molotov said that an unjust
treaty between soviet Auswiatd Poland which
had been signed ir. 1921 hau how Dee rectin
by th: present Irierul Polish uovt. and L.
thus a long and customary Iriendship betwear
the two countries had beer. consolidaleu. the
Turkish ambassador reruseu Low Colsider whis
request, saying that the oviets were nici cher
in need ol a iew more square metres or å lew
thousand more people and that their request
was therefore al expression on a policy of
prestige Molotov then discussed the questio
of the Straits.. while he coula not complain
that the present situation had in any way
embarrassed oviet Russia during this war, he
felt that while Russia might have coniicence

Seut.
I have a ne from Aambal Johnson on liaison
with SIS. He begiris: "I have lound it
dirricult throughout to iind in Section V.
(e) a responsible person who can give a
Quick decision in any mattery (D) a person
who is cor versant with their own files. As
a result of these deficiencies Cases al ter
case has been a sequence of events own
the following is typical. h.rings me
up and as.'or information about a certa.
case. I reply that I WILL araw our live and
ring him back. When I ring, A. is away but
B. who KILOWS noting about the case, takes
a message. Ime üle Course C. OI whom as itke
as not I have never heari, telephones me and
asks me what the whole matter is about. Ini
is. I am ai raiu only too true.
A report on Amt 6 01 the FHA based on
ini ormation supplied by certain on the leau-
ing personalities states that on 3 occasions
documerits were stolen iront the British Emp-
assy in Sonia. These raids were organised
Dy one BURETF and were carried out with tae
assistanee of the Bulgarian Police and an
employee or the Embassy. However, the
captured documents could not be decodea
the American 9th army have interrogated Vis-1
count Hiuemaro KONOYE, brother of the ex-
Premier 01 Japan Prince KONO SE. The lamily
isrelated to the Dunperor, i.e. to God Himseil!
01 this closeness to divinity KDDWYR is
amazingly humble. He refers to his age-old
1 amily history as so much nonsense and
derives all his pride only I rom his merits
as a musician. His whole l'amily apparently.
has artistic leanings. Another brother was
a poet who died from drinking too much wine.
He started arinkin, every morrins while sittir

Waval Espionage Section against the USA.
Kremer ol Stockholm had admitted that whilst
there he had an arrangement with ONADERA
the Jap MA Tor an exchange of intelligence
information. Somewhat reluctantly Kremer
is beginning to supply particulars or the
sources which provided Onagera wiki strate.ic
and tactical informa tion regarding the dis-
position of allied forces in this country
articulars of troop movements and allie
movements on the western front, I the
French Army and Air Force, Ol British
aircrant industry, conditions in the Far Wast
disposi til on 01 Anglo-american Airborne units,
Russian code books and USA raw material
position. Onadera's ini orma tion was con-
sidered more valuable than Kremer's and Cae
Geraris paid liverally for it. Onadera bot
in urmation direct i r'on Hajor Kempi, describe
as Chier oil the Attache dept. I the Swedisin
W.0., ahu wajor Petersets, weuish Intalligace
Qilicer. Kremer got his own ini ormation
indirectly through Hepp, the uerman Press
Attach in Stockholm, I rom Wyps, correspondent
01 the Svenska Dagblad who visited Edit land,
and reported on bomb damage. He also sot.
ini ormation from other Swedish Journalists
as well as I rom col.Blatt and Wommander
Oebert of the Swedish General Stall. Pol.
information came from Swedish M.P.S and
certain ofiicials. The above more or less
confirms our view that any information which
reached the Swedish General Staf was likely
to go on to Berlin anu Tokio.
A document has been captured which gives
the minutes of a meeting held by Hitler with
Blomberg, Fritsche, Raeder, woering and von
Neurath on ivov.5th 1937. The meeting appears
to have lasted 42 hours, Hitler set out
before his commanders in chiei and Toreign

Britain and France on the one hand and Italy
on the other in 1958 when the situation in
the mediterranean would come to a head. He
would not enter into a military agreement with
Italy but he wouli det independentis to
attack Czechoslovakia and Austria once the
med. war started and and parulcipants were
too busy to intervene. Hitler stated that
the German question could be solved only by
Way of force and Cizat this was never without
risk.
A note of eaution was sounded both by Blomberg
anu Fritsche. They repeatedly potateu out
that agland and France must not appear as
eremias el Germany and they stated that the
war with staly would not bind the rrench
to such an extent that they wound not be
in a position to commence operations on
Germany's western irontier wit superior
I'orces. The Lead which France had got in
mobilisation and the small value or existing
Tortiiications in the Rhineland woud ranger
the four motorised uivisions which would be
operating in the west more or less incapable
of movement. Special attention was drawn
by Blomberg to the strength of the Czech
fortifications, the bulluing ol which had
assumed the character 01 & maginot use and
which would present extreme dilniculties
for attack. Hitler thought that the opera
against Czechoslovakia might take Duace in
the summer of 1938. In reply to statements
Dy Blombers And Fritsche res arudiTB Dongland
and France's attitude, Hitler repeated his
previous statements and said that he was
convinced of Britain's non-participation and
that consequently he did not believe in
military action by Trance against Germany.
In view of Hitler's int'ormation wuering
thought that the military undertaking in

terefore to the hold
some extent the appearance of a German.
Uniortunateiy 5 of these people have
already let. One of them is reported to
have given a letter to Sartorius, the Spanish
Air Attache, for posting in Germany. Sartoriu
is going on a conuuc ted tour to the British
zone. Sartorius examined the letter and came
to the conclusion that it contained a code.
He had terefore expressed his intention of
handing it over to the M.I. conducting
officer. We cannot get hold on the oitider
to ask whether the letterwas in lucu hana
Over. It was therefore dilaialt lor us
to provide any suitable grounds for interro-
gating the other jouri ality going out.
We considered whetider we could not perhaps
hould th m up but in the end came to the
COLclusion that It Woula De best to get rid
of them.
July 4th
I gave my finai talk to the 1.0.5 today.
They seemed as please about their conducted
tour as the previous parties.
Milmo and went to see Iewsam about the case
OI HIRSCH, an 020 internee who had on his own
admission worked nor the Germans. HIRSCH
is applying for an injunction to restrain
the Home Secretary irom deporting him to
the allied military zone in Germany were he
will either remain interned or by released
according to whatever policy prevails locally.
Newsam thought that there might be an easy
Way out by letting him go to the Argentine.
We pointed out that this was wdesirable lor
the following reasons: (1) it is allied Polic
to prevent members of the GIS from operating
outside Germany. Argentine is a dalger spot
for such activities. (2) it is allied policy
to return ali such individuals to the British
zone in the case of Germanis and Austrians On

46
had compiled very considerable racorus
identilying ether trailic. AS ar organd sa-
tior. it was in fact the only unit uealink in
general search aria discrimination. It
aillered i rom the other Y.units as it was
Eoins I'rom the unasovi: to the know whereas
they had a definite instruction as to what
lines of traffic taey were to intercept.
M.2. Was alraid that the effecti'oi amalgama-
tion would be (a) to place whai ho feit was
a boou organisation. in spite ol' its chiety
under another head who was not rekriowned
for his powers as an organiser. Nobody
ueiieu that GC &: CS had done a woluer Iul
ob but this had not been due to the
orgsnisation, but rather in spiue or it. Had
the organisation been better the results
would have been obtained with far less labour
and high t have been more inteligently used.
on the credit vide he thought ama. alation.
woulu certainly eirect economies in the
ensinaarin tield anu might sive nis section
a better chance of obtaining the by- rouucts
01 the work OI other sections. The real
ganger he thought was that is 15once 50t in
to UC & CS it would be cut 011 from the
outside world and not have the access to
intelligence branches wrich was so desirable
As regards his own position nothing would
induce him to continue to serve under 15
Hartwy. He would however be prepared to
run RSS as a separa e organisation or to go
into GC &c OS provideü he were granted a
certain measure 01 I'ralom. I told him-
tilat I thou ht Finatater Stewart would be
tains a look at RSS and I had already made
it clear that he shou not fail to have a
talk with it. E. eanwhile I should put him
wise again to the general position.

and file some discrimination seemea necess-
ary. I appreciated the poir.t however that
trouble blew up it was on the industrial side
that we should come into contact with Govt.
circles rather than on the espiona, e side. If
we could not give a fair estimate of the
percentage or party members in any particular
unit and chapter an verse to the elect
that certain oficiais negotiating with the
Ministry of Labour were in fact members of
the Party, it might well be considered the
we were not doing our job. There was als
the vettins side. I thought that this might
be covered by what I understand a ready
exists, namely a White List of people employ-
ed on highly confidential work this list
includes all our own personnel and that of
SIS amongst others) against which any Party
member coming to light should be checked.
It seemed to me unnecessary that we should
follow minutely the careers of those who
were swinging picks and shovels.
I asxed Charles about Findlater. He has not
shown up very much lately. It was therefore
decided that I should ring up Drew, which
I did. I told him that there were various
people in B-Division that I would like Find-
later to see and that I was available if he
wanted to have any further discussions.
He is I think going to SHAEF next week, to
study C.I. position and will be available
the week alger. He anticipates that his repo
may be ready early in August.
Dick came in to discuss his future with me
There is a strong move by Gen.Wheatley who
is to be Monty's Chier i Stali, to keep Dica
and I gather that the sugsestion has even
been made that he should leave this oflice au
Stay Oix permaner tiy iri Germany This he does
not wish to do. He thinks however that is
he could set the Controt Commission on its

48
seeing these when I visit the LRC. Others
are to take various jobs, 2 in passport
ontrol, one in the B.O., and one lor the
Control Commission.
I went through Dixon's charter with McIver,
Airy, Wixon and Cayzer. We made a number 01
alterations to parts which might have aroused
suspicion in Penny's mind that we were
trying to go behinu his back. I was very
arxiuus that we should not give the
impression that we coula appeal over his
head to SACSEA and that in solar as CICB
WAS concerneu he should COTAsiyer himsali to
be wirectly under the DMI. There is no
particular reason why this charter should
ever be produceu, but if it is I do not
think that any exception can be taken to its
terms.' Dixon is responsible to the D.G. in.
his capacity as SLO, CO SACSMA and to DMI
for the work to the woes as Superintendent
OI CICB. SOS Ralipoon and Singapore will
be regarded as part 01 CICB until they go
over to a civilian or quasi-civilian status.
July 6th
I had a tal with Perieat wino is back i rom
Malta. I gave him my ideas about what I
thought might be roblems in the meu.
He did not seem to have any particular
problems 01 his own except a number 01 cases
where agents were compiuining that they had
pariormeu valuable services and had not been
rewarded. The Maltese are going to have some
form of sell-government within the Empire.
After a long conversation with Alley about
the Poles I went to see C. to try and Eet
the position. somewhat clariiiea. I told him
that Klocek of the Polish SS had one or two
others would be prepared to carry on but

50
They
it. y.will proWEDIY even. Dus come to see
tae rutility of deir operations, since
trere seems little likelino00 01' their beucin
back into power or a very considerable time
il ever.
THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUIENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
314) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958 June 2010
C.adviseu against our puttilio al. Oricer
with the British Military Mission at Polish
Hi.Q. as it mign Sa uue us wiu the res-
ponsibility which was really cow.U. 01.2.
Ine 1.0. have to see tilat e Polish Ministry
01 Natidic waience 100s hot disabled in anti-
Warsaw activities. We have ouviseu liom to
ilave Polisil Cyphers uepusies wil en Cuair
copy of any messace sent. Inition ther
SAould have communication monitored and
periouicuity chec.eu. Only in this Way can
they eliect security.
we then taneu about the future organisa
tion of both ofiices. I Outlineu to him
my views on ministerial control and USO
about a dividing line between oueusive and
uelensive. He was dat CO Viced that it
would be right for the organisation to come
under any dept. than the F.0. He felt that
they aid more for the .0. and were more
dependent on them lor assi. Cance than any
other dept. I said that I did not think this
was necessarily an obstacie. He was equally
responsible to the Services for war he ula
for them and to any other wept. Or which

the liquidation of people 01 a certain class.
July 7th
Keith canle in see me lor a moment and telt
me that Kenneta Strous has accepted the
job or PWE vice Bruce Lochart, in preiere.co
to getting command of a brigade. He did not
think that as a brigadier he stood any chance
of getting a division as during the War le
had had ilo lighting experience. It was t
therefore better for him to retain his
pres it rank and remain in the intelligence
world. He is I thinn a very uisappointed mar
and certainly rio lover or Mont/
La setting a div brigadier saue. He
Alley has ascertained that the caras Or the
Polish Security Service are still at Su.
Paui's School. He is arral is to be inese
out as soon as possible. We will thull have th
cards and documents lookeu torough anu see
what needs copil, anu what can be uestro eu.
Alley showed me a copy of the letter signed
Wilski which is an allias for Dumaeraale,
asking for the return ol ali uocuments
Dy Garlo in accordance with a my thical agree-
ment of 1940. I do not think that this
da cune..t is ikely to do SIS much food it
Lublin ultimately decides to bring an
action for the return on their property.
After consultation with Jim Hale I am very
conlirmed in this opinion, and we must
certainly avoid doing anything on similar
Lines.
I onmy Harris has just arrived back having
leit Garbo in Venezuela. Garbo's prospects
are Iairly good anů a provisional passage
has been booked for him on July 17 th.

I spent the uiternoon at the LRC. I thanked
them all for the splendid wor. they had done
and endeavoured to give them a Snort veivew
01 what our conclusions were , based on on
captured documents and interrogations. It
seemed to me that they hau dorze a meandri cerit
job and that as dar as in orla ulon went at
present we could say that to spy 01 any
consequence had been operatius here since
the beginnin or the war. There had of cours
been a certain amount OI lea age t rough
neutrals and through signals enannels Du
this Wunt amount to a great deal. I ths
interviewed a number on people about their
future. I armatsed lor Vesey and Marshal to
join B.B and for Scott, who spezus Polish,
to come up and assist sitey with the Polish
vocuments.
Brian Welland came to see me and sent with
me an miterestiny memo about Germany written
wy cache oi M.I.14. wacha emphasists that
the problem of intelligence in Germany WÍTI
De largely political, and taat it is clearly
01 value to liquidate the GIS anu iu in
any gaps in our Wartime intelligence. The
problem of meepirus Our Tiriger on the purse
of German polities and sudding them in the
right direction is far breater and more
important. Meilanu came specially to str
how important it was for us to get hold
of goou people to work in our organisatie
in the future and Co Stail Lie Control
Commission. Uniortunately the .0. do hot
altogether see the point o this. They have
appointed Lethbridge as MGI., Very nice
i'ellow but his whole experience is oi tans
and jungle warlare They are now proposing
to appoint in vickis place General Holland..
who was at one time head 01 MIR and has no
experience or CI. matters. They cannot see
that CI is a very highly specialised job
needing a great deal of experience and that

THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINE
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIO
314) OF THE PUBLIC RECORD
ACT 1958 JUNE 2010
much more proiitable.
July lith
I told the wee hy meeting the present position
with regard to the grantire 01 visas by
PCOs. This will be seit to their discretion
but only genuine applications from business
people whose bona iides al'e Kuown to the PCO
will be grant eu without rererence. This
procedure is alreauy in Torce in Lisbon, so
the other neutral countries will be soon
brought into line.
I have arranged with Walker to see Arriold-
Forster on the question of pigeons.
Dick rang me up to know if I could sive him
anyone to assist Christopher Blunt with
cable censorship. He sugested Hughes. I
doubted whethar Hughes could be spared and
would be suitable. I would asic Grogan il he
knew of anyone. Grogan later told me he could
not suggest anyone at the moment.
I discussed with Dick on very broad lines
his memo on the future of the office which
is really a reversion to the old DOCE plan.
His one idea is to get a grip on the SIS
organisations abroad. He had aiscussed
this in great detail ith Stuart Hampshire
I told him of my misgivings and that I would
let him have a l'ull criticism is possible by
Saturday. Meanwhile I discussed the whole
problem at length wita Hampshire,Ho.
Land fart. I particuarly told pics that I
did not wisa O muzzle him in any way as
regaras his conversations with rindlater,
although I thought that berore doing so he
might like to see what I had to sav.

Allen and Vickery came to talk to me about
permits for India. Vickery is very concerned
as the Gov 1. O Inaia are strongly opposed
to peuple coming out unvetlen. II Tae exit
permit s/st is to go and we are to revert
to passports as the only chec.., Vickery
insists tzat 110 Empire-wide endorsemel.ts sh
should be given without reference.
Torry came in to see me. He wanted to KNOW
about his future. I gave him the usual I
answer. He is now at Rotterdam but is being
posted to 30 Corps. brunarius is with
First Corps and Owens at 8th Corps. Smith
i with 30 Corps. In other words Our people
are in charge of all the camps in 2. A.G.
The Canadians Corps is going home.
The following is the Censorship position.
After the ISL JULY postal CETSOTShip will
uiscontinueexamination 01 all mails except
those to and from Spair, Portugai, Sweden,
Switzerl.nd, China, bulgaria, Hungary and
Moumania. Censorshig on the lirst live
countries will conti ue inueli itely, probabi
for the uura tion of the war wica Japan, while
in the case o1 ta turee others, it will on.
Eo on till the begining of Nov. It will
consist of 100% Watch-listing and partial
examination. Examination of certain
transit mails, e.6. Lire-Qurope, will also
continue. Telegraph censorship will contidue
to examine quring the Jap war all outward
telegrams with the primary object of routing
by calbe instead OL wireless taose messages
which might be of value to the enemy.
Cer.sorship of radiotelephone conversations
will continue duri..b the Jap war. "he
Information and Recorus branch or censorship
will maintain a section for tae purpose 01
issuing directives to British and Alliea
Censorships in Europe and any other overseas
censorship stations which are stilt operating

the minutes or the meeting are also interest-
ing because of the typically Priglish
Tlvereinmaessigen!! treatment of military
questions. The idea that military questions
could be deal with by a committee of all
interested parties seems to be a new one
to the Germans.
July 5th
I spent the morning at the Ilat uicta via
answer to Diek's memo about the future
of the orice.
This afternoon I attended a meeting at the
2.0. taken by Carew-Robinson to which
representatives ol Immigration, Treasury,
M/L, Registrar General, were also eser.o.
"The H.O. want to abolish the exit mit
Bor British subjects, and suwTime tite
passport. I said that the proposal means
in lact that nobouy cous be regueu exil
unless there was novad-white case.
To reuse the exit permit mareridien
that under present couitions travel was not
justiriaple except in the national interest
Refusal 01 a passport however implied that
the holder was not a fit and proper 1 person
to have the protee ti on 01 H.M.. This
meant in practice that a passport was
not refused unless the case was over-
whelming. By Talling back on the passport
we should only be able to check a man's
departure once. If he Lot do trouble
arter the issue DI his passport the only
thing that we should ud would be to get him
stopped at tile port. Even if such action
were to have oficial Suport, which seemed
doubtlu, It Was uncaetail. Wether the
1.0. would be able to stop the indiviuual.
concerned since there would not with the
increase O trai liebe any really crose

himseli is the only man who has got any
money. He was not feel however that he
can go on i inancing the other members oi
the group indefinitely.
Vivian told me on the telephone that he
was coming round to the view that some sort
of amalgamation between Section and our-
selves was probably necesary. We talked
about CICB when he said there had been
a certain amount of opposition trom
Arnola-Forster who was very insistent ul.
it should not in any way be excutive. This
is of course the old complex. I told Vivid
that I thought forster's idea was siseer
Nonsense and that the securit PİSA 1 rem
having contact with outside whorl ties
were negligible.
Joe Lynch came to sea me. He has been to
termany DU TOOK ITCO we Wri ai Dhe ...
representatives. He told me COM Duercial
that Irom Comer'sa ULONS he had a witale
DOSS the FBI wore likely to betie over bedret
service work in the luture. There were of
course political objections a out The FBI
becomins too powerri, which migt uhrow the
scheme out. He thout however that als
things were movins at present they might
very well get the charter lor espionage
abroad. He is going to keep me it ormed.
In this is the case we shall I think have
backed the right horse, although in fact we
reanty Duckeu to particular horse. We have
Herely outerea to assist anybody wao hau a
proper charter.
Herbert, Cussen, Stopa ora and I had a meeting
about HOOPER Berbert Saw Perry bruon, the
British renegade in Brussels Parry Gordon
Sad thea he had introduce Hooper as early
as 1957 to his priipais in Berlin. He

Hunter came to see me again about his stall.
He will be losing certain policemen who
have been attached to tre FSP unit. I
said taat I thought that is we wrote to the
CCS we could probably see tem on ior a bit.
Meanwhile I thought it uesirable that he
should take active steps to get receuits.
I Said I would write to Dick White ard l'ind
out if there were ally FSP being demobiliseu
W110 night wish to take on Uhe job. Hunter's
main uifiicuty is that he was not know
what he care ofier. He put forward to schel
some time abu tun.Branch and has hau no
reply.
July 16th
I discussed with Tominy Harris about his
going to wadrid. The question is whether
he should go under business cover or as a
Govt.o11icial. I tolu him that if he was
taking his wife I thought he would have to
go as a business mal. and we shoula have to
support her application on the grounds that
she would give him the necessary cover. If
he went oi'licially it would be impossible
for us to make a case for his wile. He is
going to think it over,
THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958 Jun 2010

I Saw Holt 01 PID). He wants to send a
certairi T.12m er or uermalis,nus trians and other
aliens out for PID WOT, in Germany. The
H.0. are promising them that they will be
allowed back here but has told them that
they will be subject thereai'ter to any
decision or the H.0. regaruing Im their
ultimate repatriatiori.
nat ider we shoueral's Dep
Mathieson of the Registrar-General's Dept.
rang up to as whether we shoulu back
a Suggestion that identilication cara
numbers should in lu ture appear on passports.
I said that while I did not think we could
press for this il it gave a leat deal of
extra work, it would in l'act ve ali auuition-
al identity check which might be of value.
He said that it would give ro dalra WOTK
as the special space would be made in
the application iorm for this number, which
woulu automatically be repeated on the
passport.
Anthory and urs.Pitt came to tal about the
Latire od b.do. MeS.Pitt is probably
leaving some time iti September aru ever in
she were to stay on after he reorganisation
she wound like a change. Since there are :
quite a rumber or import.nt aberts it is
1.ecessary to li a successor. David Scha
Scheer's name was suggested. I have since
puaken to the DG Wilo approves, il Kirby-
Green Can spare him.
Curry as ea me about the lina l'orm of his
report which would inuiact be an implied
censure on the DG and perhaps on other's for
agreeing to the carding of foreigners
resident abroad by SIS. There would also
be an impliea criticisin of the mechanical
nature of our registry and on the decision
to split oil an F divisions from b.

quite a lot to do in Gib. and that he was
quite content to remain where he was. II
he served with us in the future he wouLa like
to go abroad as his wife cannot stand the
severe winters.
I saw John Booth. He has become bitterly
anti-Russian. He was very pleased with the
FO answer to the Russian accusations that
we are treating their P/WS badly, and were
causing delays in sending them back. The hot
is that therussians will only receive
3,000 a day and if they arrive on the front
after 3 pm they are not accepteu till the
follwoing day. They are billetted and led
by us but bahave in a periectiy shocking
manner. They are dirty and ill-disciplined
to an incredibile degree anu mess up all
the clean German farms where they stay. Their
morals are beyond all belief. The impres-
sion upon our troops is very marked. The
whole idea of wonderful kussia" is completel
vanishing into thin air. They think the
women are unspeakable and the men just li.e
animals, which in fact they are.
The Russians who came to take over do not
seem to be able to do very much. The only
way they can get their people to obey orders
in tidying up their billets before they
leave is to tell them they will have no
food until the work has been done.
John had run into Arnold RECHBERG while on
a visit to the Swiss. RECHBERG was full of
anti-Russian propaganda. Non-fraternisation
is obviously breaking down and is quite
unwor.sabie.

Alley came vo vel.. me that walau
assistance in reauir. DecPolish recorus.
I told him to arrais ê wit' Balar to bet
Buzzara.
C. rang un to say that he had 10 Owjection
to /Leader Beaumont veilig oil teu es
AirAttache to Bucharest or verstaue, but
taat he still thought that his wife was
desirable and wat ter presence in
Russiar.s spheres of ini luce mishi de
embarrassile.
Boisove cane in totalt me that o. lne
reconn eruition and David Negea ile mau
Dear placed it. iuucn with Richter, en
American who is Chair O1' the American
Institute ol National Research, Chemical
Branch, and is in iacu Iesponsible to all
secret experimentar WOTE ON IS 1or tale
Various American services. Ineuestion
o excharise 01 norma tion arusa. hionter
Saia Quite irankly that there were Pro
4 Categories Di i ruacion and clau 10
wound be pos.ibie ou no exenansol.
Category 1. There mint however is an
excaal, O.. Categories 2, 3 al 4. Briscoe
Said trič plodunu, the same col.a. tion. Would
Prevait bere. Riemer is butu conbute
nis cniels when he gets Dic... I to.
Driscoe trial I Wound Spa to w.avout Clie
matter, as it might have visturbing
inluence on our present relation with
Carious American Organisations. They might
feel that we were soins behind their vacas.
1
THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
3[4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958 June 2010

tne uermales were (+) a rencol. in a tetter
i rom mountbatten TO Alexander ut sendiri
nima till os barities as atidse were ti-
cult to bed and HOW on points. The Gardins
Meduceui rom this that the target vi attack var
baruinia anu they aii in fact insure to a
considerable exter. O se aina reinvorce-
ments. Accoruicis to Keitel's recopus they
anticinated an attack on Sicily but taught
it was likely to be the main attack.
(2) the fact that the oilicer has in
his puccet the counterioils of two theatre
tickets which gave the uate Ol une day
Defore his aeropuane was supposed to have
lert the UK for Africa. We are setting
photographs oi ail the documents IOT our
Aditional apprehensions elective wurinis
the past quarter ili te USA have brought und
total of asial enemies appranonutu CO
10,073. 01 his number 2,87 are at present
interned a 5,000 are at liberu Ol. parole.
2502 tave beei. l'eudasou. As I sait OI uver
2,000 searches on alien chem: romises
9908 were presentea au actor action.
Dy alien bred hearing boaru.
Dy iso 1.14) the tatut
went vurunis
& Lions petition nav vedte 11. in the
USA 200 cartiicutes hi d e noalla,
195 cases were 11smisseu will 02 Cardo alle
Still War titi, a viol..
HP/W has givet al. inteze..cing ECCOUILL OI
tae explosion in the Minich Deer-center in
1940. Aupurentii & wars Called LSDR uid
the whole Dusiness on nis Ow He melie the
inierad machine ala cut a hole in a
pillar just under the badder where the
Fuehrer usually sat. He maue a aummy
wooder casins to cover the hole in the pilda

77
The minutes of a conherence bel in Hitler's
study in the Reti enscharcadorite on the
2.ru May 1939 nave been captureu. Presche
were toering) Hueden vor brunch Itachial bat,
milcaTulve ala t ollices. Hier
Dogan oy biviny u. amat sia ou ing tub til
said that he saw no 501WULDIL WI WOUL
invasion I Barely states or attacks QUE
1 oreisn property. His resine haar candy
achievea considerable successes but Du
ains coulu not be reached without the
sheuding of blood. Danzis Was not the
subject of the uispute at all. It Web
question of expanuint Germaiyy's livin-
space to the bast and on securing loou sup-
ulies and of a generad set ieuent on the
Baltic problem. He had no use it coronies.
He saiu HII fate brings LIS Imgebnict
with the west the possession of extensive
areas 11the east will be auvantaneous."
The Polish problem was inseparable i rom
the couliet in the west. Poverats internal
power of responsato Bolshevism was doubt I.
Tinus Poland Was Of Louius value as a
berrier a ainst tussia. He thought it
estionable wire ther, a må litery success at
the west coula be achieved by a quie
decision but he was convinceu that are
attack on Pala sliould be launcheu at
the irst suitablapportunity. Hitler
did not wish . siamuu tarieous connot wit
the western powai's bus 1 i 12 were not
certain the ta bemu-Pois. coliet would
at lead to W in the westen the right
must primarily be apaint marta En T Pance
II e thought that the isolation. QI Polana
was a matter of sul polities. (Be mes
at this moment have had in mind the
alliance wi in bussia). He doubted the
possibility of a peacefuSettlement with
ugland. It was therefore necessary to be

Oi trainer type aircralt quring a 24-hour
period. This errort will however decline
rapidly. Similarly all remainiig haval
units will be employed in suicide operations
in defence of the home land. The secondary
preoecupation of the Japanese 15 to build
up their Iorces in manchurie, Korea and North
China against the Soviet threat. They
might have about la million men by December
of this year. They are unlikely to have
much air support. All other areas will
regarded as of minor importance only.
Politically Japan wil make uas perate
errorts to persuade the U586 io continue
her neutrality, if necessary by oldering
important concessions while at the same time
making every en sort to SOWLCoru bewween
the Americans and British on the one bice un
the Russians Ole the other, and may even
maxe a serious attempt to kse be won as
& media tor in en in the war. The Japanese
Luning, groups are aware olume desperate
military situation an are increasingly
uesirous 1 & compromise peace but still
lind unconditional surrender unacceptable.
The Japanese people would probably prefer
national Survival eva through surrender, to
virtual extinction. They believe however
that unconai tional surrender WoW be ble
equivalent of national extinction. The
idea or foreign occupation of the home-
lana, iorei, cus touy 01 the person ol
the mpener till the loss or prestige
en vailed by the acceptance or uncondition
surrender are most revolting Co the Japanese
To avoiu these conditions it possiule
and in any event to ensure survival of the
institution of the Emperor the Japanese
might well be willing to withdraw i rom all
territory they have seized on the ksia te
continent and in the southem Pacilic and
even to agree to the indepenuence of Korea
and the ci sarmament on their military

Hart anu Sitopioru have bear. in arrosa ug
HOODET all way aile have gained a very
un avourable impression Hooper has
amitted the naaling wium uI wholline
knew as Dr. BRHARDT, out suales what they
were in response to letters that he wrote
to various imm's about a deul 11 aircrat
engines, lie na discussed only engineering
matters. The dates he save or the meetings
were preciser, whose given by GISKS Imp
weru a number 01 discrepancies which
were not satisiactorily explaineu ana
both Hart and stoprora are convinced at
Hooper aid work for the Germaus cha Was pai
by them before the war. They cuiu not think
tukat he intenues to work for them arter
the outbreak of War', or that he has in lact
done anything during or since the war.
I had & word with Fish who is Leavine.
ile has promised to look into the amoud
Smug 15 ng case and to give us any help in
the future that he cari.
D.G. has written a very fui some minute om
the B.16 re ort by rs.Pitt which shows now
completely the spanish, Portuuese and south
American Ambassies have been covere since
The beginning on the war targely due to
the ingenuity di Broomari-white. The
DNG. Thought that it was really rest
achievement.
July 20th
I attended a meeting at the H.O. with woe
i rcher. Newsaly, Lockspelser 01 Ra Harr
borough, Merer , ir ministry Security, and
Carew-Robinson, were present. We had to
decide about the Future on LACHMANN. We
came to the conclusion that his case was
really bound up with that of Germand research

78
ar dauy covering the slounus cina thatë
POD would be apertudous. I tomu Jennis
21&I aiu no sea that it Www popsia
LOvo very muc. auout the Iowe OI Miu
Sist until we had come weic mes viol.5
attieu OT tur relation with M.1.6.
Hart allu Stopu tava coln Tul.l.eu Hooper
with GILS Hooper Drazened it out anu-
Saig Dette Woue tuin Wasumari
i rame-u. UI KOD told him Walt ane late
01 Karl KRUHU Tad wees. He has been
denounces to tae Gesis po alau nak cummitted
Suicide. Hooper uerieu that he had avere
tolu Gl a vout RUNGUR alteousn he had
urevious / amibieu told me waits YOTQty
au fait with the case.
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
July 21st!N DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
13(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958 June 2010
report fromSHADE JIO Bives a. account
01 Hitler's tast days. Hitler had already
worn himself out peiore the enru came.
He may n. ve sull'ereu a stroxe arter the
20th July plot, for his leit al Desali
incessantly to uwitch. When he spoke tong
the Party Leaders last Winter na atuued to
is health for the lirst time. Frederick
the Great, he said, on returii rom the wars
was a broken mall a..u tnis war hau iert
its met rk on him. My hanu sanes, and
I hope this wit. It spreau to my neau
TOP a Shaxy geau Woul we c hall cap, out
01 this you can pa sura, / whair. Will
remin ice-cou." ind ei tea
aepressing elect, ni: lettla blew Worse.
ang by "pril he was in a very LOW stata.
The crisi. came on the 22 April. A
conterer.ce on the situation. Was to be
wetu. Himurder altenueu a cniel 01
Stall, Dorber, came down. Irom the north.
He had been playing a peculiarbame and

a release from a hard lite os dilniculties.
He sai. that he could not go out and die
1ighting on the barricades as he was
afraid oi me re beint Wouru eu and being
captured by the Russians. the would there
tore shot himself and ha au made arrane-
ments Ior his body to be crema led so that
the Russians wouk kot use 16 pilobe-
salida purposes. No one yat kuows how
Hitler met nis ena. ife was not as some bar
T13 imasine poisoneu Dydraul, his
uoctor, ince Moreil had leit Berlin Delore
tire ena. He was according to the OKW
trar smitting messages up to the 28th April.
Between then and the first on May he
probably met his death either by taking
poison, shooting himself or by ordering his
dug-out to be blown up the Russians still
persist in. saying that there is no evidence
that Hitler is dead.
Col.Bartik called here this morning.
He has come back to collect certain docu-
ments which will be l'aquirea lor the
trial of the bacha Govt. He says that
baings are beginning to settle down and
although a numberol his old colleagues
were liquidated there are not neurly so
many as he laad an cici pated. Houd many
them were working for the underground
and are now back in their old jobs. The
Russians are leaving matters more or less
to the Czechs unu only have a small number
01 garrisons in some of the provinces,
From time to time they ask for aGerman to
be handed over this is one in the
Orience has been carried out on muss Lan
soll. Otherwise the mark iintarrogateu ar
and returned to the Czech. Transport his
very uirlicuity but & Pyntentie oil planu
set up by the Germans is being used with
great advantage. Apparently the beau of

Ryder who says that there might be some
suitable people provided the per conditions
were good. He thought that we should pay
the equivalent rate OL pay and allowances
Ior a sergeant. I said that I would LOOK
into this anu let him know. (2) He then
spoke about Storm-Rice, who is Wanted by
Kellar for work on ISPÁLDick said he had
hau ar orier fromSIS. Actually I Course
STS want him for the same purposa. Her
wants to know the precise tems and Co
nature of Dhe work that he is going to
De asaed to do. This wá. we explained
by Kellar When he visits 21 AG. I He
wondered whether the contacte Comission
could have this services 1 Leut witne
LRO. I said that I had thought oi gattino
Lendet into this Orice a thout I believe
he wanten Dogo to the 0. I WOUL bowever
tals to him when he came bac4. POSSIDI
he could be to the Conupo Comision for
a time and come to us later.
I
Inai a talk with Cayuer about posts
to the Far waste. I sugwestea thet Selwyn
t make an assis tart DSO to Dirigapore.
He subgested that Downes mights as
assistant to Hunt at Rangoon and later be
replaceu possibly by Selwyn. Weanwhile
have the services of Ric etsa lor
Singapore or Rangoon. We are cabling
our suggestions to Dixon. Two girls have
left for Rangoon but more are required.
We are having the usual ailIdcurly with
1.0. establishment branch with the result
the t we have to go on paying or arwy
commitments. Kirby-Green I gather is very
anxious to stay on with 2 but enaries ieel
a certain responsibility in allowing him
to de ser unless we can be the police or
the Treasury to let him have at lease
por tioni ci his police persion. Normally
he would lose this il he joined us. I

that he could tell Bromley Wat uive a
number OIlicers inB.Division knew
about it because To Tess thal. 5 people
had volunteereu innovation under interro-
gation. Maume adidaat Wewe
Showinien Copy 01 the report 0 Person
01 OSS Sine Mooit at ny rate bluhova
inteprobateu eu coma From The American
zone and he alreau peported to the Aneri-
cans, though not Ol Gounze in any Taal
detail. Mi ne told me . Melker.calier
report and the boysiseh nepuru hau bod!
been sent to the ro. I told him that
we were preparing a consolidated remort
and it was proposeu tiat Cantine DG
shouto write a joint letter i protest
to Cadogan.
Alley came to talk about the poles. It
is going to be arranged that we approve
the payment of certain sums of money
through tano IoT the liquidation of Polish
organisations here. Alley thought however
that we ougnt to set up certain or the
Poles here who would keep us inormed
about their compatriots who were working
ior the Russians. The cost WoW be
something like $7,000 a year. I said that
I doubted whether we could jus vitably
ao this, tuite apart Irom the positical
dangers. On the other hand I saw
objection to having contact with carval.
Pales Who Coud give us user ui insormation.
They ought to buy and secure themselves
inuo jobs and we would say that a cerint
amou ton resui se lee was a real aire
Terence between this and havin15 lat organ-
iseu Polish whole-line commer-Intelligence
Organisation Limance by the Briria uovu.
In any case I thou t unwise to commit
ourselvesat the moment since we reauty
u net XLOW who of the Poves woul. De
returning to his own country. We could

lo
Wantert to know. It was in my view necessary to
have an automatic system covering the 24 hours
which would enable us to sort out all the various
personalities and eventually to concentrate on
those who appeared to be engaging ir peculiar
pctivities. Findlater agreed about this and
I think will look into the matter when he starts
enquiring into S.I.S.
Iniyo.RS:. Jap-rilitaram on certain fix
I then talked to him about R.S.S. and its future.
It was proposed, I understood, to place it under
the G.C.&.C.s, and so under the Sigint Board
it would just become another monitoring station.
I axoinined to him that the npproach of R.S.S.
was quite different to that of other Y Stations.
R.S.S. was engaged now almost exclusively on
general search and was therefore proceeding from
the unknown, whereas other Y Stations had
ar ferent tasks allotted to them on certain f'ixed
schedules, e.g. Jap-ilitary from Stockholm to
Inkyo. R.S.S. had built op an extremely efficient
library under Morton Evans, who was really the
directing hend of the organisation and the person
responsible for its officient running. His ultimate
aim and object was to create a library where all
types of traffic would be catologued and to which
reference could be made if someone wished to find
out what the communications were, for example, the
Argentine P lice; they would find details of the
time schedules, frequencies and procedure.
This analysis of the ether had been carried
out for some time and undoubtedly there was a
tremendous ndvantage in enlarging it and keeping
it up tomte. It was however, vitally important
that , pergon in control of this general search
shoula be in the closest sontect with all branches
of the Intelligence Services in order that they
might receive the fullest guidance that any
intelligence clues could provide. Provided,
therefore, R.S.S. was given quasi independence
under the G.C.&.C.S., there would be no objection
to the amalgamation. In fact, there might be
certain advantages in that R.S.S. would be more
likely to get the by products from their other

ins al in or so at AR
(a) Roland Bird may or may not know that
the man is a communist but would not dis-
close anything of a really confidential
kind; (b) he will in any caseue leaving in
the course of a month or so; (e) he would
feel embarrassed i1 he were at BARNETT S
1 lat and BARNETT started to telephone to orie
of his comunist friends; (a) Roland might
feel, in view of his somewhat strong Leit
Wing tendencies, that the office was engaged
in a heresy hunt and, worse, that he himsel
was not trusted; (e) Roland's present
work is not really or a coni idential
nature; (1) if he has the intention of
disclosing secret information to BARNETT he
could already have done so. John Marriott
apparently thinks that as BARNETT is a Govt.
official Roland might inadvertently say
things which he would not say ii he knew
BARNETT was a Party member, and that he
should therefore be warned.
Walker came to see me abouthis memo on
pigeons. I said that when tte had sounded
SIS,SOE,MI14 and the Air Ministry I
wouid put forward his memo to the JIC. The
JIO may think it desirable to keep some
small nucleus for practice purposes and for
expansion in war. time.
Gort wants Kellar to go out to Mid Hast
again. He was not quite sure whether this
was necessary at the moment. Meanwhile I
understand that the P.M. has told WEIZMANN
that he is postponing the Palestine issue
until the peace conference. This is
apparently a great blow to WIEMANN.
H111-Dillon came to see me. He is being
demobilised. He was full of praise for all
his MI5 stail and for the office as a whole,
and thanked me warmiy ior everything I had
done. Crean, Gwyer, Froulies and Mair are

(11) Thiet Henry Christian PTICK was a
Russian agent who had connections with the British
F.O. through which he hadobtained secret infor-
mation, HOOPR accompanied this information with
the suggestion that the German S.s. should talce
stens to obtnin from PIEGK information which the
Intter obtained from the British F.O.
(110) That on at least two occasions in
the spring and summar of 1939 HOOHOR was paid suma
of money by tha German S.s. for his work as an
agent.
(iv) That HOOPKR dallberately con-
canled from S.I.S. in August 1939 and subsequen.
the fact that he had had any previous contact
with the German S.S. other than with Gordon PERRY
himaalr ana deliberately misrepresented to S.I.S.
that he had any such contact,
(v) Thnt HOOPIR g report to S.I.S dated
23.8.39. on a maeting with Dr. WETCHRIT at Cologne
on 21.9.39 and by his subsequent reports to S.I.S.
of his commeations with the German S.S. wara
designed by FOOHOR to mialand S.I.S. into believing
that he had had no connection with the German S.S,
gave that disclosed therein and that for this
purpose ho either fabricated himself on evolved
with the German s.s, the latters which he
represented to S.I.S. had been reacived by him
from Dr. WEICHKLT.
Probable coclusions are:
(2) That HOOPR became an agent of the German S..
as early as Mavoh 1938 and that he received sums
of money from them at or about that time.
(2) That in aisalosing to GISKES the information
about KRUEGER, HOOPER may have believed that he
WELS not talling the Germens anything which they
did not alrendy know, since HOOPER hnd probably
rarlised from rending a book by Landmu "All Fair"
that considerable infowmation about KRUERR had
already been published and may have been known
Prom sources in P.C.O. Tha Haguela oil'ice that

pointing out to Censorship that if t ey send
all letters on they may find it extremely
difficult to explain why any particular letter
was held up: in most cases owing to the lapse of
time, the reason will not be apparent, and in
other cases, even if it were, it could not be
explained in public.
THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958 JUNE 2010

SHATIT J.1.0. In their official rapat dated
9th July give an interesting account of Russia's
policy in her zone. Their propagand, which is
directed to showing that conditions in their zona
are far better than those in the Allied womaa, is
probably largely due to their own interioty
complex. It has achieved a certain success but is
rather - vitiated when the facts ultimately
become Inown, Food is in fact very short in
Berlin, és also is coal. Meanwhile Garman
machinery is baing moved to Russia and large
mumbers of the male population are being
rounded up for reconstruction and agricultural
labour in Germany, Targe numbers oP them have
also been moved to Russia , including specialista
who are required to rebuild Russian induatzy.
The Russians have been ruthless in their round up
of leeding Nazis in their zone, but seem to have
been willing to accept the small fry, who could
claim that they were party members only in order
that they could hold their own jobs, to fill minor
administrative posts. This is not unlikely since
the Russians do not possess any large numbers of
competent administrators. They theref nre have to
rely on the Germans governing themselves with a
minimum of administrative supervision from the
Red Army. There are no signs as yet of the Russiana
sponsoring a strong communist party in their own
sones. They encourage political activity and
ara permitting trades unions to reorganise.
A combined reconstruction committee has been formed
including members of the communist and socialist
partios. The Red Azmy and the millions of homelesa
Russians and Polen live off the land. In Berlin
Itsell, everything transportable has been stripped
from the U.S. - British zona. Out of the 36
telephone exchanges in the rent only 8 remained
when the British arrived and furniture and fittings
have been treated in the same way. Russian policy
appears to be simple, German industry is to be
used as a means of rebuilding Russia, and of
eliminating all possible political opposition in
their own territory. It remains to be seen how far

94
that Russia was becoming dalberously
Strong. The Fuhrer hau beer garei at
Russiats occupation 1 Bessurazia and
Buichovina simont German kowdeuse and
approval. Bukhovina had a tunge Gerutta
copulation. There was no Count he said the
Russia 180 am TiOLS to eactenu hr
incluence through the balans the
Army feared that it wie wat went on in we
West and breater Russian support became
necessary wou bined whet
the price of expansio Di Russian
Corduro X XXXXX over areas liecasauly
to German security. When we deze1510l.
to attack Rusia huu inakby ha Pueneu
Ribbentrop na delivered to strony Warning
against such action to Hitler, but, he
said ruefully, "Hitler was a very strong
personality who could not be changed."
Ribbentrop said that he had always been
in favour of a rapprochement with the
Russians but had met with considerable
opposition Irom the -uhrer. Tinully he
convinced him that the incident which
apparently decided the Fuhrer to attempt
a political rapprochement with Russia
was a motion picture 01 Stalin reviewing
a minitary parade. The 111m had been sene
by the German MA in Moscow. Hitler
took a l'ancy to Stalin's iace, and
remarked el.phatically Me 100ks 1xe a
man with waom one could do business. He
thereupon gave Ribbentrop permission to
try to come to a political understanding
with Russia. At first negotiations were
started with the Russian Charge d'Affaires
in Berlin but progress Was unsatisiactory.
Finally Hitler agreed to send e telegram
to Stalin asking him to receive Ribbentror!
Stalin's acceptance was immediate. Stali
came right to the point and said that

evidence that he might have been made use
01 by ALCAZAR. I have asx.eurs. Pitt to
go through all the files and put up a note
Showing exactly what the case against him
is. We will then tase the matter up with
theH.o.
Jim Hale came to ask whether he coula have
the services of College for a week to
examine two parties of Germans returising
from Canada and Australia. These German
were interned here and deported to the
Dominions at the beginning of the war. Cyril
Mills has sert us records of the Canadian
lot but I do not think we know anything
about the other party. Pome of them will
have to remain in internment until the
Control Commission is ready to receive
them but others may possibly be siven their
liberty pending the return to Germany.
Herbert told me that he had had a long tak
with Findlater yesterday. He had told him
about the worning of the GC & CS andelso
a certain amount about RSS and in particular
RIS. He had seit with indiater a copy
of his meno about the re-organisation 0.1
the ofiice.
Certain documents in the Heeresarchiv
have disclosed various projects by the
Germans before the war to penetrate SIS
abroad one of them reiers to HOOPER and to
a meeting that he had with two agents sent
I'rom Hamburg in Sept.1937. The document
which is dated Oct.1937 showe that a further
meeting was to be held at Innsbruck in
Dec.1937. HOOPER when questioned admitted
that he had been to Denmark but that he
had gone there in order to carry out a deal
in smuggling mars out of uermany. He was
