The National Archives
(c) crown copyright
Catalogue Reference:kv/4/466
Image Reference:1
THIS IS A COPY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED
IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION
314) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS
ACT 1958 JULY 2010
Klop came to see me. He wondered whether
there was any thirs further bhat he could on
I said that I thought there ought to be
some Ashcal characters W.1 om he could very
well sea He then as.eu whether by any
chance we knew the whereabouts OL HILGER,
formerly a representative on the herman
Embassy who had been in Moscow roughly from
1920 O Warus. As it seemed to us both
that it would at least be interesting to
discover precisely what ieu the Russians
to make a pact with the Germans in the earl.
days of the war and what caused Germany
to attack Russia in 1941. We ascertained
from Stewart Hampshire that HILDER is at
present held by the Americans. Stewart is
going to try and lina a plausible excuse
for getting him over here.
I saw the DG about HOOPER. He thinks that
we should send a copy of the dossier to
that as soon as he has readit we should be
have a joint discussion as to how the case
can best be liquidated.
July 31st
Victor is bac.. for a day. He has fixeu up
an arrangement with Wing Of the LRC who is
preparing exhibits for the MI5 museum. We
discussed the joint intelligence scientific
committee and agreed that we shoulu be
permanently ra riesented. Vietor i Bals that
alarm and to freeze up on Leasa-bend.
Milino and I had a tal.. wi uh Hawli about
the future OL CSDIC. He will have to make
recommendations this month about the closin
down or all cams in this country. We sai
that in the present state oi ani airs we
did not think it mattered since we could
now send military personnel to 020. t was
however essential that one or other I u
should keep some sort 01 Cardpen here
ior the more important cases; as they woulu
be of CI nature it seemed to us that 0.20
should probably carry the oblisation.
I saw Maltby for a moment. He tal.eu a
little about the future of RSS but told me
1.othing I did not know already. He is I
think anxious that the organisation should
continue on its present lines and not be
merged with GC & CS.
Peter Hope came in to see me. He is now
attached to Joe Stephenson's office in
Paris. He is irom all accounts doing very
good wrk and I gather that the British
Embassy are very pleased to have us there.
Stopiorou tells me that Hooper's colleag
from CO The Hague who was eviden.
a party to Hooper's operations with the
Germans, died in 1943. We shall not there-
fore be able to get any corroborative
evidence from him.
August lst
Stratton came in to see me. He has just
returned from India olluemobilisation, only
to find that his firm will not have very
much for him to go for the next year.
