AThe National Archives(c) crown copyrightCatalogue Reference:kv/4/474Image Reference:1POL F53-24--90SAV21LIDDEIL DIARIES0FILE CLOSEDs Form 924SEE ALSO LIST INSIDE COVERSimrStarS1AVDateSetial No.Behind Nu.DateDntrSorini NoDusionationDemiunatiorDoslanutionHEM10 MOVLsaeS Form 960aNEIndexTHE ORIGINAL DOCUMENTRETAINED IN DEPARTMENTUNDER SECTION 3(4) OFTHE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 Julu 2.00919521at Januany.Throughout the papt year the spiral of wages and prices hascontinued to Pise. My suit this year has cost 650 instead of 24l.The Tory Government evidently intend to economise in every possibleway, except, presumablly, on reamnament. We start the year with adeficit pf over 2200,00 00O, 000 on the last Budget. we cannot, T think,expect much relief for a considerable time. Any change in the structurebuilt up by the Socialist Government will have to be extremelly gradual;a brick here or there pulled away from this shaky edifice might easilybring it crashing to the ground.Winston has just left for the United States, but the Press commentthat he is clearly gping to have quite a difficult time. I imagine thathe will tackle the Middle Eastern question, the Mediterranean Navalcommand, Korea and the whole of the Far Eastern question, Another matterwhich is, I belleve, on the Agenda is collaboration in atomic energyprojects.In Europe there are, I think, some signs of improvement politicallyand militarily although perhaps not economically. The presence ofEisenhower and the setting up of S.H.A.P.E. has put heart into WesternEuropean countries anl, although Monty has been extremely active, thereis nothing in the nature of a European Army which could stop the Russlansif they chose to get on their feet. It is difficult to see iin thepresent state of financial stringenoy how Buch an Army can becomeeffective before 1954.In the lliddle East the situation is far from good, We haveabandoned Abadan, vhith was supposed to be a cardinal point in our defencepolicy for the Middle East, and there seems very little prospect ofour going back. David Williams, the Chief Development Engineer, whom Isawafter his return, said that Stokes made a bad mistake on arrival bysaying that he was only there for ten days he ought to have said thathe was there for ten years, even though the temperature registered 1200in the shade! Negotiations should have been strung out until such timeas the Persians began to feel the economic crisis, which is only justbeginning to develop, The Americans have been far from helpful; theybelieve that if economdo chaos descends upon Persia, she is Hkely to80 Communist and that with the Tudeh Party in power the whole area willcome under Soviet domination. They have, therefore, been pressing LS tocompromise. We have So far hella out, as we do not belleve that the onlyalternative to Mosadeq's Government is the Tudeh Party.Another major crisia in the last year, which still continues, isin Egypt, where we seem to be moving towards complete military controlof the Canal Zone.There are a good many internal political moves going on in Egyptto try and find gome alternative Government to that of Nahas but it isdifficult to see how any Government can nov Survive unless tt makes4 British evacuation from the Canal and Egyptian sovereignty over the Sudana plank in its platform. The King is certainly worried and anxious fora solution, but he does not feel able to dismiss the Government on whatamounts to a nationsllicsue, since his own popullarity would be bound tosuffer.2.In the Far East the Armistice negotiatinns still continue in Koreaand, aB I have Said previously. it is difficult to see how ve can in anyway profit from the cessation of hostilities. If we allow the Koreansto construot aerodromes in North Korea, we shan lose air superiority,which has enabled us to deal with the preponderance of Chinese and NorthKorean land forces. The United Nations will, therefore, have an increasedcommitment to meet in Korea. Apart from this, the cessation of hostilitiesin Korea is almost certain to lead to Chinese activity elsewhere, particudarlyiin Ineo-China, Burma, Melaya, and possibly Hong Kong. If, therefore, wehave got to fight the Chinese, we may as well fight them in Korea as anywhereelse. The Amnericans are still toying with the idea ol bombing andblockading Manchuria, but whetheneth they seriously intend to do this unlessthe Chinese re-open hostilities after an Armiatice (if we get one), L donot know.The French are rather shaky in Indo-China. The position in Burmahas seriously deteriorated during the last year, and 80 has the situationin Malaya. The great trouble in Malaya is that there is no organisedPolice Fonce. in spite of the effort that have been made to build up one.As "Georgel Jenkin has pointed out, a Police Force muait contain a11 elementsof the population. It is woefullly deficient +Chinese, largely becausethe Chinese have not got sufficient confidence in/British Government'epower to bring the country to a state of law and order and resist Chineseaggression. They invariably conform to what they believe to be the strongerparty, but if they are uncertain they sit on the fence until the positionClarifies itself. Thia is precisely what they are doing now and it willneedagreat effort to get their cO-operation. The present Force ia Quitout of touch with the Chinese community, which is really the one that count.2nd January.I saw Stephenson with D.0.S. Stephenson was formerly in the I.0.S.and has been in the Foreign Office for some time. He haa just beenappointed as the high-powered Chairman required by J.I.C. M.E. I told himabout the origins and present position of S.I.M.E. Therearter, D.0.S. gavehim nformation about developments in the area which were going onwhen he, D.0.S. WaB there three weeks ago.Stephenson said that he had seen General Robertson. who was stillthinking in terms of his high-powered CD-ordinator who would have executivefunctions. Short of such a man being appointed, he evidently waa loolingto Stephensor to finn this rolle. Stephenson, I think, made it clear thathe coud not possibly be execlitive in that sense. I said that as T Baw therole, he had full rights to assees the over-all Intelligence bein received,to point Dut its gaps, and, in conjunction with the producing agencies andother interested parties, endeavour to get them filled. General Robertsonhad also spoken about his proposal to set up a Police Force in the CanalZone if we had to establish a military occupation and run all its essentialservices. For this purpose he had got O'Rourke, who formerly worked withGeneral Robertson in Public Safety in Germany and is now Commissioner ofPolice in Kenya, totcome up to the Canal Zone and to give him the benefitDf his advice.I said to Stephenson that while I realised that something of the 11would be necessary, T thought General Robertson was again making an analogywith Germany, Where of cplrse he had the full co-operation of the GermanPolice Force; the British element merely giving direction ane guidance.The3.The preaence of British police officers in the Canal Zone would not producemuch in the way of inforation unless there Wa.s a co-operative element ofthe Egyptian Police working under them. This was precisely the difficultywhich was being encountered in Malaya, where there were not sufficientpolicemen in the Police Force to make contact with the Chinese population.Stephenson was told about the proposal to send out Giles, who wethought shoud be an officer of S.I.M.E. - attached possibly to GenerallErakine'e Headquarters and working in close collaboration with D.S..0. CanalZone. His aim and object would be to obtain sources of information, themost profitable being bribeable remnants of the Egyptian Police.D.0.S. mentioned that we had had a telegram from Head of S.I.M.E.,in which he stated that General Erskine was satisfied with the presentposition with regard to information. He did not know precisely what thismeant: it Beemed hardly possible that he was wholly satisfied, but it mightbe that he merely felt the everything that could be done waa being done,and that the flow of information had begun to increase.I had a long talk with Dick and James Robertson about the PEACHcase.It is difficult to see how it can be done, but it seemed to methat if it were possible to take Tommny fully into our confidence andgive him the whole dossier, he might, on looking back on his associationwith PEAOH, be able to supply us with some quite significant information.It would have to be only borne in mind that his association with PEACHonlybegan in 1940. Personally I do not think that we can "open the ball"with Tommy, unless he says something to me. He has certainly seen PEACHsince the latter's interrogation, and it would of course be of the eatestimportance to know precisely what PEACH had told him.Hehasprobablytold him part of the story, but I should doubt whether he told him everything.3rd Januany.I discussed with John Marriott and Morton Evans the note on thepotentialities of the Communiat Party in time of war, a note on which hasbeen requested by S.H.A.P.E.B.1 nad made the point that as a party the C.P. was concerningitself solely with political matters and running no risk of being involvedin espionage oi sabotage.In a later paragraph the Purge was discussed. It seemed to me thatthe 0.0.8. and S.HA.P.E. could not understand the use of the Purge unlessit were made Clear tD them that any Communist or Fellow Traveller was in hisindividual capacity al potential spy. The necessary amendment has been madeand the memorandum is going forward.Morton Evans told me that only qui te recently several Communista at anaerodrome had volunteered information to the Party and had been sent backwith a flea in their ears: They were told not to concern themselves withsuch matters, but to sticktitt political work. There is no doubt, however,that what al Communist sees or hears in the course of his duties is amatter for discuarion with his Group and probably seeps back to Party H.Q.and to the Russlans, if it is considered to be of sufficient importance.4.It seerna doubtful whether anybody knows precisely what Bob STEWARTis up to, Since he is really a law unto himself.Vickery came to tell me that he had now taken up a job as SecurityOfficer at the C.R.O. When he has got the Home Department right, hewill probably be visiting High Commissioners! offices in the Dominions.He wants, of course, to work in close co-pperation with ourselves. Itseema to me rather remarkable that the O.R.0. have never had a Securityofficer, in spite of the Bridges Panel. T have no doubt that Vickely willfind things in a rather sorny state.7th Januany.I gave a talk to the Colonial Police: three from Malaya and one fromUganda.Later I Saw an ex-Speeial Branch officer named Davis, who had beenserving with the Malayan Police for the last eighteen months in Penang.He seemed an intelligent and rather well educated man. He told me thaton his way back he had been Sir William Jenkin, to whom he had expressedhis views fairly frankly. Davis thought the authorities were up againsta really serious problem in dealing with the Minyuen, or Masses Movement,which has talicen very definite shape during the last two years and isorganised throughout the country. It is, of course, proscribedandanymember of it or organiser of it is liable to ten yeara. Neverthelessit goes on and comprises, either in an active or passive way, a very higpercentage of the Chinese community. It appears to have a protectiv Cc.of highly seoret members. who are organised tD deal with traitors orprominent membera of the K.M.T. As arms are scarce, they are provided witha revollver which is taken away from them when the job has been comple'ted.Davis thinks that one of the worst Features is the way the schoolsare being run in Communist interests. Most of them, he says, ard breedinggrounds for future revolutionaries. The Right Wing danger are eliminated.E gather that Davis but up a long memorandum on thia Bubject which wentto Sir Henry Gurney., and, that efforts are being made to prevent Communistsfrom omrgetting hold of the school. Davis say, however, that the taak isa formidable one and that the students form their own cells in schools andare frequently responsible for outrages of one kind another. TheMinyuen has really taken the place of the K.M.T. and is wholly Chinesenationalist and Communist inspired.Davis was thoroughly aware of the troublee and intrigues wiithin thePollice and of the row between Gray and Jenkin, I gather he does not intendto return, In spite of this a certain amount of work has been done andsomething in the nature of an order of battle for the Minyuen has been plottedout. Apparently therbandit problem is a smail one compared with that ofthe Minyuen and would very soon collapse if the Minyuen could be liquidated.The Chinese are reluotant to co-operate on the S.B. side, but do not mindjoining the ordinary C.I.D., which gives them the opportunity for thetraditional "aqueeze",5.8th Januany.T talked to two Icellanders, CHRISTIANSSEN and PETERSEN. They aremembers of the special Branch of the Reykjavik Police and work under the-nister of Foreign Affairs. They have no direct authority over theprovincial police but can get what they want through the Ministry ofJustice. The Government are said to be fully aware of the dangers ofCommunism and prepared to support the Police in dealing with it. Althoughabout 20; of the population voted Communist in the last Election, giving theParty 9 seats out of 42, it was pointed out that the Communist Party isthe only opposition to a Conservative and democratic front. It should not,therefore, be assumed that 20 of the electorate are members of the C.P.There is a Soviet Legation with 12 members, although it appears tohave no raison d'etre. There is no trade with Russia. and Iceland has nodiplomatic or consular representation in Moscow. It did notseemthatthepolice had succeeded in penetrating the Legation, which 1s staffed entirelywith Rusians: it is, however, known that leading Communists in Icelandare constantly visiting the Legation and that certain Df them pay visitsto Russia. There is a regular courier service to the Legation from Moscowtwo or three times a month.It appears that foreign affairs are not debated in the localParliament, and any queetions-or the Subject by the C.P. are met with theanswer that "it 18 not in the public interest, eto."There has been considerable opposition to the presence Df Americantroops and aircraft at Reykjavik, and it seems probable that the activitiesof the Americans in Iceland provide the main target for Soviet spionage.The Icelandic Governmand have had a certain amount of trouble withRussian trawlers, which from time to time operate within the three-uilelimit. The Captains of these boats-are belieed to be Soviet naval personneI gave the two officers a talk on the general principles ofsecurity which T think they appreciated although neither of them seemedto have a very sound knowledge of English.of C.I.A. telephoned about the announcement aboutore intensive vetting of atomic energy personnel. It haa now beenreen that certain categories of people employed on highly secret workn addition to being interrogated nore fully by the employing departmentas to their antecedents, should be asked to sign a declaration that theyare not and never have been members or associates of the Comounist Party.thought he might be asked ab ont this announcementby Washington.I arrangeu for him t0 come round and see Hohia.Burt came to see me to-day. A Jewish unfommant, whom he haslnovn for a long time but with whom he has had little or NO contaet fornearly to years, spoke to him on Monday about a visit that he ha:f hadfrom a Jew calling himself JACOB (or JACKOB)JACOB said that he had come from Haifa, that he was going to Romeand Paris and that he would be back in about a fortnight. His deecriptionis as folllows-Age about 30; height 5ft 9 or 10 ins. hair bron; complexior sallov;high cheekbones; build medium to thin; weight aboutll stone; weans glasses;speaks with Blight foreign aLccent dreased in fawn gaberdine raincoat andchocolate coloured trilby hat.JACOB left with Burtis informant a note on the information which herequired. This note may perhapa be interpreated as a request for:i)The identity of supporters of the Grand Mufti inthe U.K.ii)Arab Intellligence agents and their sources ofnformation:iii)Agents of Arab Legatione and Embassies.JACOB said that he had plenty of money to pay for the aboveinformation if it could be obtained.Burt'E informant did not know why the approach had been made tohimself, since he had never seen DT heard of JACOB before. Since, hovever,he had been acquainted some yeans ago with people c onnected with Jewishterrorist activitiee in this country, it might be that his name was obtainedFrom Irgun quarters.Burt is by no means certain that his informant was not puttingforward a veiled suggestion that he, Burt, might like to touch some of themoney. The informant hag provided good information in the paet, but isa fairly unscrupulous type.Bun't vculd like me to let him knowetormorrow what i nstruetions heshould give to his informant.9th Januany.Carless rog up about trouble on the "Vanguardi. I spoke to Holliswho arranged for Pelling to ED down to Plymouth. I gathered there had beenone O1 two minor fire on boand.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958lune20007.At the J.I.0. to-day Young mentioned that D.S.I. had haa reportfrom the Anerican indicating that an atomic experimental explosdon some2,000 milles avey het had the effect DE deatrpying large quantities ofthbtographic film at Rochester, resumably the Kodak establishment. Heias endeavouring to get further details.came over to discuss the business of theS.I.C. particularly the item on the Agenda relating to the Wer Room.S.H.A.P.E. have asked us not to mention the discussions we hadwith the Amereans and the French. We feel, however, that thosediscussions wi1l almost inevitably have come to the notice of other memhersof the Commitfee, viho may ask us about the outcome. We propose to askthe Secretary to state whether he has had any reply from S.H.A.P.E. to theletter that he wrote them some time ago.If we are deliberstely challenged about the S.H.A.P.E. meeting, weshall say that it wats only an exploratory discussing ended inconere be proposalls.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOGUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSloth Jnnuary.ACT 1958one 7Q0We had a Director meating, when we discussed Overseas postingsand in particilar D.0.S'I suggestion that a station should be opened atAden to cover Aden, Argeisha and Khartouu. None of the other Directorsemed particularly enthugiastic about the proposal. T asked preciselyut the Intelligence problem wene and what the fficer VE going to do,but I did not feel that any very satisfactory answer to justify anexpansion at a time oof financial stringency vaS forthcoming.The D.G. asked what had happened about the letter aadressed tothe Collonial Office, asking for the opinion of Governors. No replyhad apparentily been received. The D.G. therefore left his decisionin abeyange.The successor to STEVART in .I.M.E. was considered. The D.G.asked us to produce a short lst. We were also asked to considerappointments for replacements for HUGHES in CLAYTON in WestAfrica, and KITCHIN in India. I do not know where the hell they arecoming from!D.0.S. tallked to me after the meeting. He seemed to have afeeling tha ir he recommended a new appointment overseas that hishis recomendetion should be accepted without coment. I said thedid not think that Wtis entirely fair on the Staff Board; everybody hadto justify new eppointmente, particularly at a time like this. It seemedat Aden was going to do if he were appointed. D.0.8. then Said that saidto me, therefore, right that we should consider precisely what the officer henuld be this quite would ready be to a good have a think revigiv and of tha't 1l1 one posta might overseas. equally review the IIcaffs ought 0f B. and O. Divisions in onder to ensune that ve were usi.ng ourmanpower to the best advantage. It was in fact soething which had alwaysbeen done periodicaly with the result. that thanges haa been made. Idid not think that ve ouglt to regard the establishments as inflexible; wehad to uccent thet they might at any time be contracting on expenddng.l0th Junuary.I have been getting a brief for the S.I.C. Which I am attendingnext Tuesday in Paris. It is largely a waste of time and the minutesof the previous meeting which I have read are strongly reminiscent toGroucho's Cabinet in Duok Soup"!I spoke to the D.D.M.I. (Johnstone) who todd me about thestrikes in Metropolitan Vickers and E.N.V. The one in MetropolitanViokens lasted nine days and was due to the dismissal of a ComunistShop Steward. The one in E.I.V. had been going on for about nine weeksand WaE due to a grievance by the Shop Stewarda against the foremen,whom they disliked beceune he evidently intends to be maatar in his onshop. The E.N.V. strike is backed by the Unions and negotations are ata deadlock. The Strike Commi ttee comprises 3 Communiats, 1 Trotskyist,2 doubtful. and 3 "no recoudu. The Panty is eotively supporting thestrike and one the Committee on KERRIGAN'E inetructibns has visitedtwo of our Opdnance Faotories telling them not to accept E.N.V. cuts.I told Johnnie we wouidlet him have a report or send someoneover to explain it in greater detail. It seemed to me, however, thatsomebody in authority in the War Office ought to ask the Ministry ofLabour What they were doing about It.15th - 16th Janunry.I attended the meeting of the S.I.C. in Parise on 115.1.52.Mr. Hirsch, the Director General of the Surete, was in the Chair.I had not attended one of these meetings for more than a yearand was agreeably surprised to find an atmosphere of far greaterconfidence. There are of course, all the old internal difficulltiesas between the Police End the Intelligence Services, but in reportingon the state of Communisn and espionage in their countries the dellegatesseemed to be far more forthcomine than. they had been in the past.Reporting on affairs in the United Kingdom, I wwattention toto trends in Communiat Party activity1) an intensification of the United Front ntpolicy andii) a somewhat increased emphasis on Panty education.As regards (i) there were indications that in alll branchesof Party activity efforts were to De made to collaborate as far aspoarible with the Labour Panty in opposition to the Tory Government.In particular approaches were to be made in all listriats wherefactories played a decisive part, in preparation for the MunicipalElections in the spring. Similar efforts were to be made on the wome5front, around the question of peace, rationing and the social service.Lastly, the SOCLEl Services Committe of the Communist Party WAR todevellop the fight against education cuts.9.Some consideration had been given by the Communi st Partyto a renewed application foraffiliation with the Labour Party, but itwaB realised that no progress could be made without, an alterationof the Labour Party constitutional rulles. No revision of theserules could take place until 1953 and it was important that meanwhilethe Party should do nothing to prejudice its chances of affiliation.As regards (ii) it was noticeable thait a good deal of timewaa being given to Party education and that a congiderablle number ofcourses were being held. It vas not possible to say whether this trendwas in any way related to the intensification of United Front pollicy,but it was perhaps reasonable to speculate that if Party members wereto come more closely into touch with Labour Party activities it wasdesirable that they should, aa far as possible, be immunised againstbourgeois contamination.Meanwhile Party strength had slightly deelined: the figureswere now about 35,000, plus 3,000 in the Young Communist League. Therehad likewise been a decline in the circulation of newspapers. Theweek-end cireulation of the "Daily Workers which some years bacic hadbeen as high as 120,000 was now 52,000, and there were likewise fallsin the cineulatdon of "torid News and Views", "Commundat Reviowi,"Woman To-day" and "Challengel. This was possibly due to theinereaced CDsit. Constant appeels were being made by the CommunistPrese for financial Support, but, in apiteof an apparent deficit, itorgans continued to appear. It was difficult to say how far thedefieit was made good by certain wealthy supparters of Communist Partyactivity oP from outside spaces.T said there was little to report abor.t the Peace Campaign.Signatures to the Petition were nominally about 800,000Therewere 350 local Peace Committees affiliated to the Bnitish PeaceCommittee, and efforts were being made to organise Committees of thevarious professipnal classes, in order to stimulate the movement andpossibly to give it a greater air of respeetability.This question of "respectability" was obviously very muchin the minds of the Communist Party, both on the political and ontheespionage front. There had recently been severall Btrikingexamples of refusal by the Communist Party, as such, to become engagedin espionage activities. A recent defector from the HungarianEmhassy named KOVACS had told us tha't an approach by his Embassy forassistance in spionage matters had been turned down flat by the Party.Therehadalso been other instances. This did not mean, however, thata general seepage of information did not go on through Communist Partymembers with access to information of interest to the Party. or thatoccasionally a Party member; or sympathiser, did not act as an agentfor Russia or the Satellites without the knowledge or approval of hisExecutive Committee.The danger, therefore, of having Communists or sympathisersin places where they had access to secret information remained aconstant one.From such information aa we had, the Russians were moreinclined to go to sympathisers or to exploit the human weaknessesof people with no Communist Party affiliations at all. It wasafairly simple matter to ascertain that certain individuals employedby the Russian or Satelllite missions were interested in obtaininginformation, but, owing to rigid security precautions, the identification10.of their contacts was a matter of the greatest difficulty.If anymembers of the Committee had any solution for overcoming thesedifficullties, I should be very interested to hear what they were.(It was clear that all the delegates thoroughly appreciated thediffdculties of surveillance and had found the problem as insolubleas we have).Luxembourg had, as usual nothing to report.In the statements made by the Belgian, Dutch and Frenchdelegates, it seemed that the pattern of Communist activity was verymuchthe same as our own. In France, Belgium and Holland it centredround the Peace Campaign.Mr. Hirach said that although under the cloak of the PeaceCommittee there was a good deal of agitation against rearmament, theParty had lost influence in social and political affairs and itsvarious demonstration during the last three mohths had in each caseproved a failure. Likewise, the dissolution of Polish organisatiinsand of a Spanish group had crippled their particular activities.With regard to Iron Curtain countries, the Ministry of theInterior had recently issued an order compelling Hungarians, Roumanians,Czechs and Russians, other than diplomats, to enter and leave the countryat a particullar frontier post. One frontier post was allotted to eachnationality. Anyone who was found to have disobeyed this regulation was,if picked up, immediately expelled. This new procedure considerablyfacilitated the control of Russian and Satellite nationals in France.It had been established, however, that in every delegation attendingthe present U.N.0. Conference, and other Conferences on political andcultural affairs, Russian and Satellite States had included Intelligencepersonnel, and it seemed to the French that there was a tendency by theRussians to make more use of Satellites for obtaining information.During the last three months there had been some increasedactivity by South American nationals, most of whom were merely passingthrough Paris on their way to conferences in Prague and elsewhere.Lastly, Mr. Hirsch referred to a certain amount of "intoxication"designed toinddeate a rapprochement between the United Kingdom and theU.S.S.R. behind the backs of our Allies. The Belgian delegate,M. Walravens, spoke of similar ramours which had been circulating inBelgium and which had definitely been traced back to Communist sources,(A propos of these remarks, T recolllected that from an account of aconversation between the Prime Minister and Adenaeur, when the latterwas in this country a few weeke ago, it was clear that Adenaeur had beenextremely worried lest we should come to some kind of unilateral agreementwith Russia which would be detrimental to German interests. He had beenmuch relieved by an assurance from the P.M. that no such agreement wascontemplated and that nothing would be done in that direction withoutpiror consultation with the German Government. I did not, of course,mention this matter at the meeting).Dr. Fock, the Dutch delegate, drew attention to a recentdecree by the Dutch Government which made membership of the CommunistParty, or of a Communist Trade Union, incompatible with holding decree anyhad created a far greater reaction in Dutch Communist circles anyofficial position in the Dutch Government. He said that this than13.other measure that had been taken in years. He did not regard this asan indication of serious penetration of the Dutch Administration, butmerely as a desire by the Communist Party to exploit wha't they thoughtmight be a profitable grievance. The efforts in the direction of a Unitedront were considerable and began about the middle of September.The Dutch delegati on submitted a full report on the Czech espionagecase, which will be circulated to delegates.The report by the Belgian delegation seemed to follow the usualpattern.The general feeling was that throughout the Western Union countriesthere had been a slight decline in Communist activity.There was a long discussion in the afternoon about the MoscowEconomic Conference. From the report made by S.I.C. delegates, it seemedlikely that its main purpose was to defeat the restrictions on West/Easttrade.There was general agreement that it would be in Allied interests todiscourage, by whatever means appropriate to each country therepresentatives on the other hand, of firms it was of felt importance that anything from taking in the part nature in the of prohibition discussions.might do more harm than good. The Dutch, who generally see things verymuch in black and white, were in favour of imposing restrictions on themovements of delegates to and from the Conference, nd thought that awarning should be given to those who proposed to go about difficulties theywould encounter in other countries in obtaining transit travel f'acilities.ther delegations thought that such action would be difficult politicallyand possibly unwise.Stating the British view, I said that while important firms whoasked for advice were being discouraged, we saw no objection to smallfirms being allowed to go; and in fact that there might be some advantagin getting accurate reports about the proceedings, both official andunofficial, and in acquiring a better appreciation of the real purposesof the Conference. I was certain that H.M.G. would not attempt anythingon the lines of prhibition.At the suggestio of the Dutch it was agreed that a note should go tothe Permanent Commissior of the Brussels Treaty Powers from the Committee,suggeating that they should inform all Governments which were a party tothe Treaty that, in the view of the S.I.C., participation in the MoscowConference should be discouraged by any means which seemed appropriate.There was a discussion on the legal position which would arisein the event of a member of an international organisation, such as N.A.T.O. Itor Western Union, giving integrated information to a foreign Bower.Seemed that, as far as the Dutch and ourselves were concerned, the existing thatlaws were sufficient to cover the situation, provided it was acceptedthe information he communicated was detrimental to the security of ownthe officer or official concerned was paid by his own Government and his thatcountry.TI said that, as far as we could see, Section 2 of the the official atter had secrets neverAot viould operate in such a case, allthough, of course,been put to any legal test.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMVENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958une ooe112.The Belgians did not seem to have any really effective legislationto cover a case of the kind, and the French said they would have to makesome amendment to their penal code.Each delegation agreed to ubmit to the Secretary a statement onthe position in his own country.Finally, under "Any other business", I drew attention to a memorandumthat we had supplied to the Secretary about the Black List. We had foundthat people of the same name with slightly different particulars were beingput on the List without prior verificatior as to identity. I urged thatsomething should be done to improve this situation before the names wereincluded in the List.The Committee felt that this was a matter which should be carriedout by the Secretary.The Secretary referred to the minutes of the previous meeting, whereMr. Whit undertook to supply delegates, through the Secretary, with copiesof a White Paper on stoppage of work in industry, in particular the dockersstrike in Manchester. He complained that no uchypapers had been received.It may be that none were issued, but B.I could give the answer to this.The next meeting is to be held in Brussels, under the Chairmanshipof the Belgians, on Tuesday, April 22nd and the Secretary would be glad to knowof any subjects thought to be suitable for discussion.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSAOT 1958Auae 2009At a luncheon given on 16.1.52 by M. Hirsch to the delegates attendingthe S.I.0. and to certain other individuals, I sat next to a man calledWapler, who controlled the desk in the Ministere des Affaires Etrangeresconcerned with N.A.T.0. and Western Union affairs.In the course of conversation, Wapler, who had been responsiblefor the part played by Leduc in the tripartite security take, said thathe had the impression that we took a slightly exaggerated view of Frenchinsecurity. It was, of course, true that, owing to the political situation13.in the Chambre des Deputes, there was considerable difficulty in imposingany strong measures for the exclusion of Communists from GovernmentDepartments. He thought, however, that we were not perhaps wholly awarerf the extent to whi.ch "under the counter" methods were employed withinnistries to exclude Communists from places where they might do harm,and ultimately to edge them out altogether. Moreover, there was a strongunofficial Trade Unionism in the more important departments of the FrenchGovernment. As an example he said that,with very few exceptions, it wasalmost impossible for a Jew to obtain office in the French Foreign Office.Occasionally a notable exception was made in the case of some well-knownJewish familly whose reputation vias unimpeachable. This was donedeliberately to avoid any accusation of racial distinction. What he hadsaid about the French Foreign Office went, to some extent, for otherimportant Ministries where secret information was obtainable. He couldnow, however, say the same for other departments. He then told me that inthe French Foreign Office they knew of the existence of six Communists,but that none of them was employed in a position where he could normallyobtain access to anything of importance.While there may be a good deal in what Wapler said, I had inmind (although I did not of course mention it) the case of the fairlyhigh Foreign office official controlling the Satellite desk, against whomthe proposed action by the Surete had been supressed on the orders ofM. Pleven - the idea being that a French BURGESS and MACLEAN case would havean adverse effect upon the economic aid which the Frencl Government wereexpecting from the United States. Owen told me that this individual hadbeen identified, that his name wasand that he was being sent toGreece.Incidentally, I may mention that Wapler was at the French EmbassyBelgrade at the beginning of the war and that he was instrumental ingetting Verneuil and the French Naval Attache out of the country at the timeof the German invasion. They apparently spent several weeks in themountains and eventually succeeded in reaching Budapest. Wapler thenreturned to Belgrade, where he waB severely interrogated by the Gestapobut was finally allowed to leave the country as a diplomat. On his returnto France he served on the staff of Darlan. He told me, with some pride,that the only Intelligence operation of any value that he had ever carriedout was when he saw a report on Darlan's table about the movements of theScharnhorst and the Gneisenau. He stole this report and gave it to theAmerican Naval Attache, who communicated the information to the BritishGovernment. The Germans came to hear of his association with AmericanORICERS ald aemanded his raoval. he waa subsequently sont to the FreachEmbassy in Berne. He joined up as a Reserve officer in the French Forcesin 19114.Verneuil confirmed this account and told me that he had a highopinion of Wapler.a few weels ago when Constantine (I) Johnstone (D.D.M.I.)During a lunch with Owen I was told about an incident which occurred andHilken (D.D.N.I.) visited Paris to lecture to the N.A.T.O. Staff Collegethe Russian and Satellite orders of battle.These officers had been studying their briefs in the train and, of for theirsthe purposes of co-ordination, Johnstone and Hilken had given a copyblock14.to Constantine, whose notes were mainly in pencil draft. They arrivedrather late in the evening and were due to attend a cocktail party.Instead of depositing their despatch cases at the Embassy, they concealedthem in various places in their rooms at the hotel. Constantine hadapparently put his attache case, for which he had no key, under his bed,When he returned to the hotel at about 2 a.m., he discovered that thebriefs of the Army and Navy which had been lent to him were not in hiscase. He thought it possible that he might have left them in the train.Having consulted the other two officers, it was decided to report thematter to the Security Officer in the Air Attache' office. The latterthen communicated with Securite de 'Air, who in turn got on to the Surete.It was not until late in the following day that Owen heard about the matter.Enquirie at the Gare du Nord were met with the reply that all paperscleared out of their trains were burned. Constantine was seen by theSurete, who complained that he had given no very accurate account of hismovements between the time of his arrival and 2 a.m. in the morning! Hehad therefore been sent back by aeroplane for further interrogation bythe Surete. A full report on the whole incident had gone back to theAir Ministry, as a result of which Constantine had lost his promotion.I told Owen that I had heard nothing about this and that clearly it wasbeing hushed up. It seemed to me that it should in some form or other bepromulgated and, moreover, that Hilken and Johnstone, who had in a sense beenlucky, were as much to blame as Constantine.Only he Army and Navy briefs were taken from Constantine's case,Constantine' was only in pencil draft. These documentspresumably because they were in typewritten or photostat form, while nothavesofarheen traced, although considerable enquiries are being made by theSurete at the hotel at which the officers stayed.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958Me200015.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958Guae20918th Januany.Burt came to see me about the case ofHe said theman was returning and he was making arrangements to canny out observhtdon.Meanwhile, he had been approachedwho had precisely the same story, namely, that Jewish Intelligencwere interested in the activities of the Mufti and any Arab supportersthat he might have in England. They were willing to pay considerablesums of money.Burt had wondered whether it woulld be possible to giveor the other informant a certain amount of 'chiden feed"I said I though tthat this might be unwise, since if by any chance it became possibleforthe Arabs to say that the British Government vere reporting on theiractivities to the Jews, the Foreign Office would be seriously embarrassed,particularly at a moment like this when we were trying to bring the Arabsinto Western Union defence schemes.Burt appreciated the point and said that he would refrain fromdoing anything of the kind.Burt then told me about a serious case of leakage which 3.B. hadbeen looking into. They had received certain documents from Waterlow's.These documents were of secret nature from the Ministry of Supply tothe Prime Minister's office. They had been sent to S.B. by Waterlow's,who had found them in an empty bag which they had received from a pulpingfirm called Jacob. The matter had been reported to the Ministry of Supplywho were investigating.I told Burt that we were of course always interested in suchcases from two points of view. Firstly, we had a general interest ingetting departments to improve their security arrangements, and secondly,such papers might provide the answer to a existing case of leakage which wehad under investigation.Burt promised to send me a report on the matter and to let usknow about any other cases of the kind which came to his notice.16.lunched with Van Moyland.21st January.The D.G. approved our posting arrangements but raised a questionabout returning Benior Officers. He was anxious to avoid, as far aspossible, the position whereby a Senior Officer corng back here fromabroad would have to do the work of a section officer. It was explainedthat considerable difficulty arose from the fact that returning SeniorOfficers in certain cases had had no previous training in this office.Hollis and I expressed the view that such officers were not fitted totake over a Senior Officer's job untill they had been back here forabout two years. A notablle example was Bill MAGAN, who with hisusual honesty had declared that he found the work here extremelycompllicated and in many respects entirely different to what he had beendoing in the Middle East. While of course he could take over almostanything and master it in the course of time, the same did not apply toothers, and even in MAGAN'S case efficiencly would be bound to suffer.The D.G. asked us to look into this matter in greater detaill atour staff meeting.22nd January.The D.M.I. telephoned to say that Gerald Templer was very anxiousto see the D.G. about the appointment of someone to co-ordinate Intelliguin Malaya. I said that this seemed to be somewhat similar to theappointment which had been suggested for the Middle East and had been shotdown by the J.I.C. and Chiefs of Staff. T rather doubted whether suchapost was either necessary or desirable in the Far East, but we woulldof course be delighted to see Gerald and discuss the matter with him.I arranged an appointment for 2.30 on Friday.Later, Gerald rang me up himself from the Colonial Office. He wason the open telephone and coulld not tell me in any detaill what he wanted.He said that as far as he could ascertain, Intelligence was not comingthrough or being properly disseminated. T said that as far as I knewthe machinery was there but that the real crux of the matter was the lackof any Intelligence at all. For a variety of reasons it wa not comingoff the ground and those primarily concerned were the Police.I saw Patrick Reilly about the mechanisation of Post Report, whichhad been discussed at the J.I.C. last Wednesday when I was away in Paris.T felt that we were rather closing the door off the Home Office and that ifwe coulld get them to mechanise Post Report there was a possibility ofextending the scheme to the whole of the Aliens Register. I felt thatthis would be valluable, particularly in time of war. Rbtlly thought thathe had better withholld his letter to the Home office and that the mattershould be reconsidered by the J.I.C. He asked me to put in anote.I told Reilly about my experiences at the 8.1.0. meeting in Panis,and particularly the remarks of Wapler of the Feench Foreign Office on17.French security. I also mentioned to him what had heard about thethree Deputy Directors, who instead of depositing their bags at theEmbassy had hidden them in their rooms, with rather disastrous consequences.It seemed to me a pity that others should not know of this incidentin the generall interests of security, although the last thing any of uswanted to do was to get people into trouble or kick them when they weredown. Reilly told me that Constantine had been earmarked as a successorto A.0.A.S.(1 (I), who I gather was not considered to be up to his job - nivefelllow though he is. This appointment was now in abeyance butConstantine was contuing as Deputy. Reilly felt that if he had beenthrovn out of Intelligence altogether, it might have been possible togive the incident soe publicity in Government circles, but that in thecircumstances he did not see that any action could be taken.Burt rang to say that Charteris had some Czech servants in hisemploy. I presume that this had come to light owing to the burglaryat his house. I said I doubted whether there was a eal securityissue, since Princess Elizabeth does not, as far as I know, receivesecret Government documenta.Dick has telegraphed from Washington about his interview withHoover, which seems to have gone well. Hoover seems fairly convincedabout the case against PEACH, but understands that no action is possible,He did, however, ask how it was that PEACH got a clearance for work inS.I.S. Dick pointed out to him that PEAOH carne into S.I.S. in the earlystages of the war when cases of his kind were not looked at with the samescrutiny as they would be in the present situation.23rd January.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958MAoJohn Shaw talked to me about his position, which he felt wasin nyrrespects unsatisfactory.He realised that the main purpose ofhis appointment was the administration of overseas stations, but he founddifficulty in carnying out his assignment.He thought really thatone person should control the whole of Administration and blishmentand give order for posting, as I understood him, without much regardfor the Intelligence needs of other Divisions.I said that of course this had been the case in the past, but thatI had always felt in this office that there was a tendency for theAdministration "tail to wag the Intelligence dog'! Anybody, therefore,who was controlling staff and appointments should be fully acquaintedwith Intelligence needs; these could only be discovered by closecollaboration between all Direotors.D.0.S. then said that in his opinion the Staff and Administrationcoulld be carried by one Director, for home and overseas and that theIntelligence side of 0.S. could really go back to B. Division.18.24th Januany.T had a word with Reillly after the J.I.C. meeting about a latter whichPEACH has written to Skardon. PEACH says that he may get a job with a firmin Egypt and wants to know if there would be any difficulty about hispassport. We propose to teil him that there will be no difficulty.Meanwhille, we are retaining the passport; we should, however, like to havethe Foreign Office view as to whether we should send it back now or retainit until occasion for its use arises. Reilly a sked me to write him aletter. 'ct has no ob section to the return of the passport.At the Appointments Board meeting to-day I told Horrocks that Iwanted to discuss both the staffing of R.S.L.Os 0s and the L.R.C. intimeof war. It seemed to me that we ought to have these two pieces ofmachinery ready to go into action immediately ifhit ever became necessalBreffitt, Chief Constable of Sussex, has written to tell us thathe has taken on, with his eyes open, a Communist named BEAL as a memberofhis Force. Having interviewed BEAL he came to the conclusion that hehad the makings of a good policeman. As BEAL has been the leader of hisLocal Communist group and, in 1951, was the Secretary of its EducationCommitte we feel rather strongly. I may yhsay, that he is hardly suitableas a candidate for any Police Force.The Home office hase been informed and have taken the matter up withthe Chief Constablle.After discussion with D.C. and Arthur Martin, I spoke to 'c' aboutMartin giving details of the PEACH case to Jones (of G.0.H.Q.) with aview to his passing on such data to certain of his subordinates who areconcerned with London -Moscow traffic.'C' agreed to this being done.25th January.I had a discussion with Potter about the mechanisation of PostReport and the Aliens Register. He has provided me with a li6t ofcategories sui.table for punching. He think it arguable that the HomeOffice may be able to supply our needs and those of she Services without19.mechanising, but he rather doubts it, and in any case he realises thatthe operation would be a tedious one, particularly in time of war,Kenech'hd came to ascertain from me whether I thought an enlargementof the S.1.0. to cover the other N.A.T.0. powens was a good idea. I toldhim frankly that I did not think 80: there might be something in theNorthern Group and the Southern Group having their own C. : in that caseit might be necessary to bring the information together. I should,however, regret to see anything in the nature of amalgamation. From myexperience at the last S.1.0. meeting, it seemed to me that Western UnionS.I.0. was slovly improving - at any rate a far greater degree ofconfidence had been established than existed at the outset. If wenowintroduced other nationalities we might freeze everybody up. Heappreicated the point, although I think he was rather disappointed withmy answer.Gerald Templer came in the afternoon and was seen by D.0.8. and theD.G.It was impressed upon him that the existing machinery for collectingIntelligence should be sufficient and that the introduction of a super-Intelligence man was likely to be a fifth wheel in the coach. It wassuggested that he should examine the machinery of the L.I.C. and, if hethought it necessary, put in a strong Chairman. He has for the momentaccepted this advice.26th January.A Czech diplomat, VYHNANEK, has defected and been housed by ourselves.Meanwhile, another, a colleague of his. is doing the same thing. Thelatter, named ROSAK, was besieged in his house by Czech diplomatic cars..He escaped over the roof with his wife and child.We have housed ROSAK and the Flying Squad are getting his wife andchild to safety.The Ozechs seem to think that VYHNANEK has been a British agent forsome time. This suits us anite well and we intend to use it in getting ridof to Czech spies from the Military Attache's office.There has been a major battle in the Canal Zone and we have beenconsidering what to do with our staff in Cairo if there is a rupture ofdiplomatic relations.28th January.At the Directors Meeting to-day it was annoumed that OUGHTONis pleased to accept the appointment of S.0.0. S.I.M.E. and that DROWER,THIS HISISACOPYORIGINAL DEPARTMENT DOCUMENT RETAINEDACT 3(4) 1958 OF THE PUBLIC UNDER RECORL. SECTIG200920.although it 1s slightly inconvenient. is prepared to 80 to take hiBplace in S.1.F.ED.O.S. complained about housing conditions in Kuala Luopur andNigeria, where the Office of Vorks have refused to build. The D.G.felt that we should say to the Colonial Office that if they could notfind us the accommodation we should withdraw our posts.D.0.S. further announced that MORTON had not received with anyenthusiasm the proposal that GOODWIYN shoulld go out on a visit. Hefeltthat. if anyone came it shauld be a Director tho would give them theanswers to their various problems both on the Intelligence and administratiside. GOODNYN' visit has been cancelled.I mentioned the case of the Ministry of Supply leakage andsuggested that cases of this kind might with advantage have a certainkind of publicity in Government circles. It was agreed tha't the pointshould be raised with the Inter-Departmental Committee on Security.I discussed with D.0.S. a letter from Stephens, in which he stronglyadvocates the appointment of a full-time Security Officer as D.S.0. Canal.This view haa already been represented to the J.I.C. and the point wasraised by the G.0.C. when he visited S.I.M.E. a short time ago.While, of course, fully trained Security Offices can always Bo betterin a post of that kind than an attached officer, I doubt whether in thepresent state of affairs there is much opportunity for running agents.There will, of course, be informants, and probably a good deal can belearned through the interrogation of prisoners, but, apart from all thisit is difficult to see who can be sent out without as a result dis-locating our business at home. If, of course, there is a rupture ofrelations with Egypt, FOULKES could very well go down to the Canal Zoneand would no doubt be extremely useful.30.1.52.Howard of the Home Office telephoned to me to-day and asked whetherwe had any special observations to make on a draft memorandum recommendingthe abollition of controls between Ireland and this country, before heput the matter to Sir Frank Newsam.I said that is seemed more than ever clear from his memorandumthat whatever wae done the ill-intentioned alien could fairily easily getinto this country and reside here almost indefinitely without detection,but that since the abolition of controls for Irish traffic at the WesternPorts had been decided upon in principle, it wa s difficult to make anysuggestions about blocking up holes until we knew what the Irish wereprepared to do to assist. There are however, certain principles invollvedin the present decision, which in some degree weaken the effect of theAliens Order. Under Article 7 of the Order, whereby an allien cannotenter the country without permdasion from an Immigration Officer, it willnow be made doubly clear to him that he can do so if he comes via Eirebecause there will be nd Immigration officer at the port to put thenecessary stamp upon hi.s passport, and because for administrativereasons this fact will have to be given as much publicity as possible.Equally, the Home Secretary will not be able to exercise his power toprevent the departure of an alien for the same reason.21.I suggested to Hovard that he might like to consider whetherthepowers of an Immigration Officer could be delegated to the Policel, eitherad, the port or when the alien registers. He said he woulld consider thisint.Another point, which I gather is one of some controversy ithin theHome Office, relates to the visa. Hutson is inclined to argue that asthere wi.ll be no immigration officer at the port to inspect docunents, thereis no point in the alien having a visa unless legislation is nacted makingit an offence for the natibnals of certain countries to be in the U.K. withouta valid visa. others feel that there is some merit in insisting on a visawhether there is anyone to look at it or not.For the moment I do not think there is anything more that we can do inthis matter.him by General The Vandenberg P.M. asked while the the J.I.C. former to look was into in the a ourselves U.8.A., statement to and made the the to effeetU.S.S.R. that was 11-1 in favour of the Soviet. It turns out that the U.S.A.therationttheproductionofaircraftbetweenproduction at the moment is 142 per month, our own 120, and the Russianabout 550: in other words, a ratio of about 2.1- 1.Meanwhile, of course,American production is rapidly increasing.Alan Moprehead, who was formerly Public Relations officer at theMinistry of Supply, has, af the suggestion of the Foreign offico and theMinistry of Supply, written a book on the cases of RUCHS and others engagedin imparting atomic energy secrets to the Russians.The late P.M. had asked the D.G. to arrange for some counterblastto the American White Paper, and the D.G. had consulted the appropriatedepartments. There i8 now a certain anxiety. about the disclosures in thebook which will make it quite clear that it is officially insptred and tosome extent weakened our position vis a vis the Press.The D.G. holds the view that, with the exception form of and, certain if necessary,modifications, should be admitted the book that its contents are partially derived from official.shouldstandinitspresenturces.22.B1st January.There is considerable consternation in the Czech Embassy about thetwo defections of VYHNANEK and ROSAK.The Foreign Office have agreedto one person in the Military Attache' office being declared personanon grata, and the second one a little laterThe Czechs have removed all ROSAK'S furniture, valued at aboutE500, from his apartment which is rented by the Czech Embassy. They aregetting a Solicitor's letter, lthough the legal position at the momentis not very clear.lst Februany.I vent to see General Sinclair about a request by the S.0 branchto get informtation into the Press which related to derogatory remarksmade about King Farouk in Cairo. It was not my business to comment onthe policy which Sinclair assured me was guided y/Foreign Office-cum-I.R.D. steering committee, but it seemed to me from Foreign officetelegrams that one of the factors which made Farouk reluctant to actin British interests was' the likelihood of his becoming unpopular withhis own people. I was, hovever, concerned with the principle that theSecurit) Service should be used for this kind of job.Sinclair did not seem to think that in principle there was anythingagainst this, any more than there was in the Foreign Office being apartyto it. I said I thought it would be extremely damaging to us, but thatin any case we were not really equipped with the proper machinery; suchcontacts as we had with the Press were direct. -in other words each officerwho made a contact was known to the Pressmen as a representative of M.I.5.Sinclair said he quite understood this and clearly we could not usepeople of that sort for this kind of work.I do not think that we shalll get any more enquiries of this kind.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958ane RoofT raised the question of principle as to whether or not wartimeestablishments such as London Reception Centre and Camp 020 should beplaced in charge of an existing member of the staff, or someboyd importedforthepurpose.It was considered that provisional appointments shouldbe made from existing staff to the head posts in sections such as these.Note was taken that provisional appointments would probably have to bemade for L.R.C. and Camp 020, and for sections dealing with Exit Permitsand Censorship. Directors were invited to consider nominations for theseposts.D.E./A. reported thait he had ascertained that the Civil Defenceregional Headquarters were in the same towns as those in which w previouslyhad Regional Security Liaison Officers. It was agreed that D.E./A. shouldmake a bid to the Ministry of Works for the provision of accommodationin the towns where headquarters were to be set up. We should ask normallyfor accommodation for two officers and about two secretaries.As regards the staff for Regions, B.E./A. would submit a provisionallist of eligible candidates from the Reserve for consideration.Malcolm Cumming talked to me about the defector ILLYIN, who hasproduced an outburs. He conceives himself only in the rolle of a counter-revolutionary and thinks that all his time shoud be devoted to the over-throw of the Stalin regime. He is not concerned with the question of earninhis own living!I said it seemed to me that what wa's really required was somethingin the nature of a Woburn Abbey, such as existed during the war, wherepropagandists Could settle down to prepare broadcasts or leaflets, andwheresuch people as ILLYIN could feell that they were making a usefulcontribution. It might further be necessary to organise Russian emigregroups: I had in mind the statement of the Russian who interviewed theremains of VLASOV! Army; it was his view that the Russians would be farmore likely to defect to some counter-revolutionary organisatior abroadthan to the British Government.I.R.D. appear to disclaim any interest in these people once they havdone a couple of broadcasts.Lith Februnny.I had a talk with two Swedes. one Kriminaloverkonstapel BOGEFELDTof the Police and the other Captain GEIJER of the Army. I gave them abrief outline of the principles on Which me worked, our objectives, andthe organisation we had to carry out our tasks. They are both returninghere for further talks with B. and B.2 and C. Division. They had hadconsiderable experience of Soviet espionage in Sweden. B.2 may finditof interest to into these matters in some detail. IT was clear thatthey found the Russians extremely difficult to deal wi owing to theexcellence of Russian security. We talked about the observation problemand clearly they have no solution.214.The D.C. told us that Jones had been finally appointed as headof G.0.H.0. The Services had put forward Admiral Daniels, the retiringCommandant of the I.D.C.. but Eden had finally come down on the side 01'ctis nominee.Burt telephoned me. He opened the conversation by saying that theleakage in the Press about the two Ozech defeotors had not come from theYard, but he thought from the Czech Embassy. It seemed to me a littlecurious that he should have volunteered this information - the more BOsince I heard afterwards that the Sunday Graphic had told an informantof ours that he had got a1l the information he wanted from the Yard!It woulld not be surprising, since the Flying Squad were called in.We then discussed the case of BATESON, who is apparently a youthof 16 collecting data about aircraft. A letter of his had been picked upat the aerodrome and handed to Special Branch. Burt had been anxious toget a search warrant. I told him that there was a considerable amountof information on our files about "Air Registration", an organisatior whichcan give full data about construction programmes of aircraft firms in thiscountry; that this organisation and a publication called "Air Britain" hadhad correspondence with the Air Ministry and that to s ome extent theyhad received encouragement. The Air Ministry are anxious that theyouth of this country should become air-minded, as this is good fordevelopment and for recruiting. on the other hand they eallise thedangers from the security point of view.T did not wish to discourage Burt from getting a search warrant,but thought that he or one of his officers ought to see our papersbefore they decided what they were going to do. It seemed to me thatprobably a warning to this youth was all that would be required. Fromthe original letter, it was clear that he was endeavouring to obtaindetails about at Least four aircraft which are still on the confidentiallist, although there was nothing to suggest that he was doing this fora motive prejudicial to the security of the State.Burt said that he woulld send over Sgb. Smith to see Bernard Hill.5th February.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958uae20096th Februry.At the J.I.0. to-day I raised again the question of the mechanisatiolof Post Report and the Central Aliens Register. I obtained theCommittee's support for a letter to the Home Office and to the holdingof a meeting between the interested parties to establish what categoriesof information should be recorded and how far the Holllerith was a practicalmeans of carrying out the task.25.I told the Committee that aB it stood to-day the AliensRegister was purely alphabetical, and that as far as I knew there wasno way of ascertaining what Hungarians or other nationalities were inthis country, except by sending a circullar letter to alll Chief Constables.It seemed to me a pity that if the Home Office were consideringmechanisatior we should not give them every encouragement. Once a startwas made we might be able to extend the mechanisatio to naturalisationcases. T did not think it was necessary to review again the 20,000Post Reports which could be mechanised on a purely factual and, as far aspossible, invariable basis.With regard to further interrogations, it might be thatmembers of the Committee would wish to add certain points to thequestionnaire on which the Home Office were at present working.The King' death was announced at about 11.30 by theSecretary. The Chairman asked us to stand in silence and the meeting wasthen adjourned.T had lunch withHe told me that he had asked forcertain enquiries to be mate about individuals here who might be in contactwith Tunisians at present causing trouble in the Colony.Alec Kellar had told him that enquiries of this sort woulld beoutside our Charter. I explained tothat what Kellar tolld himwas entirely correet; if, for example, we wished to look at someone'scorrespondence we had to make a case to the Home Secretary and obtain hisWarrant. This could only be done on the basis that the man was a menaceto our national security. If, however, these individuals were connectedwith the Communist Party, we should be Justified in conducting furtherenquiries. We had no such evidence. in spite of the coverage we had ofthe Communis't Party in this country. I would, however, look into thematter to see whether there was anything to be done.T am all for helping the French if we can, sincw we may well askthem from time to time for enquiries which are possibly to some extentoutside their Cherter. I thinkwas under the impression thatwe more or less had carte blanche to do that we liked.I spoke to 'ct about his letter,in reply to ours regardingthe six people named by PEACH as acquaintances of his during his Universitydays, and particularly the statement "I can see no other riskI pointed out to him that in our View there vas a considerable risk of aleakage of information, to the effect that another member of the ForeignOffice was under suspicion. Bearing in mind that out of the six peoplenamed by PEACH as acquaintances of his during his University daye, fivehad Communist traces, T made it clear that it woulld not be possible tointerrogate these individuals without it being apparent to them thatwe regarded PEACH with considerable suspicion. If there were a leakage,it seemed to me that the Foreign Office woulld be seriously embarrassed.'C' readily accepted this point. He then asked sincllairto come in, when we continued the discussion about the case. I made itquite clear that there was no reluctance on our part to carry Dut the26.interrogations, provided S.I.8., on their behalf and on behalf of theForeign Office, were prepared to accept the risk. We did not, however,anticipate that we should be much nearer a positive solution: we had all1heard from PEACH thatm short of holding a Party card, he was as nearbeing a Communist as no matter. If, of course, it was felt that infairness to PEACH the interrogations should be carried out, we vould goahead.Sinclair throught it wa's possible that someone might be in aposition to say or to deny that PEACH was a close associate of KLUGMAN or ofMACLEAN, and that this would be a material point worth getting at. Both'c' and Sinclair, hovever, realised the risks involved and suggested thatwe should select one of the six individuals whom we thought to be theleast likely to talk.'c' hoped that it might be possible to start theinterrogation by discussing BURGESS and MACLEAN and leading from them toPEACH.Recent telegrams from Egypt indicate that Farouk is extremelynervous about the rioting which occurred Some days ago. It is clear thatif things had got any Worse we should have intervened. Farouk evidentlyknew this and said that he Would make it his business to let us know ifthings got really out of hand, although he would male no specific requestfor out intervention.At the moment we are taking up an injured and somewhat reservedattitude.Our Ambassador thinks that it would be unwise to make anyserious offer to negotiate until it is quite clear that the Governmentintends to put a stop to all acts of terrorism both in Egypt and in theCanal Zone. He does not, however, wish to wait too long.7th February.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONie3(4): OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958JinsTO0HIn the February issue of a monthly digest called "survey" thereare derogatory remarks about the Security Service and a statement that theP.M. intends to make changes. The D.G. is mentioned by name.From records in our possession, it appears that the "Survey"which has officer in London and Paris, is run by Drew the idea being that init should gain a reputation for accurate informtior which it will getadvance of official publication and that having done 8O it will put outdeception material at a suitable moment.give one, HOOD, a fair wind with the Bank which holds the funds on thisWe know that it is officially Sponsored as Poston vias asked which to27.'Survey" is run. It is believed too, that Dick knows that the "Survey"IS official. Dick Butler has come into it too, in connection with theformation of a Company.Whether the venture is a sound one or not, it seems outrageousthe "Survey" should join in the generall hunt of the Security Service on theli1s8 of the "Daily Express", and without any prior reference to this office.remably Drew will argue that if averyone is to be consulted it will never beinvolved. Possible to He get wi.ll the also digest say out that each by month, blackguarding apart from Government the question departments of security heNill be able to lay off any suggestion that "Survey" is official. But none ofthis can possibly justify his action.Whether the venture is worth while is another matter. Personally I3houlld be inclined to doubt it, but if you have a forward planning seetion Tuppost they have got to do something, at considerable expense, in the hope thatne day it may be of some use. On the other hand it will necoil like aoomerang if it ever becomes known that it is supported by Government funds.L cannot help feeling that aponer or later this is bound to happen.Roger will be tallking to Dick about it when he returns and will thenspeak to the D.G. If T were the D.G. E should take the matter up prettyforcibly with Norman Brook.It was agreed that the establishment of Mr.should bere nmended, and this was subsequently approved by the D.G.D.E./A submitted a provisional list of suitable officers to beearmarked to take over the Regional Offices in the event of war,This liatwas agreed subject to one or two modifi cations, and D.E./A. will write to theindividuals concerned asking if they would hold themselves in readiness to takeover the posts.8th February.D.D.M.T. telephoned to say that Gerald Ternpler had been receivingthreatening letters to the effect that if he took up his appointment inlalaya his children here would be in jeopardy. The letters apparentlycansi from Valton-on-Thamnes and the matter has been reported to the Police.IN ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDTHIS IS A COPYDEPARTMENT UNDERACT 19583(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS SECTION28.Johnstone vondered if he could help the Police in any vayI said I doubted whether we could, that there were peophe who made ahabit of this kind of think - they were generally mentally unbalancedbut as a rule did not really campy out their threat. The Policegenerally had information about them, although they often had difficultyin getting a conviction. I did not think that a search of our recordsfor Communists in Walton-on-Thames would really make a contribution, sinceit was extremely doubtful to me mind whether there was any politicalmotive behind a case of this sort.Allan rang up about to Post Office officials who had beentelephoning to each other between London and Manchester and speaking ina derogatory way about the King. The lines had apparently got crossedand their conversation broadcast on Manchester radio diffusion. TheDaily Worker, of course, had drawn attention to this incident, althoughit evidently thought it politic not to state precisely what was said.Allan said they had got hold of the Post Office official in London andwere questioning him about the identity of his contact at the other end.9th February.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958hne20001lth February.Burt telephoned to ask me whether 3 would see 8who was an Australian officer working under Colonel Spry.wished to have photographs or facsimiles of visas and exit stampsfrom Iron Curtain countries which were normally put on passports. Itis apparently Colonel Spry' idea that these should be circulated to hisport officers.29.turned up and wan seen by Mancoam and mytselp.n tho interim Man.colm had nacertained that somebody hia compiled abook of these stamps and that ponibly more upto-date ores could bebtained from the passport office or other sources.. They have undertakenllethave these in due course.hag been in Germany and Austria for the last few yearsscreening D.Pa going to Australlia. This had brought him into contact withthedefeotorproblem.HeseemedapleasantandsensiblepersonandshouldI think, be an asset to A.6.1.0. Whole in Germany and Auatria he has hadvery close contact with the American C.I.C., for whom he has a high regard.Derby cane to aee me to ask my permission to show certain intercepteonThere is an individual here signing hinisel'N.N.'; who is in cormunication withand evidently has an interestin running an agent in Leningrad. This seeros to link up with a storyDunderdale toldrm when J last saw him in August.I have read a resue by Kit Steel of Forestal's diaries, which arebeing published in the United States. The work seers worth reading.Kit Steel draws attention to the following points:-i) the reactions of the Americans to having worldresponsbilities handed to them by us were initiallyones of extreme rritation and of misunderetandingor lack of appreciation of our basic economic weakness.This was veny apparent at the time of our withdrawal from Greece.Gradually, however, Forestall became more and more aware of the part whichAmerica would have to play in future. ln 1917 he was showing increasingconcern at the way the Truman administration was allowing domesiticpoliticall considerations go come before what he considered as the interestsof national security. The Palestine situation was a glaring example.Forestal feered that the United States would lost the riendship, not onlyof the Arabs but of the whole Moslem world with its LOOM pcople. He said:"I would be derellict in my duty if I did not point out what I thought verethe consequences of any particular policy which would endanger the securityof this country. I said that I was merely directing my efforts to lift thequestion out of politics; that is to have the two parties agree they wouldnot cornpete for votes on this issue. I said I was forced to repeat.to Franklin D. Roosevelt Jnr. what I had Said to MoGrath in response to thelatters observation that our fadlure to Eo along with the Zionists mightloge the States of New York, Pennsylvaniia and Callifornia, but I thought i.twas about time that somebody should pay some consideration to whether wemight not lost the United States".After two appeals to Marshall, on 12th and 18th February, 1948, to fanda non-partisan policy, Forestal abandoned his own effort to that end, butnotbefore he had become the target for the bitterest griticiam of his career,He was fallen upon by dournallists and commentators, such as Halter Winchelland Drew Peanson, who probably contributed considerably to the acuteOysecution complex which led to Forestal'E ultimate suicide.Forestal records that on a visit to Cenerall MacArthur on 28th February,1945, the latter regarded as essentiall the committments of the Russians toan aotive and vigorous campaign against the Japanese in Manchukuo, on Blich50vproportions ag to pin down a very lante pant of the Japanese Army, 8Dthat the Amnericane could invade Japan Ltseif. There was, of course, wideagreement on the mi1tary importance o getting the Soviet Union into thewar against Japan at the time of the signing of the Yallta agreementForestal'i opinion of MacArthur was that he had a high degree ofprofessional ability mortgaged, however, to his sensitivity and vanity.An interesting entry on the 13th September, 1948, during the Berlincrisis, reveals President ruman as informing Forestal that he prayed thathe would never have to male la decision to use the atomic bomb, but that if itbecame necessary nobody need have misgivings but that he would do 80. Atameeting with a group of newspaper publishers and editors on the following dayunanimous agreement is recorded that in the event of war the American peoplewould not only have no ouestibn as to the propriety of the use of the bomb,but that in fact expect it to be used.At a Government meeting on the 16th March, 1945, Roosevel't indicatedconsiderable difficulty with British relations and, in a semi-jocularmanner of speaking, stated that the British were perfeetly willing for theUni'ted States to have a war with Rusaa in time, and that in his opinionto folllov the British prograrime would be to proceed to that end.Although Forestal t ought Englland would inevitably go Socialistin the post-war elections, he did not seem to be unduly alarmed. Apartfrom apparently showing the distinction between Sociallism and Communism,he expressed the view that either Russia or the United States could becomeCommunisticlbecause both of us have the raw materials, popullatio andproduction necessary to the creation of a Socialist State', but Englanddid not have these things and that such a nation could only becomeOommunistic if we, the United States, underwrote the transaction.THISISACOPY THIS A COPY12th February.ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDI gave a lecture to the Police course to-day.IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 19582oo9Dick returned to-day after a successful visit to the U.S.A. andCanada. He had long talks with the F.B.I. but. seems to have reached thesame conclusions as other visitors, namely that although they have greatadvantages in manpower, they are not so well organized to produce goodresult as we are. He gave an example of a request by Hoover for a reportor1 the Edith COPLAN case to be on his desk by 9 a.m. It tool no less than30operators, working all night, to do the job. Arthur Martin could probablyhave produced a similar report in a couple of hours: Equally, on B. casesthe Americans are far less welll-informed about activities of the C.P. in theJ.S.A. than we are abont British Communists. their recorda are SO diffuseand their organisation So sectionallised, that d.t is difficult to producethe officers they want.Winston'e visit seems to have been a great success. The Ambassadorremarked to Dick that it vias astonishing how opposition melted in front orthair on matters which he, the Ambassador, had been plugeing away at for months31.Roger Hollis has spoken to the D.G. aboit "Survey' and a letterhas been drafted in suitable terms for Bridges, with a copy to GeneralMaclean.-13th February.Mallcolm tells me that in the case of LINKIEWICZ, about which IItook 80 much trouble ith Newsam, it has now been discovered that thereis no brother in Scotland at the hotel where he is said to reside, noranywhere else. as far as we can ascertain 9 from which it should follow thathere is no LINKIEWICZ in Poland. It may be. of course, that S.l.s. havegot the name wrong. It is slightly irritating that this was not dis-covered before.There is a rather interesting revival of the NOULLENS case. TheFrench police found a man gagged and bound in Paris, who said that hehad been working for the Russians and that a man who used the name ofHAMADAN was travelling to America as a Sovdet agent on a certain ship.A deseription was given indicating that this man had three gold teethand a slight sguint in one eye. He was travelling on a Britishpaasport.The F.B.I. checked up at New York and discovered a man calledEDEL who answered to the descrbtion, and on looking at his photographthey detected a strong likeness to NOULLENS @ RUEGG, the Soviet agentwho in the thirties had run the Far Eastern Bureau for the Cominternin Shanghai. Both RUEGG and his wife had been arrested by the Chinese,-but are believed to have been rellesed in 1934, since when nothng furtherhad been heand about them.Records show that. RUEGG'E allias at that time was HAMADAN. EDELhas apparently been living here for some time and runs a small business.The whole story sounds too good to be true.-THis IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE RUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958une32.lth Februarv.were brought to see meby Hill. I thanked them both for the assistance they had given us inreporting on the large quantities of steel tubing which were going to WestAfrica about a year or eighteen months ago, and I exxplained to them thedangers of this traffic. They have recently reported an order which cameto them through a firm in Bristol, for steel tubing for Ireland. Un-fortunately they turned the order dovn. butthinks that he may beable to discover the name of the purchaser.had known by brother David, who had given him advice onsecurity matters - during the war. He wanted to know whether there wasanyone here with whom he shoulld make contact. I told him that we vereonly really concerned with classified contracts., but that if at any timethey were given a secret contract ve should be placing someone in touchwith him. Incidentally, he fishes the Llanover water!Iwent to see Newsam. He gave me particulars of four individualswho were being considered for a Rusaian professorship at NottinghamUniversity. He was anxious that we should let him know if any of themwere undesirable. He did not with for anything to be put in writing.The L.U. has shovn one of them,to be a CommuhistThisman was educated at St. Paul's School and Balliol College, Oxford.He hasbeen lecturer in Rusnian at the School of Slavonic and East European FellovStudies in London since 1943. He was also, from 1919 - 1950 Seniorof the Russian Institute at Collumbia UniversityTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAIN-IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958AAAE200035.15th February.I had a long talk on the telephone viith Howard of the Home Office.He wanted to know whether we were prepared to let the Irish, wi.th whomconversations were to be opened in Dublin next week, have our G. Circullars.I said that T should have to look into this and let him know.He then gave me a brief ou'tline of the proposalls for dealing withaliens coming from Eire. He said that Article I of the Aliens Onderwould have to be amended and pecial provision made for the registrationof alliens coming to this country from Eire. Persons with valid national.passports who did not need a visa, and persons who did need a visa and havene,vill be told to register within three months and not to take upemployment without reference to the Ministry of Labour. Those who shouldhave a visa but have not got one, and those who are using travel documentsare to be told to register with the Police forthwith. In order to dealwith aliens who have crossed the bonder from South to Northern Ireland,n order will have to be given that thone whose last abode was in theRepublic of Eire should register with the Police forthwith. No provisionhas SO far been made for resident aliens in Northern Ireland.I aaked Howard to keep me informed about any measures proposed tomitigate the effect of taking off Immigration controls at the WesternPorts, as we should like to comment on them. Clearly Howard is verydubioue about the whole scheme and was never really in favour of it.Personally, I think it extremely doubtful whether an the end we shall nothave bad security for the same price that we paid for good security.What seems to be happening is that the Home Office are placing theresponsibility upon other people and that an extra burden will fall uponthe Police.Howard then talked to me about the mechanisation of the CentralRegister of Aliens. He said that the Home Office had given the matterconsiderablle thought and that he thought it might be usefull if Weilerattended our meeting. I said I thought it might be better for us toget the Intelligence requirements clear first, but that I should verymuch like to have a talk with Weiler, and allso to have a list of the HomeOffice requirements in the event of the Index being mechanised. I shouldthen be able to see hoN far they overlap with Intelligence requirements.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 19583l6.I asked John Marriott and Robertson about G. Oineulars. They didnot think that they should be given to the Irish.I talked to the Police course sho seemed to be more than usuallyenthusiastic about the counse and the way in which they had been receivedhere.18th February.I saw Jones, Lodge and Weiler from the Home office Allens Branch,on the question of the mechanisation of Post Report and the Central AlienRegister. Only two facts of major importance emerged. Firstly, itwas clear that any sorting operation, involving 200,000 cards, would bea very considerable one: it would not be possible to sont more than about15,000 an hour and then, of course, there would be further sorting of alimited category and, above all, the replacement of the cards. Itseemed, therefore, deairable, if possible, to limit the number of cardsto be sorted: this could either be done by eliminating high age groupsand dull-witted agriculturists and S0 on, or by arranging the cards incuts, such as nationnlity cuts. Secondly, for their own purposes, theHome Office woulld need something like 65 punches out of 68 for eachcard. Thier Index woulld have to be alphabetical and could not be sub-divided in cuts on a nationality basis. It seemed, therefore, that veshould have to make our own cards, which should be restrifted to purelyIntelligence uses.The Home ffice apparently have a statistical branch which worksa Power-Samas machine. This machine gives the answers to many Parliamentaryquestions on crime and other problems like rosd accidents, etc. It couldbe used for sorting out cands provided our demands were not excessive.Ifwe made our own Index cards there might Just be a possibility that the HomeOffiee vould be prepared to keep they up to date. but it is doubtful whetherthey Would do so without either funds or personnel. It also seems doubtfulwhether the Home Office will ultimately be prepared to merhanise theirown Alliens Register for their ovin purposes the angumnent will be that theyhave doen without this for SO many years that there is no reason, particullarlin times like these, for them to change the system, They are not, however,uninterested in our efforts and the representative of the statistical branchwould be quite interested to take on the job.I told them that we were holding a meeting of interested departmentsin order to get clear in our minds the items which vle wanted togetcategorised; we should then consider how this could be done as economicallas possible.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUWVIENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSAOT 195835.22nd Februay.I saw Roger to-day on my retun, having been away for a few days.He had, in my absence, taken the meeting on the nechanisation of PostReport. The meeting had come to the conclusion that the operationshould be confined largelly to Poet Report and, having got some idea of theIntelligence requirements, these were given to the G.C.H.0. Hoblerithexpert to work out the most effective and economical way of handling theproposition. He is to submit a report.T heand from Dick that a decision had been reached to place usunder the Home Office. It seeme likely that Winston on his return fromthe U.S., where security IOE tters were obviously touched on, asked to seethe Brook Report. He wag probably told that these recommendations hadbeen put into effect, except in the case of Ministerial responsibility.He had simply said "This Lsshould lie with the Home Secretary - get on withith.I talked to the D.C. and it was agreed that Serpell should put upa draft after consultation with Dick, Holilis, and myself. This draftshould show, very broadly, what the functions and ramifications of theSecurity Service are. This could then be left with the Home Secretaryto study. The D.G. himself, however, would like a short bried indicatilspecial points to which he should draw attention.25th February.had a meeting with Hn and Disk about the case of Dr. Paul WEST,anaturalised-Britis journalist of German origin, who had beencommunicating information to a Dr. PLATOW in Germany about the Anglo-GermanDebts Conference in London.FLATOW runs a kana news agency, when nas evaaenty peencollecting information in German Governmen't circles by bribing officials.His offices have been raided and the Germans are no wanting US tointerrogate Dr. WEST. His find this difficult, since WEST is ajournalist and no charge of espionage under Section T could really bepreferred against him. An interrogation, therefore, would lead to actionunder Section 2, which has in the past got DS into trouble where journalistare concerned. We cannot use the O.S.A. to interrogate a journalistin onder to obtain the sources of hie information, unless there is strongpresuntive evidence that he is a spy. We do not wish to point out thisweakness to the Germans; it has therefore been suggested that ve shouldsend an interim reply to Int. Div. and meanwhile getto try andascertain how the leakage occurred. II am inclined to think that WESTgot it from the German Consilate here.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958Neweam Bad that he had always thought that this was the right iden,but that of course the Home Office whula not the any responedbility foruractivities.I said I found it difficult to see how they could avoid doing 8D,since if the Department was attacked someboay woulld have to defend it inthe House of Commnons.Newsam then went on to complain about the publicity which M.I.5 had.I aid tha nobody deprecated it more than we did. He thought that we shouldoperate entirely as a Secret Service department and that our affairs should notbe allowed to become the subject of discussion in the House of Commons. Hethen asked me to tell the D.G. that he would be coming over to see us.I was more than ever convinced that Nevsam has little idea of what thework and ramifica tions of this department are. I think he imagines it as alittle research organisation which can provide appreciation for the HomeSecretary on subversive movements in this country and can operate in aid ofthe Police.27th February.28th Februany.Luke of the Colonial Office telephoned to say that he was preposingraise the question of a Director of Intelligence for Mallaya at the J.I.C.had had a telegram from Gerald Teopler regretting that he could not getDick and turning down Keller and Courtenay Young. Personally, T did notknow tha't either of the two latter had been put forward as possible for theJob. I said that; I had no objection, and at the J.I.C. meeting I made itclearthatinourviewallltheblue-printingforanIntelligenceorganisationand for the procurement and collation of the project had been laid downmore than once. The troublle was that the working tools, in the shape of aPolice organisatior containing the requisite elements of the population wasnot in existence: it was rather like expeoting the Siamese Police to takeover from the City Police and hoping to get any co-operation out of thepublic. The cart, therefore, waa to some extent before the horse. In myview, manalike Dick White, who is carrying an extremely important job inthin country, would be wasting his talents, and we should merely be robbingPeter to pay Paull. Nevertheless, it was clearly necessary to have someoneto take advantage of every opening. He woud have to cobine firmness withtact, Since there were obvious differences between the representativesof the Malayar, Palestinian and Indian Police services. The J.I.c. weneasked to foryand names. Meanwhile, Gerald Temnpller, according to his tele-gram, had approached Morton in order tn make another bid for his services.Luke hns in mind making an approach to 'of for the services ofI sid I did no't think that he would be a bad choice.I spoke to Hilken after the meeting about the rumour that AMOS,an American who runs 8 neyis sheet, publishing a story that a member ofountbatten's staff was a Communist and that Mountbatten himself would haveTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 195838.a Left Wing influence in Palace circle. Hilken said that he had spoken toMountbatten. The latter was incensed, although he realised that suggestionsabout his influence on the Queen were to be expected. He wae, hovever,taking particular care to avoid giving any sort of credence to thesesuggeations. He ran through the names of people on his staff, of whichHilien unfortunately did not make a note; he regarded them as all abovereproach and could think of no basis for AMOS" story.Hilken had informed the First Sea Lord about the whole Incident,and he, the First Sea Lord, woulld give a warning to Sir Alan Lascelles;there was therefore nothing to be done.Drew appeared before the J.I.0. on 28.2 52 to give some accountof the work of the Forward Planning Section, of which he is Director.1.Introduction.He began by explaining that ne had been charged viith this workabout eighteen months ago by the Chiefs of Staff, and co-ordinated hisactivities very closely with those of the Director of Plans. Heexplained how the work of deception, which had been praotised with suchsignal success during the war against the Germans, presented an entirelydifferent problem in a peacetime situation against the Russians.In considering the nature of the information in which we wantedthe Russians to believe, he had at first found himself in some difficultyowing to the indefinite nature of our own plans. But this situationwas gradually becoming clearer and it was now the policy when formulatingplans either in Europe, the Middle East or Far East to consider at the sametime a uitable coven plan. One had been formulated in the Far East,matters were lese advanced in the Middle East; and only a beginning hadmade in S.H.A.P.E.2.Channels.Meanwhile, F.P.S. had been considering suitable channels for thetransmisad on of deception to the enery.a) There were, of course, the classical ones, namely, doublle agents,but the old difficulty remained of being quite sure that these channels werereally sound. If they were not, any attempt to use them for deceptionpurposes might produce precisely the reverse effect of what was intended.For these channels he looked largely to M.I.5 and M.I.6, but for obviousreasons they were not and could not be an plentiful or effective as theywere in the case of Germany during the war.b) It had therefore been necessary to consider other methods ofmaking contact vith the enemy, and as a first step he had launched variousprojects with a view to seeing whether they produced any sort of reactioninenemy quarters. In this connection he mentioned, without giving anydetails, a project in Gibraltar, one in Singapore, information put throughM.I.6 agents with C.P. connections, the placing of remours throughindustrialists in the Middle East, the starting of a chain of corresponderto Egypt on the assumption that the letters would be opened by theEgyptian authorities, and the sending of letters to the Far East with theobject of their falling into Russian hands. At home he haa found aTHIS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUIVENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUDLIC RECORDSACT 195839.8 Government official Who her established soms peronad relationswith a member of the Russlan Mission in this gountary.c) He had alLSD expllored Press channels. Through a newspaper featureagency in Switzenland, which seils artiolles to nemepapens in other countries,he had been able to plant a certain amount of naval information. As ather special project he had started a News Letter, ont the basis ofKnowledge that the Russians were considerably intrigued by informetionput out in this form. He had considered the Economist News Letter, whichhe knew to be the subject of interested study by the Soviet Embassy as anorgan which they thought represented Government opinion. Unfortunately,however, this paper dealt more with opinions than wi.th facts and was not,therefore, suitable to his purposes even if he could have persuaded themanagementtoallowhimt.omakeuseofit.Hehadthereforedecidedtosetup his own News Letter, known as "Survey" and had done this by arrangementwith the three Vice-Chiefs. of Staff and other Departments, the idea beingthat it should cireulate freely overseas and in the United States. Havinggained the confidence of his readers in the accuracy and independent natureof this paper, he thought that it might at the appropriate moment be able tocarry major deception policy.At this point he said that he wished to tender a complete and abjectapology to the Direotor Generall of the Security Service for Wha't badappeared in the last issue of "Survey". The information was Dut out in hisabsenceabroad find he had taken special steps to see that nothing of the kindever occurred again.3.Present Plans.His present plans wene:a) To build up a false onder of battle. This would apply almostntirely to the Army, and to some extent to the Air Force. Deception withregard to the Navy vas, for obvious reasons, too dfficult.b) To put over a cover pllan for our wartime mobilisation plans.c) To implement the Far Eastern cover plan.d)To implement the Middle Eastern cover plan when it had beenformullated.e) To formulate in conjunction with the 3rd U.S. Air Force, asuitable cover plan for submission and approval to the Air Minietey whichwould be designed to diminish the threat to U.8. Air Force bases.f) To assist in formulating a cover plan for S.H.A.P.E. and to help,in conjunction with F.P.8. opposite numbers in the United States, in puttingit across.LeDrew then spoke about his l1aison with the United States and with theDomindons.Liaison.He haa close relations with what is known as the Orange Team in theUnited Stotes, although neither he nor his colleagues felt that thatrganisation waf sufficiently linked with the Planning Staff to be reallyeffective.THIS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUIVENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 195840.The Austhalians, whom he had juat visited, were anxious to set upa section eanivalent to his own ard woulld be prepared to eo-operate,The Cunadians, whom he had not yet approached, he thought would alsobe receptive to the idea.In general he hoped that if his various projects developedBatisfactoriny there should be some foundation on which to build if war brokeout, and some chance in the meantime of misleading the enemy as regards ourintentions and capabilities.5.Owing to the presence of Colonel Betts throughout this discussion, itwas not possible for me to press Drew for additional information.I.therefore confined my remarks to three points;a) On behalf of the D.G. I accepted his apology for the publicationin the last issue of "Survey",b) I said that such channels as might he provided by the SecurityService were established primarily for counter-espionage purposes, theobject being to ascertain a8 much as possible about the enemy' techniqueand contacts in this country, and that ve must therefore remain the judgesofwhetheranyparticularinformationwassuitableforpassingthroughanyparticular agent. Subject to these considerations, We were doing alll wecoulld to assist.Drew said that he fully accepted this proviso.c) I thought, too, it was desirable that we should be kept as fullyinformed as possible of the various projects which Drew had in hand, sindefailure in this respect might cause Lis embarrassment or lead us to donduotenquiries which would endanger the security of the work Drew himself wasdoing.This point was allso accepted by Drew.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECOROSACT 1958There vas a general discussion on existing officer vacancien.Thewere reported as follows:41.C. Division: 011 - an officer to assist Mn. Gainsford.C.2. a replacement for the vacancy causedby Or. Johnstone.B. Division: in addition to the replacement for Mr. Hackney,two officers to replace Mr. Panton andMr. Bulllard.S.Division: one officer for Iraq, one for S.I.F.E. andthe possibility of officers for Malta andAden.It was agreed that a further batch of candidates should be seen assoon as possible.There was a general discussion on the number of Senior Officer postswhich each Director considered necessary in his Division, but furtherparticulars of these will be circulated.T told the D.G. about a further approach to Morton by Gerald Templerfor the fofmer's services. I allso gave him the gist of Drew's talll andapology at the J.T.0. and the developments in the Mountbatten affair.29th February.Dick, Roger and I considered a arart memorandum for the D.G. to leavewith the Home Secretary, describing to him the main features of our office.We decided to sorap the other memorandum, with a more detailed descriptionof the duties of each section, and to give the D.G. just a sheet with certaintatistics, such as the number of staff employed at. home and overseas, locationof foreign stations, etc.T showed the draft to the D.O.s who agreed that this was what he wanted.Luke telephoned to me to say that Gerald Templer had seen MORTON andthat the latter had accepted the post of Intelligence adviser.Thismayina way be a good thing, 6ince MORTON certainly knows what is wanted. On theother hand, it will be Bti1l more difficult to fit him into this office atthe end of another two to four years. Moreover, I foresee certaindifficulties for Courtenay Young when he takes over S.I.F.E. MORTON will beinastronger position to bring pressure to bear on S.I.F.E. in various waysand there may in the end be a demand for more of S.I.F.E's personnel to assistthe Police in collecting Intelligence.3rd March.The D.G. told uIs at his meeting to-day about his interview with thetome Secretary and the instructions which he, the Home Secretary hadleceived from the Prime Minister to take responsibility for the SecurityService.Maxwell Fife began by saying that he regarded himself as "deputisingforthe Prime Ministertf. The D.G. then went on to tell him that while of42.course heaccepted the present position without demur, he would liketo let the Home Secretary know what his previous objections had beenwhen the proposal wag first mooted in the Brook report. Firstly,as this department wa's involved in matters of defence with almostevery department of the Government, it would make our work extremelydifficult, if not impossible, if we vere in any sense departmentalisedwithin the Home Office.Maxxwell Fyfe gave an aasurance that the words in the Brook report,namely, that the transfertwould not affect the direct relation nemaintained between the Security Service and many other departments.Nor would it mean that the Security Service would in any way becomea part of the Home Office".l were wholly acceptable to himself.The D.G. then mentioned certain matters which he thought should befor the Prime Minister only, to which the Home Secretary replied that herecognised the need for the D.G. still to have aocess to the P.M. ondelicate issues. Thiraly, he had objected on the ground that toeplacethe Security Service under the Home Office might give rise to thecriticism that it was a Gestapo.The D.G then referred to the necessity for us to have access tothe P.U.S! of any Government department in whose affairs we foundourselves concerned. The Home Secretary felt that our affairs shouldnot go through P.U.S. at the Home Office except where he was speciallyconcerned, Later in the interview he called in Newsam and informed himthat this would be the position and that he himself was merely"deputising for the Prime Minister. The D.G. will therefore havedirect access to the Home ecretary at any time he Wishes. He madevery clear that the Security Service would in no sense become a pantof the Home office.Newsam raised the question of the Home Secretary's Parliamentaryresponsibilities. Maxwelll Fyfe, rather to Newsam's surprise, said thathe woulld of course take full responsi sponsibility if questions were askedabout the Security Service as a whole, but on questione of detailel hewoulld in general reply that the answer "was not in the public interestNewsam accepted the decision with a perfeatly good grace and was obviouslyready to help as and when the occasion arose.Lth March.I saw Newsam to brief him on Ritter. von Lex, whoewas calling andmight possibly wish to disousa security matters.Newsam evidently did not intend to become involved in this; hewould merely talk about home administration.There seems to be a s.trong case against John CAIRNCROSS, now inthe Treasury and was at one time in Seetion V.A piece of paper in his handwriting, giving notes on interviewin 1939 with various officials in the Foreign Office and otherdepartments, was found among documents bellinging to BURGESS. AsCAIRNCROSS is of the same Cambridge vintage as BURGESS and MACLEANand knew them both, it looks very much as if he was at one time anagent of BURGESS.13.He w111 be interrogated on the notes and asked for an explanation,The D.D.M.I. telephoned to ask me who MORTON wase presumably the D.M.I.ished to know. I gave him a pen picture and said that I thought Geraldwas very lucky to get him.T talked to Martin about the disposal of B.Js, since I understandthat if they are not speeially marked they are destroyed at the end ofthe year. It seemed to me that certain categories, like Czech ISOS,ought to be retained indefinitely whether they concerned this country ornot.Martin explained that it really depended on the carding it was nouse keeping documents which were available in G.C.H.Q. unless they werecarded.5th March.Thistle told me that, a propos of the Mountbatten incident, T.C.had shown that Mountbatten and his entourage were not only in touch withPeter MURPHY but also with PAVITT, a Known Communist. We are lookinginto these two.I talked to Walter Bell about his visit to Aden and Somaliland. Heseemed to think there was a marginal case for having an officer in Aden,but no more. Generally, he felt that the S.L.O. - he was spealingparticularly about Nairobi - had become a part of the local set-upand that his services were ofavalue to the local authorities. IF he weremoved they would certainly feel the draught.6th March.THIS IS ACOPYORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958MneAT,I lunched with Anthony (RLUNT) to-day. He told me first about theblackmailer, JENKINS, who haa rung up the BASSETTS. Anthony wonderedwhether he had got certain documents from the flat in Bond Street throughJackie HETITT. It appears that when the flat was searched by Ronnie Reedand someone else, t! ey cnncentrated solely on BURGESS' papers. A suiteaseo1lettens belonging to HEWITT was not touched. Anthony says that Lateron HEWITT remarked that there was not only his own correspondence but aconsiderable amount belonging to BURGESS in the case. HEVITT had disclosedthis later but said that he had burned them alll, Whether he took them withhim and gave the diary to JENKINS is a possibility.Anthony then told me that, quite fortuitously, 8 friend of his hadobtained the name of the individual who alleged some time ago tha t hehad actually seen BURGESS and MACLEAN in some cafe in the south of France.The individual's name was BARRINGTON-SMITH, who did kno BURGESS and MACLEANbut, I gather, not veny vell. Whether he was merely telling this storyfor effect is uncertain.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958seAt the staff meeting to-day ve had a long discussion about S..F.E.Dick tas rather inclined to suggest that wc should thow our best S..F.E.bodiee into the police organisation in Malaya and So improve the flow ofIntelligence. At the moment there is little coming off the ground andvery little coming from sddacent foreign territory. It was therefore ratherdifficult to see why S.I.F.E. were not wasting their time.I said that this was all very fine, but that having improved the flowof Intelligence there Would then be nobody left in S.I.F.E. to receive itand corlate it, unless we were prepared to double our staif. However, theremay be something in the inaa.45.Note on D.D.0 interview with Herr Ritter von Exon 1733852.Herr Ritter von Lex called here at 3 pam. on March 7th,1952, and atayed wit th me until 4.30 D.l.1. 3I Buggeated to him that it might perhape ba useful ifat the outnet gave hlin a brief account of the structure andreeponeibilitie of our office and of the principles on whichwe worked.I then explained to him that we were nonmdepartmental,in the sonbe that we were not an integral part of any Miniatry.We Berved all Ministrdee and held ourselvea reaponnible to theparticular Minister concerned For anything that we did on hisbehalf. If we ware attacked in Parliament in a general way,it would probably be Tor the Home Secretary to reply, but thoremight be many DocaBions where n question would be answered byBomC other Minister whose department happened to be particularlyconcerned.We were not executive in the strict sense of the word.If notion under the anw wne required, 1t IT8E generally taltenthrough tho Police Force in whose aren the offence had beencommitted.Our role waB a purely defensive one. We did not concernoursellves with Political matters which did not were notlikely to constitute n brench of the lnm. our staff WABnon-political in the Sense that 11B epproach to any problemunder our Charter WEB n professionnl One and entirely objeetivein it nature. We had no rolatiohe with the Press. We didnot pana Dur information outside Government department and WNOhad the right to refuse inrormation even to a Minister if aquention of sources arone or if we did not conBidex the requeatEI valid one.I explained that such a Ouse would not normally ariae, butthat if it aid there obuld always be an appeal to the PrimeMinater.Von Lox Beemed interested to know that we were notconcerned with pure politica, either intornally DP externally.He here explained to me nome of hin dirficultien in the Inender,where politics were apt to play a considerable part.2. I went on to explain to him that Dir objective WIB purelydefeneive one; we wore ooncerned with the defence of the realmCrom enpionage and fror any subversive activities Df the Leftor the Right which threatened the overthrow Df the constitutionby violent mneana. In purguance of this objective we had twoimportant and banie tamlee te perform.(1) To collect, aneess and collate all availableinformation within our Charter and to Plan countermenaures.In order to get things in their proper porepective in the caseof 11 movement or organisation which hnd internationalramifioationn, it WALF necessary to study Buoh movement asthe Cormunist Party and the Russian ana Satellite intelligenceServices on an international sense. We, therefore, made lseof the machinery of Government whenever it could be of asniatancein onrrying out thin task.(i1) To navine and annint all Deportmenta on a1l matterof protective security, or, in other words, o11 all security/measures46.- 2 -mensurea designed to make an enemy's tank more airricullt andto force him into that lcind of evasive action which mightbring him to notice.I Btreened the importance to any organisntion Buch anoura of having oDntrol over both there funotiona, whiclwere complementary and basic to the maintanande of Goodsecure ty in any country.3. On the intelligence and inveatigation side, I explainedthat we had DLY own source which operated solely on Britishterritory aind that in addition to the noral methods ofenquiry, nuch ne the running of BEenth, we had certain powersof censorship without which it would not be possible torun an affeetive Service. Thee povera were of course,limited and nubjoet in each and to the Warrant Df theBeoretary of State, in whose office such powers hnd beeninherent Since the days of Cromwell.Von Jex was particularly interested in thia matterand explnined to mhe that only with the authority of theequivalent of the Attorney General and in very apecia2canea could he exercise auch power. Thero would thereforehave to be nome alteration in the basic law. T think CEconvinced hir that some measure of censorship want essential1f hin Government waB going to be properly informed onnecurity ienues.Apart from there Sources of our on, we obtainedinformation from other departments, and on 111 exchangebasin from ouP Allies, and inaily from the Police.In disouasing the running of agenta in this country,3E made it Clear that only ourselves and the Police wereconcerned. The Matter could not be denied this rightaince they retained responsibility for the maintenanceof law and onder. le did, however, mnintnin close relationswith the Police Dn this Bubjeot in order to prevent overlapping.th. At thia point I went into opnaiderable details about ourrelations with the Police.Ye had no authority over the Police, although certainsanetionn would be applied in oxtreme cases. In practice,however, thia WIIS neither necessary nor dealrable. Ourrelntione exiated on the banis or goodwill, and in our viewthis wan tho only basis on which sntisractory CO-operationcould be obtained. The Police had loenl Inpwledge which WEBnot available to any other depertent, and it wag essentialthat they should be nufficiently informed about matters ofinterest to DUP department to enable them to give EB the ldindof inforntion which we required. we had, therefore, talcenconniderabile trouble to build up natintactory relatione withall of the 156 independent Police Porcea in this country, ofwhich Scotland Yard was only one.We had urged the Police to establish in cach Force aSpecial Branch which concerned itself with Bubversive matter.In some Porceo this might consist only of one man. ve hadthen induced the Police to hold aro0 meotinga for SpecialBranch officera, to whom we gant lecturern Dn virioun aspecteof Dur world. A ropresentutivo ot our orrice attended 11Chief Conatables! meetings, and representativee from thevarious Forces visited our office and were given a week'a courseDf instruction.In thia manner we had improved both the quality and thequantity of the information va received. we wore convincedfram 011r experience that not only WRB it necessriry to Met thecO-operntion Df the Police officora actually concernea in/anecial Branch mattore4.- 3Special Branch matter, but to make are that theirChief Conatables and Buperintendents would give them thenecemnary Bupport and encouragementeNormally a polliceman was judged on the guocess ofhis court cases. In Special Branch work court caseswere comparatively few and far between. Unless,therefore, the higher officers were convinced of theimportance of Special Branch work, interest was inclined toflag and those who were omployed on Special Branch dutiesmight vell be ordered by their Superintendent to ignorethe Special Branch aide of the work in favour of criminalwork.These vere psychological factor which I wanconvinced existed in all Police Forces. I could not,therefore, Stress too strongly the importance of retainingthe cooperation and goodwill of the whole Police hierarchy.Giving orderB to Police chiefs to collaborate might lookall right on paper, but it was entirely worthlesa unleesthe goodwill of all ranks was obtained. I hoped Von Lexwould forgive mie for atressing this point, but it seemedto me BO basic to the procurement of good intelligencethat it could not be emphasised toD strongly. He WaB,Ithink, impressed by the importance of what I had to say onthis subjeote5. I then Btreased to Von Lex the importance of ouroffice as a focal point for all information bearing onespionage and subversive movement. It was only byobtaining as wide a picture as poanible that WO couldasseas the weak points in DUr information and set up thenecessary machinery to fill the gap. This meant a highlycentralised set of detailed records, against whichinformation received could be assessed and collated.6. I then discussed proteetive Security, which we believedto be inseparable front the function of acquiring andcollating information. While Dur organisation played aguiding role and gave aBBistance in a variety of ways, itwaB important that responsibility for proteotive securityshoulld be largely docentralised upon Ministries. It hadtherefore been laid down by the Prime Minister that theMinister of any department carried fun reaponsibility forhis own domestic security, and that where necessary heshould appoint a Security Officer and staff to carry outtheBe duties. Our role was to give aBBistance to alldepartments by advice and on the banis of DUr centralisedreoorda.Proteotive security was of two lcinda:(i) Mensures designed to bring a man up againstauthority. I here explained that the vina was the firstpoint where a man was brought up against authority whenhe made his application he had to give nome account ofhimself and the purpose of his visit. The next pointwaBwhen he arrived at the port OP the frontier and Wasinterrogated by the Immigration authorities. The thirdpoint was when he had to register with the Police.There were also other pointe where a man wan broughtup against authority, which were not necessarily designedfor Security purpose but which could be advantageouslymade uBe of. A consideration of the various account thata man might give of himself and his businese might showdiserepancieB which would 0aune UB to investigate hiBaotivitieB more olosaly./(ii)48.(11) The other basic form of protective securityconsisted of mueusures designed to keep a man away fromplaces where he might do harm This Was normallyachieved by guard, pase systems, eto. and by a processof aoreening on the bnaia of records and further enquiries.The first problem WaB for each Minlater to deeide whichpart of hin department really contained information vitalto the security of the State. UnleBs thin were done theproblem waB likely to become unmanageable. Having decidedwhere these vulnerable point existed, it was necessarymetaphoricallly Speaking, to put a ring round them and to seethat nD-one who was unrelilable coua obtain nocesa to them.The importance of thie function could not be overemphasised, singe there were only two fields in which aninvestigati on branch could detect a apy. One wag where heprocured the information and the other waB where he impartedit to some unauthorised person, If, therefore, he once gotinside the ring, enquiry in the proourement field was unlikelyto produce result. There remained only the field where heimpanted his infortation to some unauthorieed porson, and thishe might do only at extremely infrequent intervals.This concluded my talk and we then went on to conBiderthe application of our methods and principlea to preaent dayconditions in Western Germany.7.We had already disousned the importance of havingresponsibilities olcarly defined, but had Agreed that BuchCharter were of little value unlene full CDroperation fromall dopartmente could be obtained on the basis of goodwill.Difficult aa this mght be on aocount or the varying politicalsituations in the Laender, it WEB or paramount importance thatco-operation on those lines should be achieved. It waEessential that the Bfv should be the real focal point for allsecurity intelligence for Western Germany, and it Should havecomprehennive and accurate records on the basis of whichinformation could be checked and rellable apprecintionsaupplied to the Federal Government. It wan an importantfor the BrV to obtain the support and confidence of the Iaanderas 1t waB for the Laender to establish good relations withthe Police. It seemed to me that there were two ways inwhich the BrV might improve its relations with the Laender.(i) The BrV might establish in cach Land a liaiaonofficer, either in a separate office or in the Land office,not, at any ate at the outaet, with the idea of givingdireotionB to the Land, but purely for the purpose of mutualexchange of information such an officer would obviouslyhave to be very carefully selected aR much would depend uponhis personality. It might also be possible to have somereciprocal arrangement by which each Land appointed a linisonofficer with the BfV.(L) It would be necessary for the Laender to feelthat they were deriving benefit from such & l1aison. If,therefore, power Df consorship were vested BDlely in theBIV they would clearly have Something to seel which would notnormally be available to the Land offices.At the central recorda of the BrV improved in quantityand in quality, 80 the Laender would come to realise thebenefit of closer CO-operation.Both there idean seemed to appeal to Von Lex and itwas clearly hin intention to give them curerul thought/8,49.- 5 -8.In addition to the Police there mere other organisatinnacontrolling Frontiers, atc. which might with navantnee beharnenned in to garve the common purpose which the BfV hndin mind, and which Would be of particular value in settingup an efficient protective security machine.Von Lex seemed to think that this could be achievedwithout very great difficulty.9.In the matter of running agents, it wan agreed thatthin could not be denied either to the Police or to theLaender for three reusonB(1) They could not divest themselves of responsibilityfor the mnintenance of law and order in their own locality.(11) Nothing would prevent the ordinary citizen fromreporting breachea of security or Bubverive Betivities tothe 1ocan authorities.(111) It would normally be difficult, if not impoasible,to exercise control over an agent at long distance.At the same time, it was of paramount importance thatsual activities should be guided and controlled by Some centralauthority As confidence grew and the baic recorde of theBiV improved, Buch guidance and control would become mOPOacoeptable both ab between the BIV and the LfVa and the Laenderand the Police. Moreover, the information received at theBfV would be capable of proper RBBenament.8th March, 1952.50.At the D.G's meeting to-day we discussed the telegrams fromMorton,which seemed to conflict somewhat with Gerald Templer'sMorton's telegram showed that he had eserved his decision on whetheror not to accept the appointment until he had come home and discussedthe matter, whereas Gerala seemed to imply tha t Morton had agreed toaccept the appointment.The only thing that has been agreed, as far as we can see,is that,pending Morton's absence on leave, Leighton should carry thejob of D.L.s. D. L. S. Morton thinks that he should receive additiohal payand aske our advice. We feel that Morton should make his terms withthe Malayan Government and that Leighton should get 90, in Morton'sabsence.The D.G. is going to disouss this matter with Lloyd.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958Juuse51.lIth Manch.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958fire 200913th March.At the J.I.C. to-day there was a Iong discussion about Russianstrategy in the eventof war 1952-1955.The D.N.I. had recast the J.I.S. paper. One of the main pointdiscussed was whether the Russians would be first to use the atomic bombin Pearl Harbour fashion D.N.I and D.M.I. thought that the politicaldisadvantages to the Russians ir doine this voulld be SO great thatthey W ould wait for the Americans. The Air Ministry 9 on the other handthought that if their principal aim and object was to knock out basesfrom which our atomic attack could be delivered, they would be likelyto strike without warning.52.Personally T was rather inclined to doubt the N.Iscontention, since the Rusaians were quite capable by propaganda oftwisting events in such a manner as to persuade their superiors thatthe first blow had in fact been delivered by the Americans.In discussion it seemed that the point wan not really somaterdall as it had first appeared, since it seemed almost certain that-the Americans would use the atomic bomb on the first signs of seriousRussian agresaion, and that of counse if they did the Russians wouldretaliate immediately. Equally, it seemed that, discomcerting as itwould be both for us and the Americans to get an atomic bomb withoutwarning, it was unlikely tha't any such action woulld have a decisiveresult. It would merely lead to the Americans hitting back in fullmeasureeAt the Appointments Board meeting to-day it was agreed to disposeof a number of direet telephone lines. as recommended by D.E./A., subjectto the retention of the Foreign Office, Scotland Yard, War Office andColonel Allan, G.P.0. Further investigation would be made into thepossibility of giving up one line to the Aliens Registration Office,High Holborn and also the ine to Post office Engineers.The Board agreed to appoint a Working Party to exxamine theclassification 5 distribution and control of Secret Documents, D.C.would consider whether Mr. Mitchell could undertake the Chairmanshipof the Working Party.D.E./A. indicated that our Application Forms for staff covereda number of the questions asked on the new Government SecurityQuestionnaire. The Board agreed that it was undesirable to use theGovernment form and that we should prepare a supplementary one embracingthe questions not ineluded in our own. Ve should require all membersof the staff to complete this form, as welll as new applicants, but weshould not approach attached personnel.D.B. mentioned that he was nxious to start a special vettingsection under Mr. Clayton. This was agreed in principle; details te bediscussed between D.B. and D.E./A.D.E./A reported that Mr Findlater was no longer available forthe special job with C.2 and it was agreed to review the files of recentcandidates to see if there were any suitable names amongst them.Staff Postings.i) D.O.S. indicated that he was prepared to leave the fillingof the vacaneies at Baghdad and Malta for the moment.ii) It was agreed to post Mr. Cuckney to the Canal zone.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECOROSACT 1958THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958An14th March.T had a long discussion with Simkins about Tomry HARRIS.Nicholas Eliott has reported bn a conversation that he has hadwith Eileen PHILBY.ShesaysthatwhileshehadbeensuspiciousaboutKim, she had come to the conclusion thar he was entirely innocent. Shehad, however, been worried by a question put to her by Tommy HARRIS, afterhe and Kim had been drinking fairly heavily. Eileen had retired to bedTornmy came upstairs and said there waa a question that. he wished to puther which she need not answer. He wanted to know whether she "had beenin this business with Guy", The following morning he more or lese apologisefor his behaviour and asked her to forget all about it. She then toldhimthat of course she had never been involved in anything of the kind. Sheknew that Tormy and his wife were at loggerheads, since when visiting thems short time ago they had found them in the middle of a now - Tommyisayingthat Hilda could go off if she liked and that he vas going to pacl up thewhole place in London and EO back to Mallorca. Eileen thought this rathersavoured of the BURGESS get-away.All this seems to me to be utter nonsense. It may well be that Tommyhas had a row with Hilda, but this has happened before and I should saywould likely to blow over quite easily. In fact they are both fairlyjealons of each other. Thia may wellll have caused Tommy to start drinkingagain, which of course is extremely bad for him. The important question tomy mind is what prompted Tommy to put the question to Eileen. I find itdifficult, if not almost impossible, to see that such a guestion in any wayreflects upon Tommy himself. It is, however, possible that in the courseof a long discussi.on with Kim, thectxTommy had become slightly apprehensiveabout Kim's part in the whole afair. It is even possible that Kim may havein fact sad something which in Tommy's view definitely implicated him.Alternatively, Tommy may have been treating the whole business as a caseand trying to eliminat one by one all those who could conceivably hatebetrayed to BURGESS that definite interest was being taken in MACLEAN.The troublle with his wife, caopled with an uncomfortable feeling aboutll best friend, may well have driven Toromy to a desire to clear out ofit and settle down to his painting in the surny tmosphere of Malllorca.Another point that Eileen made mas that Tormy had said that he hadbeen keeping on his business here for a cause.Sheinferredthathemeant54.the Communist cause, but obviously had no possible grounds on whichto place her assumption. The cause might well be that what he wasdoing was in the interests of the export trade, since he thas beenselling a number of pictures to the United States.I cannot help thinking that Eileen and S.I.S. are both clutchingtt a straw which they feell may exonerate Kim. Personally I should liketo have the whole thing out of Tommy, but I shall then be upon to theaccusation by S.I.S. that they having given ls an "important intelligencelead" I go down and have it out with the suspect.The question was then raised as to why Tommy had not discussed thematter with me, This I can well understand. He may feel uncomfortableabout Kim, his best friend; and unable to tell me about it as what hewould have to say would not in any sense amount to proof and would merelycast further suspicion on Kim, possibly unjustifiably.It is really shocking that such an impasse should have arisenand that such havoc could be created in peoples' private lives throughthe action of a little skunk like BURGESS.rang me up about the TAIPHONG network. He seemed toagree entirely with our view that it should be closed down; he was, howevermaking arrangements to consult the French.I had a further discussion about Tommy HARRIS with Dick and.nthony Simkins. Dick had been wondering whether he could talk to Kimn the lines that his case was bound to be solved sooner or later, and tha.whileit might be solved now on the basis of a Gentlemens' Agreement, thiscould not be done if proof were later established of Kim's guilt. Hemight, therefore, be wise to reconsider his position and talk to us morefrankly about his past,This is, of course a possibility, but I doubt whether it would work.We also discussed whether I could make any approach to Tommy. I said thatit would be quite natural for me to ring him up, and in fact unnatural notto do so since I was aware of the fact that he had been in London for thelast five weeks. Dick saw no harm in t is but did not think I coulddiscuss Kim unlless Tommy opened the baIl. There was, in additian,trattitude that S.I.S. hnve arorterTamthinkingefhaving2helyr"o'.17th March.At his meeting to-day the D.G. again raised the question of thepostings of Senior officers. He was worried about Senior Officersreturning from abroad who had tD serve under section officers, ant Ithink particularly he had in mind the case ofwho findsthat he has not got enough to do and wants to move. We had, of course,wanted to send him out to S.I.M.E., but at that time the D.G. did not feelhat he could spare him and I gather that he feels thatcould beore usefully employed at home.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958fsAe70oaI said that we were still reviewing the position but thatwe hadmany things to sort out which were by no means easy. I promised him thatwe would have another look into the whole question.The Home Secretary, Maxwell-Fyfe, same over for a cocltail party whiuwe gave for him. He was accompanied by Newsam and his Private Secretary.He SEW the Registry and the SixthFloor and was apparently much impressed.T had a long conversation with him and I think he enjoyed his visit.18th March.T gave my usual lecture to the Police. One of the things that isworrying them more than anything rellates to requests which they receivefrom factories, including Royal Ordnance factories, to vet their personnel.I explained that such vetting as we did had to be restricted to placeswhere really secret information existed. This did not apply in the caseof 2.0. factories, but there was, on the other hand, a danger of sabotage.In this matter we could only rely upon the Ordnance factory Inspectors. Onthe other hand, we were all in favour of any assistance from the Police thatthey could give within their discretion to 2.0. factories or other importantfactories.I gathered that there was to be a meeting between the Police and theHome Office, when some sort of policy in these matters may emerge. I urgedthe Police Officers to raise this matter in more detail with Graham Mitchel?The D.G. gave a luncheon party at the Connaught Hotel for Mr. GUNDERSEMthe Norwegian Minister of Justice, and Mr.who is responsible withinthe Norwegian Police for counter-espionage and counter-subversion. BothGUNDERSEN andhad had talks with Dick White and Hollis, andisto see B.2. They both made an extremely favourable impression and there isno doubt that they have had interesting experiences in dealing with theRussians.Theyseemveryconsciousofthepos sibilitythatintheeventofwar one of the first acts of the Russians will be to establish submarinebases in Norway.McnOl.The Mountbatten story has broken in Amos's Digest, although we do notknow yet how far the matter has been taken up by other organs of the Press.20th March.I lunched withHe was very anxious to know about the agitationgoing on in the Daily Worked, Which published a facsimile of a shoulder-strap "U.S.8.R.", alleged to indicate that we were forming an Army 01Russians in this country for utae i.n a future war.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 19581o0956.The War Office and the Ministry of Supply had refused to comment,IE said that while it seemed to me there must be something behind thenyiy the interpretation placed upon it by the Daily Worker could notpossibly have any foundation, but I would try and get him the answersince his Ambassador had expressed interest and was rather chidingthat with alll his contaots he was unable to find out a simple little matterlike that!At the Appointments Board meeting to-day we considered a cablereceived from H/S.I.M.E., which dealt mainly with his desire to retain theBeirut post. It was considered that no decision on this matter could bereached until D.0.S. was present.D.E/A reported that O.C. Bucks had offered us the services ofIt was agreed that we should proceed with hisreferences and ultimately Board him.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE RUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958JuneLeo57.D.B. reported that he had been considering the filling of thevacanoy treated by the death of Mr. HAOKNEY, and he felt that there wouldbe much advantage in appointing an officer with B. Division experience,preferablyfromB.2..tothepost-atanyrateforalimitedperiod.This was agreed in principle and D.B. said he would go into the matterwith Mr. Storrier.2lst March.Isaw Newsam. He seemed pleased with his visit here and theHome Secretary had also enjoyed it. The latter vas apparentlyimpressed by his tallks with the Directors and has apparently got theimpression that we are a fairly competent lot, which is all-to the good!The purpose of my visit was to take over to Newsam the returnsof H:0.s for the year. I left the list with him.I telephoned toand told him the answer to his query aboutJ.S.S.R. shoulder badges. It seems that these were made, with aof others in 1942 as an advance preparation for the liberationof the Continent. Presumably it was anticipated that a certain numberof Ruasians might escape and get back to this country, when these badgeswould be used in the same way that those prepared for the Poles, Cgechsand other nationalities were ultimately used after D. Day.Silverman has got a question down in the House for next Tuesday,which should provide the Government with an opportunity to make capitalout of the Daily Worker's propaganda stunt.It might vEl beasaid thatthese badges were prepared with a view to lending assistance to the remnantsof any Russian forces which might escape or be rescued by British warships,and that s0 far from representing any present hostile intentions, it isfurther proof - if that were needed -w of the extent to which we wereprepared to go to assist the Russians in the early days of the war when theywere on the run and throwing their arms away. We should then go ontoenumerate the extent of British and American aid that they gave to theRussians at that time, and for which virtually no thanks have ever beenreceived.22nd March.I had a tallk with Hilil to-day about his investigations into W.E.X.which is engaged in East/Vest trade. He haB had Several successfuloperations; in particular, one where the Turks were selling copper,stensibly destined for this country but actuallly to be diverted in thefree port of Rotterdam. An approach was made to the Turkish Governmentand the export has been prohibited.There are three companies here which are concerned: the W.E.X., workingwith Hungary, Brenner working with Czechoslovakia, and Dahl working vithPoland. The good never touch this country, but a lot of businesstransactions are centred here in London. We have yet to find what partf any of the proceeds go to finance the Communist Party.Hill has variousideas about this but SD far we have nothing concrete.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIO3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORISACT 1958200958.21th March.of the A.5.1.0. callled to see me. He is particularlyInterested in the security of Operation HURRICANE in Australia and isover here for consultations.THIS S A COPYORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958225th March.Searight and Green of the J.L.C. paid a visit to the office. I gavethem a general talk on the principles of the work and a skeleton of theorganisation. They were to see the other Directors.I talked to Macdonald about the mechanisation of Post Report. Theexamination carried out by a representative of G.C.H.0. C. H. seems to show thatwe shall have to abandon the project, which would cost initially over210,000 and subsequently between two and three thousand a year. Nineficens would be required at the outset to carry out the work, and threeNeep it up to date. It would, however, be necessary to codify the 200, 000reports and a certain amount of expertese would be required for this work.Had ve decided on the me chanisation of Poat Report at the outset, thenecessary code forms could have been issued to Immigration Officers., but it isnow too late Once a angeproportion of the work has enlreadycompleted. The only poneibility of cutting down the task anid theexpense would be to reduce the numbers of individualls to be codifiedand to employ the machines of either the statistical Branch of the HomeOffice or G.C.H.Q. in actually carrying out searches.It does not appear poasible to reduce the numbers, since we havealready eatcluded higher and. lower age groups. The exclusion of otherswould depend very much upon an assessment of the individual for theparticullar job that he might be required to do, since we do not know atthis stage precisely wha that job might be we could not safely reducethe numbers and SO neduce the expense. The actual use of the machinesof other departments would not materially affect the expenditure, sincethe cost of hiring such machines is comparatively smalll.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORUSACT 1958OneRineSimkins came to tallk to me about the telephone varrant which hasapparently been running on Tommy HARRIS for some time. I am franklya lit1le annoyed that I had not been told about this. It arose fromthe fact that there was a warrant on Kim and that while he was stayingwith Toroiy Harris the warrant was awitched to Tommy'e house. Tommy hadthen gone abroad and the warrant had been in abeyance, It had now, howevercome into operation again and it was felt that it should be covered.Additionally it had been discovered that Tomy had an ex-directory number.While I cannot believe that Comrny is in any vay a guilty party, he 18of course a close friend of Kim's and S.I.8. have come forward with astory, through Nicholas Ellott, obtained from Eileen (see pages 53 and511) which they think suggests that Tomry might be implicated. My ownview, and largelly the view of Dick,and B.2 is that the story has nosignificance at all. on the other hand, we do not wish to give theimpression to S.I.S. that where an ex--M.I. man is concerned we arereluctant to pursue the case. I have said that I do not wish my personalfriendships or beliefs to interfere in any way with the enpuiries which are60.being made and I have therefore initiulled the varrant, although I donot think the reslts will get us much further. 1 would much prefer tovee Tormy and say to him that I presume that Kim must have discussed hisoubles, and ask him precisely what Kim had told him, since it would beviously difficult and improper for me to go outside anything that Kimhad actually conveyed to Tormy himselr. I would then go on to ask Tommyexactly what he thought of the whole business. I would not, however, beable to tell him what I thought, beyond perhaps saying that the wholequestion was stilll unresollved,There are, however, added complications, since Kim now appears toSuspect Eileen ahd has warned her that she can only make things worse bytryingtoclearKimofthechargesagainsthim.Eileenseemstothinkthatsome approach has been made to Tommy on the basis of the information whichshe gave and that she is now getting the reaction through Kim, who is treatingher pretty coldly. This is, of course, quite untrue, since nothing has beensaid. The ineident does, however, make it much more difficult for meto establish any contact with Tormy. This is regrettable because he must,Ithink, imagine that auspeot him or at least do not trust him.277th March.Kenneth Strong talked about his visit to Washington. He thoughtthat at Least 50 of Americans in the know agreed with our pollicy vis a visChina. on the other hand the Government had taken the line and peopllelike Vandenberg and Fechteler had made plans. The prevailing feelingamongst these people was that since a preventive war was out of the questionthe Americane would at least like to hit the Chinese wherever they could.Theyhad,however,realisedtha'tsuchapolicymightleadtoaglobalwar.They have no very clear idea of a sound plan of action and. to some extentrealise that whatever plans have been proposed mighit well be ineffeetive;they ane consequently embarrassed.The Americans still refused toparent on DL J.I.0. papers; since they felt that this d.invollvehem in expressing views on policy which were in conflict with their own,ich they would not vish to disellose. Strong did not think that ourcomments on C. C.I.A. papers carpiled much weight unless they were put in atthe drafting stage.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958o961.The diary of General GROWi, Which was belleved to have been stolen bya Commniniat agent in Frankfult, has been getting a great deal of publicityIt is quite revealing in its nature and I gather involves at least fourother powers, including ourselves. Pope, on M.A in Moscow, wasmentioned. General GROW was M.A. in Moscow and it is to his thoughtsthere that most of the important revelations are directed.D.0.S. reported generally on the position in S.I.M.E. Afterdiscussion it was agreed that D.0.S. should begin negotiations for thewithdrawal of the Security Service officer in Beirut.It was agreed that our relations with S.I.s. in foreign countrieswhere there is a necessity for overt liaison should be reviewed at anearly date.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958Mne 20o928b6 MbnotreDuncan Baniys pulct a yisut to the office. He want fadplythorouzhiy into DUP balntiona with the Ministry of supply snu the vorland on their behale. He seemed quite gui.ck to yealige Ali thefmioultins. He waf a ltune ahocked to find that we did mIot controlsecurity in cther department, but I thinic that in the end he was convincedthat any aavantages from such a syaterd would be ontweighed by the dis-advantages.Ist Apnil.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSAOT 1958fine'o' told me that he had hitd Kim to dine with him at the TraveilersClub, apparently in order to ask him whether he wished for any advance dfthe bonus that Was given to him at the time of his resignation. 'o:seemed to to have reached the conclusion that Kim was innocent. saidthat; I had corne to the conelusion that the only thing to do in cases ofthis kind, Where oie new an individual fairly intimately, wag to sinkone' personal view and allow those concerned to get on ith the job,purely on the basis of the ascertatinment of fact. othervise one wasliable to get mislea. I gave him my view about Tommy HARRIS and saidthat I was not in any way jmpeding enquiriee.Kim does not, apparently, bear any particular resentment againstthis department. If he had been in over position he would have reactedin the same way, even dovn to the question of withholding his passport.3rd AprilSi.r Lan Jacob of the 33.33.0. attended the J.L.C. to-day. orquestion of nialson between depantmente and hia Monitoring Beetiirrun by Mal.colr Frost. Owing to veanetion of staff and to domesaludarrerences, he wi.shes to aispense with Cormander Winn's post RS aDiaison officer. He yinl heeve tn move Vann in any case As le heshad a OW with Foost. mhe Sepvicea deprecated Winntg derarture, siineeE emerged during the discussion Crat winn was doing a conaidergbleuount of theiy worl by reviewing report tind bringing special tbemsLO their notice. General Jacob pointed out that it WaS his job tosupply the anteriall and 1o ascerait yeguirements; it was nod, however,he J0b to indicate peansages 1n he meporte whi.ch might De of panticilar03.antereat tm Pene: Services.t WiE eventelly tlecidleri that the head of the depentient couldvery we caamy the iriB:0n duties if he vere yersona grata. At thisstage members of the Corlitte began to make it cllean that Srost wasnot persons grata - a view which T. personally could welll underntand,sinee he served under 1ne during the war and MRS extremely broublesome.The ifficulty is that he able and, in fact, bae organised hisdepartment wery welllyIn View of the advers opinion of the services Jacob said thathe woulld see whether in due course It oiight be possible to transferFrost to other spheres.We iscussed the Perimiter Revist. The Foreign Office were ratherworried about the neisent to which the Rusalans seem to ha.ve got possiblythe majority of the German people as a whole behind them in their proposalfor Germar city and some measure of rearmament.Some anxiety was felt about the situation in Indo-China, Althoughthe rrench do not appea to be pulling out in the immediate future, thereane ominoua rumblings in Pain, even n General Staff cineles.I is rellyin Paris rather than Indo-China that the danger l.1e8.The new Constitution in the Sudan, recently promulgiteg ha8 beenvery unfavourably reviewed in mgypt. The Americans want us to recognisethe Kingship of Faroul over the Sudan and to start evacuation of the Canallone at an early stage.. we ofered these terms, they think that weshould get favourable tetttreent on the matter o0 leaving behind maintenance-units. I do not think that we are going to be jockeyed into anyhasty decisio by the Amenieans.At the Appointmente Board meeting to-day D.0.S. atatea thet hefelt it would be wi.ge to advise oversea stations of the Home Secretarytaking over from the Prime Miniatev the political headship of thisDepartment. It was agreed that D.G's permission to thi.s Course would besought by D.0.S. on Mondty.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDLDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE BUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958lingIt was agreed in principle that recruiting should be restrdorted tothose under the age of 30, cxxcept in cases of special qualifications or needD.0 reported that there WNS a possibility that he Would recei.ve aueat to nominte an officer to on a NATO inspection to Headquartersin Durope, including Greeoe and Tirkey. IT was deeirablle that theofficershould be able to vear uni.fol. In the event of such a request beingreceived, the Boand agreed thatWoulla be a suitablle nomination,64.and D.E/A said he believed that the necessary permission to wear uniformcoulld be obtained from the War office.T said that I had ascertained that a Working Party had been formedby the Home Office to consider arrangements for screening at ports. Thiawould not however prevent our proceeding with the selleation of sui tablereserve Officers. It was felt that these reserves shoulld b e put on 8military basis, and the strength of the agreed establishment woulld beifted if necessary.It was agreed to recommend to the D.G. that no suggestion shoudbe made on ouP part for the revision of the Prime Minister's Direetivein consequence of the delegation of supervisior to the Home Secretary.It was agreed to hold a Boand to interview Candidates on Thuraday ,17th April.CAIRNOROSS has been seen. He was extremely perturbed when confrontedwith the document in his own handwriting which had been found amongst thepapers of BURGESS. His statement is somewhat contradictory; Dn the one handhe says that he gave BURGESS the information because he thought that he wasworking for some Government organisation and that it would be in his,CAIRNCROSS interests to keep in with him. On the other hand, he says that hewas extremely nervous when he tried to get his notes back and was told byBURGESS that he had ither lost br destroyed them. A further point which isnot in his favour relates to an incident reported by the Watchers. Heapparently deposited in a wastepaper basket in one of the Parks, a copy ofthe Communist Review of current date. This woulld have been understandablein the circumstances if the copy had been an old one but it is difficult tosee how a man who describes himself as having given Up his Communist ideasand as having become a Churchillian, would go on wasting his time readingsuch turgid material as the Communist Review.Lth April.Perfeot came in to say good-bye on leaving the office.Kennedy of the R.U.C. came to see me. I asked him about the protectionof arms at Alr Force, Naval and military Btations. He said thare had beenno more pilfering since the incident at Derry and that security generally hadbeen considerably tightened up by the Services, His llaison with the SouthBtinn went on, but on the whole there was little going on in the I.R.A. world.The principal character in the North is one, STEEL, who appears to havebrought the GINGER Group of the old I.R.A. together.! He is a tough disdoplinariaand quite capable of causing those who do not toe the line to disappear.He haB been in prison B longisl time, but was relleased some months ago.7th April.T asked Holmes about the Germans employed on secret Government workwhom he had interviewed during the last eight months. I was prompted to65.do this by a suggestion of Group Captain Paull that something should be doneto watch these sedentists when they visited their home country.Hollmes said that by and large they had very little in the way ofroots in this country; they were rather a community amongst themselves.Some of them had homes in the Eastern Zone and, not unnaturally,corresponded with their relatives. Speaking generally, it seemed thatthey had no particular motive for staying here, except that they couldearn a reasonable living while conditions in Germany were difficult.There is little reason to think that when the Germans get on theirfeet these scientists will not offer their services to the Fatherland.I told all this to Group Captain Paul and also drew his attentionto the various diseussione which had taken place on the J.I.0., when wehad strongly represented the undesirability of employing Germans on secretwork for an indefinite period.Tommy HARRIS rang up and asked me to dine.8th April.I had a talk with Simiins and told him that T should be dining withTommy. He said there had been no development in regard to PEAOH andhe personally was inclined to regard Elleen's stories as very wide of'the mark.Eric Jones of G.C.H.Q. looked in at my request. I discussed withhim the mechanisation of Post Report, with particular regard to thecosts. He said that he baw no reason in principle why they should notdo the job, whicl would cut expenses to at least one-fifth of the presentestimate. He would, however, like Dr. Morgan to discuss the matter indetail with Maedonald.9th Aprin.At the J.I.0. to-day we considered a memorandum by the D.M.I.in which he stated that British Intelligence, Germany, would hav torenew its contracts in May of this year, and that unless some gratuityor other inducement were put forward, the best of the staff would belikely to resign. He said that it would not be possible to get somegratuity scheme going without an Act of Parliament, and that the onlysolution, therefore, was to establish some 60 of the most reliablemembers of the staff. In, however, we were forced to withdraw fromGermany it would be necessary to provide work for these people. Theproposal Was that they should be absorbed by the various departmentsrepresented on the J.I.C. including ourselves.I made it very cllear that we could not help, although it vias justpoasible tha't we might have a vacancy for someone in a specialist capacity,In a general way we were recruiting fro the bottom and, Since we were a66.SmEIO organisatior ve did not like bringing in senior officers over theheads of the juniors, or placing senior officens to Work under juniorficers. It was disclosed in the memorandum that the present staff ofE.0. (G) was 377 officers. I cannot imagine what they can a1 be doing!As regards the question-in the memorandum as to whether (a)staff would be of the type which could be absorbed into a GovernmentIntelligence Service, I understand that the question of a GovernmentIntelligence Service does not refer to proposalls in the Brook CommitteeReport, but to a matter under discussion by a Committee of P.U.SE fromthe Services under the Chairmanship of Sir Harold Parker. Ministry ofDefence. This Comrai ttee is considering whether it is possible to providea civilian nucleus within each of the Service Intelligence Departments., whichmight act as kind of projection of J.I.B.loth April.At the Appointments Board meeting to-day, I mentioned the formationof a Committee to report on the Would Wide Intelligence Organisations inViarand Peace. It was felt that co-operation with the Comrnittee wasdesirable and any paper should be entrusted in the first instance toMr. Magan and Mr. Kellar.D.B. raised the question of representation on the censorship planningcommittee which was at present undertaken by B.4. It was agreed that beforechange was recommended, this matter should be further explored byG. D.B. and B.2Var strengthe for Overseas statiens: - D.E/A reported that the matterwas at present before the Establlishments Committee at the War Office, afterwhich nomination of reserves could take place. D.0.S. pointed out thespecial needs for Malta and Gibraltar where more executive powers wereexercised by Defence Security officers.The proposed syllabus for the lecture course to newly joined officerswas approved, with the addition of one by A.l on administrative procedure.D.B. said tha't a number of post-war cases would be covered in the course of thyB.2 lecture. It was felt that there was no advantage in asking for anybodyfrom S.I.S. to lecture on agents, and that the work of Special Branch couldadeuately be covered by the lecture given by P.L.S. The Board agreed thatno notes should be distributed by lecturers, save where it was necessaryon faotuall or technical information. The Course should be limited to onelecture per day, to comtence on about Lth May.asked whether it was yet possible to inform the LordChaneellon' Department if we wanted to retain the services of Mr. FLETCHER.The Board agreed to defer this matter until nearer November, 1952.It was agreed not to proceed with the application ofIt was agreed not to proceed at present with the printing andDistribution of certain forms required by the Port and Travel Controll Groupthe event of wary but tha L D.C. would arrange fon drafts of the formsfor distribution schedules to be in readiness.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 195867.I annived at Tomay'e house at about 7.30 p.m. He met ine athis garden gate, but Buid nothing about PEACH. Hilda and PEACH met mein the haal and I greeted PDACH in the noama way. I asked him what heainas doing and he told me that he was going to Spain, where he woulld beoing journalistic work and writing a book. He thought that at this moment,when there seemer to be a chiinge of attitude towards Spain by both Americaand ourselves, the situation would be an interesting one on which to report.At no time during the evening was PEACH'S case discussed. Theconve sation ran on a whole number of other topice, including warreminiscences. The only hint that I got as to the extent or otherwiseof the Harris knovledge of the FEABH case was when I was allone for a momentwith Hilda. She remarkced that she thought it was such a good thing thatPEACH was going to Spain ne she thought it would do a lot to reatore hismorale. She added that he was "such a fine fellow't. She then mentionedthat Mrs. PEACH would not be going with him at the outset, but might possiblyjoin him later if he settled down in Spain,The elationship between Tommy and Hilda seemed to be absolutelynormal. He seemed in very good form, but has recently been So Worriedabout the restrictions on business matters, in particular the export ofpictures to the United States, that he has mors or LeBB decided to windup his business and acquire a permanent pepidence in Lincolns Inn Rielda.He, Hilda and PEAOH are leaving on April 22nd; PEACH going to Spain andthe other two to Mallorca, as far as I can understand. Tonmy and Hildawill be returning in September when he is to have another operation, butnot, T gather, of a serious kind.During the evening Toromy was drinking only wine. PEACH waslooking reasonably ell and only drank in moderation, but I should saya general way he waa drinking quite a lot.On re-reading the 1.C. I am little inclined to think that theHarrist are not fully informed about the case againat PEACH; I doubt otherwisewhether Tommy would have been quite 8O sanguine about throwing me togetherwith PEACH in the may he did. PEACH himself was evidently somewhat worriedat the prospect, and although he was a little uneasy at the start, very soonbecame normal, He mado one half-hearted attempt to go home before dinner,but was easily persunded hy the Harris's to stay on.15th April.John Marriott talked to me about the case ofwho the Air Ministry, on somewhat slender grounds, seem to think is aCommunist and guilty of obstructing the rearmament programme.While our file shows that he has had some rather curious friendsMEREDITH in and BLACKETT and that he may hold Bevanite views on the questionthe past, particularly when he was at R.A.E. Farnborough; these includeof rearmament, ther is no evidence to show that he is a member of theCommunist Party. The Air Minister now appears to be taking the matterup with the Minister of Supply.Marriott is informing the D.G. on his return.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 195868.The Treasury have considered the case of CMIRNOROSS and arerequesting him to resign. They seem to feel that the case has beenextremely well handled by Skardon.I talked to Hid about the case of KUCHENMEISTER, and subsequentlygot the D.G's approval to pass a copy of his latest letter, addressed tothe D.G. personally with all the old accusations, to the Home Office forinforation. It was also agreed that we should not reply, since it wouldclearly be undesirable for us to start a correspondence with KUCHENMEISTER.16th April.I talked to Maedonald about Post Report. He has had another talkwith Whelan. I have suggested to him that he should get out a codingpro forma for Immigration Officers; that he should get out a new estimatof precise costs, and that he should ascertain whether the Home Officestatistical department could do the punching. We should then be in aposition to present our report to the Working Party, showing the originalestimated cost and the extent to which we have been able to reduce thefigures.Horrocks, to whom I talked, said that he coulld arrange for a codingof the reports already made by a team in the Registry, rovided they coulddo it in their own time. This seems satisfactory as there is really noyengticular urgency about the matter.An excellent report for the informatio of B. Division has beenprepared on the NITWIT case. It is a pity that the Directors ofIntelligence cannot know something about this operation, since I am surethere is a tendency in those circles to think that we are apt to sitback here and wait for things to fall into our basket.There is no doubt that this case waa handled with the greatestpossible skill and that the product has been of enormous value to theGovernment. One particular point emerges from the technical side,namely, that a key which will open a safe will not necessarily close it!Therefore, in making facsimile keys it is as wellll to make several withslight variations.Speake of the Home Office rang me up yesterday to say that thePublic Relations Officer had had a call from Mr. Peter Duncan of theB.B.C. saying that one, PINTO, was proposing to broadcast his M.I.5experiences and that the B.B.C. were a little worried about what he wasproposing to say.After consultation with Hill, the latter rang up Speake suggestingthat he should tell the B.B.C. that PINTO had served in M.I.5., that hetherefore subdect to the Official Secrets Act, and that if he saidal thing disclosing official secrets, both he and the B.B.C. Woulld beliable under the Act. If, on the other hand, what he was proposing tosay was purely fiction, doubtless the B.B.C. would not be interested inwhat he had to say.THIs IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUVIENT RETAINEDDEPARTMENT URDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORUSAOT 1958fune 2oa69.17th April.Martin and Miss McBarnet have come across an old file onJ.D GREGORY, who in the early teenties was head of the RussianDepartment in the Foreign Office and was sacked for speculating infranes.The file, which contains paraphrases of Russian 3.Js, indicatesthat there might have been a lealage of a memorandum on the Russianquestion compiled by GREGORY.I told them about the origin and suggested that they should seewhether the old B. Js were still in existence. It was my impression thatwe brought them over here in 19311.They subsequently ascertained that they were still available,although I bellieve they are largely uncarded. Miss McBarnet intends tolook them through in case they may contain some information which isstill of value. Historicaiily, of course, they are of the greatestinterest.AS regards the leakage of information, I said that from a personalknowledge of GREGORY I should doubt whether he had been responsible. Itseemed to me much more likely that the culprit would have been Mr. E.F WISEthe left-winger in the entourage of Lloya-George who at that time was hisadviser on all Russian affairs and playing an exteernelly dubious game.18th April.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEOIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIE3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORUSACT 195870.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSAOT 1958me2oo021st April.Yesterday I received a call from Anthony BLUNT, who wanted ifossible to see me. T arranged to have unch with him, when he told methat he was having trouble from a man called WOODS, who apparently had beenemployed in the same firm, Head Wrightson as Jnckie HEWITT. Some timeago WOODS, whom Anthony had never seen before, turned up with a sad storyabout how he had been duped by HEWVITT and was involved in malversatiof funds belonging to Head Wrightson. If this money coulld not be repaidthe firm would prosecute. BLUNT, knowing the state of mind in which HEWITTwas at that time, agreed to pay, borrowing the money for the moment fromTormy HARRIS. He had made one attempt to get repayment but without successand had then come to the conclusion that WOODS was just a erook. He hadrepaid Tormy HARRIS and written the money off. While he was in Paris,however, WOODS had tried to obtain money from his, Anthony's secretary, andhad finally been seen by Toromy, who tthought that he had scared him off.There has now been a new devellopent. A man purporting to be areporter from the Daily Mail called LEGARE (?) had rung up asking whetherhe was a friend of WOODS and saying that he had a story which he proposedto publish. He promised not to do anything without showing Anthony thescript. Anthony thought things had gone a little far and was thinking ofgetting the Police to EO and see WOODS, if he could be found and if thiscould be done without Court proceedings.I said that I did not think that such a proposal would work, sinceif the Pollice took the matter up they would have to go through with it.I would, however, consullt with Skardon on Monday.Hill is worried about the terms of the Geneva Convention, whichin spite of all his efforts are likely to cause u'S some embarrassment in timeof war. He thinks it may be necessary to have yet another Camp in order toavoid the attentions of the Protecting Power71,I saV James Robertson, Simins and Skandon and told them about myinterview with BLUNT.Our only interest in the case is really to ascertain whetherthere are any documents in the possession of WOODS or HEWITT which mighthave some further bearing on the case against BURGESS. Skardon agreed,however, to see BLUNT in order to get further details of the story. Hethought that we might be unwise to see any representative of the Daily Mail.I rang up BLUNT and told him 80.Meanwhile, as far as we could ascertain, there was no reporter onthe Daily Maill with the name of LEGARE(?). It seemed, therefore, not unlikelythatLEGARE (?) was merely an associate Df WOODS' trying to put the sorevon, with possibly Jackie HEWITT in the background. Skardon advises againstgoing to the Police and against seeing any representative of the Press.I had a word with Colonel Kearn who has joined us from the Ministryof Labour in order to deal with defectors. He knows the problem wellas he has been a very great assistance to us in the past. He seemed anextremely sensiblle person and likely to fit in to the organisationsatisfactorilly. He is going over to Germany to see those coneerned withdefectors.22nd April.I gave my usual lecture to the Police course. One of thePolice Officer asked whether it was true that there was some proposalthat M.1.5 should take over all the S.Bs of the Police; he had seensomething to this effect in the Press. I told him that this was entirelyopposed to all our ideas on this subject; it was not the way we didthings in this country and clearly we coulld not possibly, even if wethought it desirable, take responsibility for the activities of officerswho were working and must work under the head of their Force. We didnot believe in supreme authorities as we were convinced that satisfactoryresullts could only be achieved on the basis of goodwilll understandingand full co-operation.23rd April.Ihad a long talk with Bill Oughton on his experiences in thear Fast.He considered the folloving to be the main tasks of S.I.F.E.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSA0T1958200972.1.(a)To obtain as much information as possible about theComraunist Party of China and its influence in general on the S.I.F.E.area. The main difficullty is to get the information off the ground.Police sources are weak andIt 1s,therefore, rather like trying to make bricks without straw and much ofJ.I.D's wonk and time is wasted in trying to sort out material whichcannot as a rule be verified by any basic source. J.I.D. is by no meansoverworked, but what it can do is not very profitable.(b) As regards the education of security forces of neighbouringcountries, S.J.F.E. has done quite a lot in this field as regards theSiamese and Indonesians, but full advantage is not taken of the traininggiven,In Indonesia there are two faotions both seeking complete power.On the one hand the Inspeetor General of Police, SOEKARNO (?) and onthe other, SOSRO, the head of Intelligence Research. The Americansare supporting the former, while we are supporting the latter. Thereis some analogy here between the surete and the D.E.C. since SOEKARNO (?)foes not, forepolitical reasons, supply SOSRO with the information to whichhe is entitled.In Indo-China the C.E. side is not strong and much of theinformation received fror the French is of doubtful value.In Burma, where we have an officer of our own, the results arereasonably good.Hong Kong is also good from the internal security point of view,but there are oven sources of information which could be exploited if theGovernment would agree to something in the nature of an interrogationcentre and the money were available to finance it.(c) Our third commitment is the provision of an order of ba'tthefor the (b) staff, should British troops be involved in hostilitiesin ahy of the neighbouring countries. Here again, information is lackingand in the immediate future, of course, military operations, even ifhostilities break out, Would not be teasible.2.Oughton thinks that there ought to be some joint centre inSingapore, where the Americans. the French and ourselves could pooland exchange information about the whole area. At present there isa good deal of overlapping and bogus agents are selling their informationto all three.There should be more visits from home.1.Oughton felt that it was perhaps a mistake to remove hir from thearea when he was just beginning to get a grip on the subject. HeThIs IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORACT 1958oo73.thought that officers ought really to remain in the area for at leastten years.I said that if this were the case it would clearly be necessaryto have an entirely separate organisation for overseas, since after tenyears in the Far East it was doubtful whether our officers Would eversettle down at home. It seemed to me that this observation showed amisconception of our role overseas. We were there to collect informationand assese it on the basis of our experience at home, and to give ouradvice on all security matters. This implied the adaptation of ourknowledge acquired here to local conditions. I quite understood hisarguemtn if our officers were to become local experts in the procurementfield; they woult then obviously have to know their natives well, but thiswas not in fact our job. If we were to enter that field it would, Ithought, be for consideration whether the organisation should remain underthe control of London.Oughton appreciated this argument and thought that perhaps he hadgot the job somewhat out of perspective. I thought, however, there was acase for having M.I.5 officers in Bangkol, Saigon and Jogjokarta, but ifthis were agreed it was difficult to see in present circumstances how wecould supply the bodies.Winnifrith telephoned to re about a question put down byWaldron Smithers about the vetting of people employed on Secret projects,Winnifrith was proposing to say that they were screened,! but some peoplehad taken fright at this suggestion in that a large number were not thesubject of positive enquiries as in the case of those employed on aimited category of secret jobs. T agreed with him that his apprehensionswere not well-founded and subsequently confirmed with Graham that this wasalso his view.Walter Bell came to say good-bye.He is off to India to-morrow.Dick has returned from the S.I.C. in Brussels. A certain amount ofinteresting information emerged during the discussions, particularly aboutthe activities of Greek seamen. The Surete seem rather well-informedand mentioned the case of a courier who had visited the U.K. We aretoreceive all particulars. It seemed to be fairly clear evidence that S.I.Sliaison with the Surete was not really satisfactory. It is almost certainthat if we had had a representative in Paris he would have got thisnformation long ago.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958ne2o074s24th April.Young of D.S.I. telephoned to say that in a report from STIBin Germany it had been suggested that M. M.I.5 I. would be interested in anoutbreak of foot and month disease in Canada due to infection which hadspread from Germany. I said that a matter of this sort would only beof interest to us in the improbable event of its being discovered thatthe outbreal of foot and mouth was due to the machinatiions of someforeign pover.I talked to him about the case of Clemens DUTT. He told methat on receipt of my letter he had decided to drop the matter.Hunt of Downing Street rang me up to say that the PrimeMinister has received a copy, from a Member of. arliament, ofan East German publication entitled "The Democratic German Report"edited by John PEET, Friedrichstrasse 167/3, Berlin W.8. This a rticulanissue is Volume I No. 7 dated April llth and the paper is publishedfortnightly. The annual subscription is 8/- and the distributorsare COLLETTS.The Prime Minister is anxious for any information we can givehim about this publication, particularly the extent to which it isbeing distributed in this country.At the Appointments Board to-day it was agreed that stepsshould be taken to obtain the attachment of Deteetive Sergeant WADEto this department from the Bucks Police, for one year in the firstinstance.It waB agreed to reject the application ofTHIS I A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDNDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE RUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958thine 20oaMe2aoo75.I mentioned a tellegram which had come in from S.J.F.E. suggestingthat an S.1.8. representative Should be aent to work in Mallaya. It wasagreed that the type of mork which he should do would most properlyfall within the police orbin, but further consideration of the mattershould be deferred until the return of MORTON which was expected any day.It was agreed that the leetures for the newly joined officersshould be held at L D.m. daily instead of at 2.30. This resultedfrom represntations by C. Division.25th April.I spoke to Hunt at No.l about "Democratic German Report"and promised to send him a short note on John Scott PEET and onwhat we knew about the circulation of the Report. This does notat the moment amount to very much, but we are asking the PostOffice to check the incoming mai.26th April.I had a long talk with Jack Morton who has returned today.From what he said it is cllear tha't he had no alternative but toaccept the post which was offered to him by Geralld Templer. Heis not, however, too sanguine about being able to do a usefuljob. The only difference between his appointment and that ofGeorge Jenlcin is that he has the full support of Templer. Thismeans, however, that he can only get his way by wielding the bigstick, and each time he does SO good will on the part of thevarious Services which it is his duty to co-ordinate will becomeprogressively less. He is not impressed by Young, the newCommissioner of Police. At his first nterview Young asked himwhat was generally known about the terrorists and the MalayanCommunist Party. Morton gave him some account of the presentposition indicating that there was a fair amount of informationabout the enemy's order of battle. Young then said "If you cangive me a list of the people, I wi.ll have them arrested tomorrow".It then had to be explained to him that this was not quite sosimple as it might appear. Had it been possible to arrest thesepeople, the Malayan Government would have done so long ago.As regards SIFE, there are obvious weaknesses, largely dueto paucity of inf ormation both from within and from without.The onlly foreign station in an adjacent country which producesreasonably good intelligence is Rangoon.THIS IS A COPYdirect to J. J..D. in,ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 195810001Singapore, who vaste an enormous amount of time in disproving andiscarding valueless reports.basidIt follows from al] this that the Rangoon pattern is theright one, and that if it were possible from the point of viewof man-power, SITE would get a considerable dividend by havingaproperly trained M.1.5 officer in Siam, Indo-China andIndonesia.28th April.Graham tella me that, at a meeting with the Minstry ofSupply and the Foreign Office, it has been decided torecomroenri to Mi istene that they shomlir continue to diecourage any visit here by Americans to look into ourstandands of security He raised the question of thepositive vetting which the Government have undertaken tocarry out and about which the Ministry of Supply havedone absolutely nothing. If the Americans come oven, theywould find that no enqutrie had been made about thosepassed for Operation Nomination. He strongly recommendedthat such enquiries shoui.d be made forthwith in retrospect.The Ministry of supply then divulged that Achie Rowlandsis taking the Dine that such enquiries should be made byourselves, and that he wishes to discuss the matter with thD.G. While we might be prepared to get the Ministry 0fsupply out of their present jam, it seems to me wong thatwe should assume any responsibility for the Ministry'epositive vetting. In any Case we coulld not do 80 ithoutreference to the Treasury who have laid down the policy.77eThe main argument ie that we cannot undertake overt vetting ofthis kind.29th April.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.Julu200930th April.Burt rang up about the case ofourwho was arrested and imprisoned by the-Poles for attempting 'to smuggle a Polish girl out of the country.He subsequently gave away a good deal of inforation. He hat 8just returned and the question arises ab to whether he should becourt-martialled. It had been arranged that Skardon shoulldinterview him. Meanwhile, however, we wished to know the policyof the Air Ministry in regard to a prosecution. Group CaptainMears had been to the D.P.P. P. but had produced no evidence exceptapress cutting. Mears had then gone to Special Branch andasked there to preventfrom leaving the countrythatis thinking of returning to Poland,Itold Burt to speak to Dick who had more up-to-da'te information.Ogilvie-Forbes has diseuaeed with D.G. the case ofof T.R.E. who is said to be obstruoting the rearmament prograrme.The Air ministry have produced no evidence, and indeed, two oftheir officers have expressed their appreciation of the workdone byMeanwhile, ve have orders to investigate.B.2 have caught a spy, one William Martin MARSHALLY employedfor E year in Moscow by Gambier-Pamy's organisation and nowworking at Hanslope. B.5. in the course of following KUZNETZOVwhois always very carefull about his movements, saV MARSHALL effect78.a meeting and hand over certain papers. This is the firstcase that T can recolleat since the war where, havingascertained that a particular individual in the Soviet Embassyis a runner of agents, it has been possible to detect a contactwho has not been planted on them. The watchers apparentlylost KUZNETSOV who must then have thought that he was in theclear Accidentally, hovever, they picked him up again.lst May.At the J.U.C. this morning, Reilly told us that theproposals for increased staff and funds for G.C.H.0. weregoing forward to Ministers In its preliminary stages withP.U.Sa, P. Sa, however, it had been slightly whittled down.Provision for further coverage by the Air Ministry would notbe allowed. He gathered, however, that the Air Ministrywere prepared to make an attempt to carry out the commi tmentwith their existing sources.-The Committee took a gloomy view of the situation inKorea. There is no doubt that the Chinese harve been stronglyreinforced and are in a position to take the ofrensive at anymoment. There are one or two disquieting pieces of nforma-tion which may indicate that such an offensive is imminent,Our reserves are thin and Ithough we have dug a fairlysubstantiall line, well to the South of pur present positions.,it 18 by no means certain that the United Nations forceswould be able to hold it. The Air Ministry still maintainthat the Chinese and Forth Koreans cannot operate a tacticalAir Force in support of their infantry as their bases are toofar away.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOOUMMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNER SECTION3(4) OF THE BUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958fins9.Prospecte in Egypt seer gloomy. The stumbling blockis the Sudan.We had a staff meeting this afternoon. It was decidedto recommend to the D.G. the establlishment of Mr. RICH, theestablishment and promotion of Mn. VERNON.The Supplementary Security uestionnaires which revealedanswers to questions 2. and 3. wene reviewed.I said goodbye to Mr. HANDOO who seems to be impressedby what he has seen hene and is grateful for the assistancegiven to him.2nd May.We had a further meeting on integration - Jack Morton,Magan, Dick Thite, Kelllar and others being present as a resultof which we reached fairly firm conclusions on what Dur requirementswee with regard to Dutstations of both S.I.M.E and I.F.E.The next thing will be to see whether we can get S.I.8.agreement in principlle and, if eugcessful in this, we shall haveto try and find the bodies. This is going to be a matter ofsome difficulty and may take time.5th May.Burt came to talk to me about the leakage to the press about themovements of a Pole who had been noted by .B. for sorutiny at ports.Burt said he was convinced that these leakages were taking placethrough the Immigration. I reminded him that there had been onecase where we had given a notice to S.B. only, namely, certain peoplesuspected of having had oonnections with BURGESS and MACLEAN. Burtsaid he remembered this, but wag still convinced that it was throughthe Immigration that the leaks were occurring.I said I thought it vas of the highest importance to get thema'ttey cleared up, because, a8 we atood at, present, we were more orless debarned from notifying the ports of any suspects if the casewas in any sense a lelicate one. I told Burt that I was quiteprepared, if necessany, to make epresentations to the Immigrationin this sense, or. if expedient, to speak to Sir Frank Newsam.Burt said that he would. have 1i talk with Ruck, and if he wanted anyfurther assistance from me he would let me know.THIS COPYIN ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED3(4) DEPARTMENT OF THE PUBLIC UNDER RECORDS SECTIONACT 1958June80.T tallced to Holines about Germans employed at the RA.. Farnborough,and esewhere. 1t was IOy view that we should send some sont 0fcommunicabion to the Ministry of Supply and the Admiralty, pointing outthat in the changed cineumgtances of German rearmarent there was alwayspossibility that the Germans here might wish to return to the Fatherland,which case they would be carrying up-to-date informatio from thisountry. I7e have, of course, pointed out these dangers in the past, butpersonally I think the time has come to reiterate them.Holmes said that of the people he had interviewed very few seemed tohave any real roots in this country.General Maxwell-Oraig said that awho was a member of his Air Survey Company, had just returned from Burmawhere he appeane to have seen Harrison and had a certain amount of in-formatior to irpart. His telephone number waeI spoketo Alec Kel]ar and put him in touch.Oughton came to say good-bye. He is off to the Middle East.I was glad that he had attended the meetings on integration, and suggestedthat he might impart our onclusions to "Tin-Eyell.I gave a lecture to the newly-joined officers on the history of theoffice and the principles on which we worked. I also saia something aboutmethods by which our information was fed into the Government machine.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNOER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958aune 200481.I had a tall with Dick. A certain amount has happened during myabsence.Continued observation on KUZNETZOV has shown that he has had anothermeeting with MARSHALL and that he has also met two Cormunist journalists,HAPPOLD and TAIT.man narged, who ie another of Gambier-Parry' people inhas been sent home owing to an entanglement with a Russian girlwho is a waitress in the Mess.This entanglement led to a proposal,obviously by the M.G.B., G. B. thatshould supply inforra tion to theRussians in exchange for which he would be allowed to marry the girl.There is no reason to think thathas behaved in any way thanproperly.The Daily Express have taken on PINTO to investigate the BURGESSMACLEAN affair.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLEC RECORDSACT 1958use 2c0482.Hollis returned to-day from Amenioa, Where he has been attendingatomic energy security meeting, Archie Rowlands. led the delegationand seems to have handled the Anei.cans satisfactorily. Although he startedout sceptically about the necessity of canming out the Ministry Df Supplyligation to conduct field enquiries he seme to have ceturnedi with theallisation that his department have really got So get down to things.The F.B.I. representatives attacked him pretty severely, but he kepthistemper and obviously had the support of the other American delegates.It was revealed that of the enornoue number of field enguirie conductedby the F.B.I. pnly four-tenths of one percent had led to the rejection of acandidate. Our objections, through vetting on the basis of our reconas.amounted to 1.2 percent. It seemed to follow, therefore, that either theAmericans as a wholle were vihiter than we had reason to think, o1 that thefield enquiries were ineffective:I gather that; the only defence that the F.B.I. could put up was tha tthe existene of the field enquiny system was a deterrent to applicationsbyundesirable people. That is as may be!Another interesting Fact revealed was that there has been an alterationin the McMahan Act, which now laye dovn that with the exception of certainappointments of a veny high grade o1 secreey, the ivil Service Commissionin the United States is in future to conduct the field of enquiries.If, however, they discover anything suspicious they ane to refer the casetothe F.B.I. Clearly the F.B.I. are finding the field of enquiry is tooburdensome: on the average, each one takes 41+ days, and in one case whichHollis saw, no less than 32 people had been interviewed, all with completelynegative resulte.D.E./A mentioned that certain of the women staff had approached him andwisneu UO nave Lit U2 Jaior Momen ofien place of AdministrativeAssistant. The Board felt that the title Assistant officer would be moreappropriate and D.E./A. would discuss this further with those concerned.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMIENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT URDER SECTION3(4) OF THF PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958FAne2axo83.Postings:THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958Aine 2002T had a word with Macdonald and Curnining about Post Reportmechanisation. We now have the reply from G.O.H.0. which reducesthe inttial cost to about $450 and the annual Cost to about E330.Ve have now to ascertain whether S.I.S. willante-up, since theyare obviously going to benefit from the scheme more than anybody else.84.26th May.The Daily Express have come out with a part of a letter written byBURGESS, which quite obvipusly they have obtained through HEWIT and hislacicmaihing friend, WOODS. The letter is alleged to be one written byURGESS just before he left for delivery to a friend. A nidiculouslysinister construction 1a placed upon it, but in fae't it has no bearingon the case whatever it relates solelly to some emotional isturbancebetween HEWIT and BLUNT several yeere ago.I saV Antlony at my flat and obtained from hirn the above comment,At the D.G's meeting to-day the D.G. took note of Hollis's remarksaboit the favourable views from America and Canada.wh which were taken ofGeoffrey Patterson. The question anose as to whether he should continuefor another two years in America after his normal term comes to an endin May of next year.The D.G thought that if he wanted to stay he should be nlowedto stay. I pointed out that we had on the Appointments Board beenendeavouring to not keep ficers abroad for more than four yearsunless the circumstances were exceptional it seemed to me that ifGeoffrey Patterson was going to be in the line for promotion he mustshow huia capabilities as a desk officer here. The D.G. did not seem tothink that thig was necesnany, and that we should have Senior Officers whowould be eniployed abroad in liaison capagities. I aada I thought this would-a liroited field which could not include S.I.M.E. or S.I.F.E.THIS A COPYORIGINAL DOCU RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT MER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUei RECORDSAOT 19582ooc27th May.Hunt of Downing Street telephored to ask whether we had any furtherinformation for the Prime Minister about the distribution of "DemocraticGerman Report", A journal published in the Eastern Mone.After enguiry, Bill Magan told me that the last issue had had acirculation of 1oo n the provinces but the Post Office had failed to pickLondon distribution. 1t was hoped the this might be done when thet isue came Dut.I SD informed Hunt, who said that he would be grateful for a note whenwe had the London figures.85.Anthony rang me to say that he hed spoken to Andy REVAI about theletter in the Daily Express. REVAI had reached exactly the sameconclusions as himself and vas feinly positive about the date being 1948.It emerged during the discuagdon thet the lationship between BURGESS andFred VARNER at that time wouln tend to confirm tha t the word erased anddeciphered by the Daily Express as "Fred" almost certainly referred toFred WARNER.Anthany SuEEested that Norman NASH, who was a close friend ofBURGESS in the Press Department of the Foreign Office but wag non retired,might, through his Press connections, intimate to the Daily Express thatthey were barling up the wrong tree. He said that he could probablyarrange this if we thought the idea wae a good one.I said that would consdde ler the point, but provisionally I thoughtit woulld be better tD leave matters Es they were, since the Express wouldbe boun to ask Norman NASH for his interpretation of the letter and hisreasons for thinking that it had no significance in connection withBURGESS'S departure.28th May.After consultation with Dick, I rang Anthony and confirmed the aboveview.At the J.I.C. today the D.M.I epoke About his recent travels.He had had discussions in Karachi, Singapore, Kualla Lumpur, Hong Kong,Tokyo and Kores.Kapachi.The D.I.I thought that Pakistar vaa in a le88 aggressive frame ofmind on the question of Kashmir. From conversations he had withlending personalities, he felt that while Rusgia was not regarded as apotential aggressor, the country would be inclined to throw in ita Botwith the Alllies in the event of trouble.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958une 20086.Singapore und Malaya.The D.th.i. felt that Generall Templer" personait and drive verehe mnain hope for the reatorntion of law and order, but that clearly hewas working under a gret strain. particularlly with regard to cutting hisway through the Administration. The D.M.I. describedthesituationwithregard to the Police and the Special Branchee, with which we arc allfamiliar.I intervened to make it clear What our responsibilities were and toada that we had given General Teopler the Head of S.I.F.E. and that wevere proposing to second two other ofdicens to eBsist him. I added thatwhat had clearly hampered the Police more than anything was the fact thatthey were out DT touch with the Chinese population. This, of course,was due to the Lack. of a Chinese element in the Police. The D.M.I.hadcome up against this latter point then he visited one of the new Settlementsand found that it Was almost entirely in charge of Malay Police officers, whohed no real contact with those inside the perimeter.The D.M.I. also thought that ossiby agents were net being properlyexploited. I mentioned here that there had been a proposal to set up someseparate agentmrunning organisation, and that we liad strongly advised thatit should be constituted within the Police, fnem yihom it would be boundto receive ite leads and assistance in actual operations. I gathered thetGeneral Terapler had 8 plan te integrate the Police, Special Branches andMilitary intelligence at all levels.Hong Kong.The D.M.T. Vas extremely worried about the intelligence situa'tionin Hong Kong. Having attended a meeting of the L.I.C. and had longconversn tions with most of its members, he had come definitely to theconclusion that the Coloniall Secretary (in the Chair), the Poliitical Adviser(of whom he did not take a very favourablle view) and Mackintosh doninatedthe Committee and were a dead weight on any proposals to develop intelligencefrom within the Colony. Their attitude was a purely political one and theywereconcernedsolelywiththemaintenanceoforderwithintheColonyandtheavoidance of any activity which might gibe the Chinese an exouse for sayingthat Hong Kong was being used as a. base for intellligence operations inSouth China. He had had more than an hour'I conversation with Macicintosh,who had told him that the frontier was vlytuallly closed and that no agentswould Stand a chance of getting through. On proceeding to the frontier,however, where he spoke to an fficer named Fraser, he was told that atleast 1,200 to 1,400 people crossed the frontier every week.The question of the Interrogation Centre was discussed, but hereain the Collonial Secretaryan Mackintosh had put a spoke in the wheel.Such interrogation work as vas being done by the China Bureau vias inadequate.THIS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UuER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958200487,The D.M1.I. hadt wut his case very Prankly to the Governorwho thanked him for that he had sai8 and expressed his appreciationof what he, the D.M.I. had done to give intelligence a jol1t. He didnot 8ay, however, what he personally ma8 going to do about it and,aneBs le caused the Colonial Seeretany, the Pollitical Aaviged andMeckintosh to change their views, nothing as 11kely to happen.Trafford Smith, on behalf of the Colonial office, here remarked thatwhile it would be H Good thing for the D.M.I. to put his case to theColonial Office, it would be difficult for them to do more than endeavourto persuade the Governor to talce a more favourable view of intelligenceactivities from the Colony into South China. It was difficult for themtoact contrary to the Governor's allvice unless they were prepared toreplace him. He thought that poesibly it weid be more profitablefor Generall Airey to make representations through the B.D.C.C. and theOhefe of Staff.The D.M.I. thought that the machineny for dealing with defectorshadnot worked satisfactorily in the recent case of a military defectorfrom South China. hose vitally concerned were still without anyinformation. T pointed out to the D.M.I. that the .I.0. document ondefector procedure should be in the PossesniD of the Hong, Kongauthoritiee, and that their attention should be arawn to it.Tokyo.Britlsh staffs in Tokyo have had no status since the signing ofthe Treaty. our Attaches ane aocredited to the Japanese and not tothe United Nation Forces. In the D.M.I'e view, they should also beaccredited to the Unived Nations Liaison Seetion. Air Vice MarshalBoucher has worked his way on to that organization, but should beithdrawn owing to uneuitabilllity and to the fnct that he 1s no longerin touch with the Cwin-C of the United Nations Forces.Korea.The D.M.T. wan veny impreased by the spirit of the CommonweallthUnit which, to a large degree, he attributed to the personality ofGeneral Cassell.The enerny are not using mines or wire; their tendency is tobuild Li trench round a smell hill and to burrow in from the back in orderto establish gun and maehine-gur emplacementa. We, on the other hand,ane relying moPe on belte of wire, of which there are as many as 50covering ouP ponitinns in the Kansas Line. The D.M.I. considers thiaLine to be a formidable obstaclle.. if we ane sblle to get back to 1tunscathed in the event of a North Korean attack.29th Nay.At the Appointments Board to-day I raised the question of thechange of name of Administrative Aseistants to Assistant Officer (women).T said that if it waB to apply to A.As who vere doing purely secratamtalwork, it seemed to me to miss the point which E undenstoou lad beenput by certain members of the female stafr', namely, that they wanted someistinction made between those doing purely secretanial work and thosedoing quaai-officer work.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958206188.Horrocks pleaded firstly that the representritives of the Femalestaff, to whom he had spoken since our 1ast meeting, wene satisfied withthe present arangernent. I replied that I did not understand thia to bethe poaition. Seconaly, Horrocks stated that any such arrangement wouldreduce flexibility. 1 said that I did not quite understand the pointabout flexibility, unless it wag conterplated that those now doingofficerg' work coud be put back to secretarial work against their OutWishes. Horrocke then quoted the case of Registry supervisonswho were carying quasimofficer function in overseas stationsThere may be a point here, but I am hot sure wheis really a valid one.HolliB then chimed in to say that he wvaS seriously worried at theappointment ofto full officer grade, since it seemed thatthe w8s really only doing seccetarial work. Horrocks replied that theD.O. had thought that this was justifiable in her case since when he,Horpock, departed she woulld be the only person who would know anything abou'tthework. Hollis thought that ther Divisions ought to have been consultedbefore such an appointment was made, as they might have had candidatee toput forward if vaaancies existed. There was no real answer to this,except that Horrocks had asked Dick for any names. Dick had given thoseofandwhich he had in fact put forwardmore than a year ago.The fact is that norally the Apppintments Board have instruetionsto keep their fingers out of female steff problems, and that nobony reallyknows whether they are suppoaed to put forward names or not. The samething applies to the putting forward names for inclusion in the Honoursist. There is, I am afraid, no hope of getting these things right untilyHorrocks leaves, and there i8 no doubt in toy mind that his successor villhave a formidable task. involving the breaking of many heads, beforething can be straightened out. It was made clear at the meeting thatnobody had any personal feelings aboutor the excellenceof her work.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 19583rd June.PINTO seems to have gone out like al damp squib, I understandthat Burt has dropped a few bricks about hia past to Percy Hoakina.To-day's Daily Express carried a leading article entitled "Slow Sleuths"Directed, of course, at ourselves, and makes the brilliant suggeetion thatnI futue there should be an amalgamation of 1.J.5., the Foreign Officentelligence Service and Special Branch of Scotland Yana.89.A point hns arisen in conneetion with the passing of Classifiedinformation to the Germans, an participants in the activities of theEuropean Defence Committee. Only members of N.A.T.O. ane a party toprocedure. If, therefore, wethe Germans, we irplythat they are members of N.A.T.O. Apart from this, the German SecretService is by no means on its felt and may not be in a position to vetany of its nationals who might be appointed to receive the classifieddocuments. Lastly, there is a question of a possible change ofGovernment in Germany at some future du te, which might even repudiatethe Contractual Agreement.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958291Lth June.Kennedy and Stone have been asked to supply a representative oftheWar Office with a ticket to attend de COURCY! rally which beginstomorrow. Why the D.I.I. wants to waste somebodyis time in this way,cannot imagine. The Archduke OTTO intends to speal, but we all knowthe lcind of things that he will say!I am telling the P.M's office that the distribution of 'DemocraticGerman Reportt in this country is roughly 1,000 per fortnightly issue.5th June.called on me to-day.He said thathad been approached by a high-grade representative of "Time" and "Life"who contemplated writing an article for his paper on certain implicationsof the BURGESS/MACLEAN affair. He is taking as his text the portion ofa letter written by BURGESS which appeared in the Daily Express on Monday,May 26th. He seemed to know that the individual named Fred' was a ForeignOffice official.He askedwhether his proposed action woulldin any way be embarrassing to the Embassy, although he did not know whether,ifhe wrote such a story, his paper would necessarily accept it.I gather, said something about getting his facts right, andhad, I think, hinted at the possibility of the representative of "Time" and"Life" getting departmental guidance either from us or from the ForeignOffice.T toldthat if this journalist had asked whether hisproposed action would embarrass the Embassy, it seemed to me that there wasa fairly straight answere Were he to publish an article stressing thesecurity or the homosexual aspect, it could only result in creating a falseimpression that security in this country is bad and that the Civil Serviceis riddled with homosexuals, and such an impression would certainly not beconducive to good relations between Britain and Amnerica. If thecorrespondent stin wished to write his article, he might be told that hewould do well to get his facts correct, and that if he were starting withthe letter published in the Express he would notice tha t it was torn from itscontext and might, therefore, have no bearing on the case whatever.90.I made it clear tothat there could be no questionof ou giving this corresponsent any guidance, since we had no contact withthe Press. I doubted, too, whether the Foreign Office would wish toscUSs the case.I passed the gist of this conversation to Patrick Reilly at theJ.I.C. on Friday, and also to Carey Foster on the telephone.91.This IS A COPYINDEPARTMEN ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED3 AOT (4) 1958 OF THE PUBLIC UNDER RECORDS SECTION6th June.July2009At the J.I.C. to-day I spoke to Air Vice Marshal Fressanges aboutI said that there were two things which seemed to us important:(1) to keepaway from the Polles, and(ii) to obtain full evidence of Polish methods of interrogationand their psychological effect.We did not stand much chance of doing either unless we could givesome assurance that he would be given his pension. It was our91a.CONFIDENTIALMr. Speaight, H.I. Ambassador in Rangoon, madeastatement to the J.I.C. to--dny on the Situation inBurma. He took an his text the last report of theJ.I.C. on Burta, dated Novernbar 1951. He said thatthe present sitantion was on the whole sightly betterthan that forecaat bs the J.I.C.The Government hadhad a viotory in the electionsand the Prime lindater had remined in power The newGovernment, slightly tore dnotrinaire and slightly lessinefflcient had been established. There had been 10real between the Government and the Comnunists. Someconcesuions hnd been made to the Karene, who had not Bofar co-pperated to any great degree with the Conmuniate.The Communist offensive had net materiallised and 1aB infact Foreatalled by an attselc by NE WIN'B forces. Boththe Comunists and the Karens. were short of arig and, toBome extent, food, and the initiative Seemed to havenot passed to the Governent. Chinese communism notmaking much of ain appeal, since there vaB no very fertileBround for 11 to work on; there ware no rich classes OPflaming injustices. In general, the Burmene vere a Jollypeople who did not take kindly to dialeotical matorlalisi.Anti-American propaganda did not cut much ice, Binde theBurmese were consoious of American aid and were anziousfor it to continue. Alt the same time the Burmese, thenthey thought about there things, were afraid of Chinesepower, if really serious pressure vere brought to bearon them their tendency would be towards a policy ofappeasement.Thera is a very real desire Rraong the Burmese tokceep ou't of war, and this desire is their guiding starin foreign policy - henee they cling to Indin. Politicallythey are basically Socialist and antiimperialiat in Dutlopk.In character they are lazy and always reluctant to ecmmitthemaelves in advance. They are intensely religious andtheir beliers oonetitute a strong antidote to communism.AB long an we give them nBaiatance it is unlikely that theywill wish to break with us. They are consoious of theirbarguining power in regard to rice, tungsten, eto. whichthey export at fairly high prices. Their foreign exchangepoBitit is good, due largely to inertia in the matter ofinternal development; they have a balance here Df Somethinglice 30M aterling.Little teak 10 coming Dut or the country,owing to a lack of okllad labour and the faot that theforeste are to nome extent in the hand of the insurgents.The Irrawaddy if fairly free for navigation, but the Rangoon-Mandalny Railway, although open, is frequently blown up.Road traffic is on the whole more secure, provided protectionmoney i8 paid to the insurgents. Manufnetured Eoods seemto be airly widely distributed.Speaking of ITE WIN, one of the most importantpereonalitice in Burma lr. Speaight B8id that he WaD firstand foremoat out for himself, but WES a patriot 25 fer 2Bhin own interests would allow. There WES a time when hemight have got on the Communist band waggon, but he now BeemBto have realleed that those who do B0 do not necessarily gohery far. He is likely, therefore, to gay with the Government./The present GovernmentThe present Government 1o 1kely to muddle on,and the Communist merace will probably recede if theBurmese realise in time that the Allied Ouse i0 thebetter bet.Asked why the Chinese Communisth did not givemore aotive support to the B.C.P., MP. Speaight didthat Chinn probably preferred a policy of friendlyrelations for the moment and would not, therefore, liketo be exposed 88 aotive supporters D1 communist activityin Burma. Reither would they like to face an appealby Burme to the United Nations. Apart from this, theymay we1l think that the B.O.P. is not an organlaationwhich would be renlly worth supporting and that arssupplied would merely be used for banditry.In conclusion, lr. Speaight Said that he hasnever Bean the Prime Minister Took worried. When heVisited hin the latter never had any paper on hin deskand ho never telephoned in faet he gaye the Bpresrenceof having nothing to do! Thi3 rather tarpifiod thewhole situation in Burma.D.D.0.6.6.52.alocuo92.belief thatwas mentally unstable, and this indeed volld notbe surpriping i.n the light of his experiences in a Polish prison.Fressanges said that a decision had junt been reached to grantthis pension from the title when he landed back in this country,and on condition that he behaved himself. This decision had beenreached on the basis that ashad made his digelosures underduress there were no legal grounds for withholding the pension.Fresianges waB ouite agreeable to our establishing contact withand imparting to him, unofficially, the decision of the Air Council.will receive anvofficial communication in four or five days time.I said that we would do our best to rehabilitatementallyind persuade him to arop any iden of returning to Poland.Hunt of Downing Street rang mne up to Inow whether the distributionf ,000 copies of Democratic German Report" included copies sent outratuitously. I said that to the best of our knowledge it covered everything.Kennedy tells me tha't the COURCY is once more on the war path,NO officers who are eged to have visited the French Police.7th June.Michael Serpell tells me that he has a case of attempted Hungarianpimage age. A woman named M3s. SCOTT, who has been tice married and is ofing ian origin, was approached by a Hungarian courier called BENEDIOT1d ked to give information, with 8 veiled threat that the authoritieseiv that she had n Bister in Hungary. M4YB. SCOTT works i.n B.I.A.There3 to be a meeting, botween hor and BENEDLOT on MondayTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSNCT 1958 Julu 20099th June.J. saw Colonel Bathat, Hend of the Traui C.L.D., to-day. He 192pleasant little man and obviously very eurnest about his job.Havelim general tlk on the principles applied in OL' world and therganisation Which ve had set up to give effect to these principles.Colanel lajhat then told me of some of his difficulties. Helearly has quite a lot of troublle with the military security branch and isomewhat worried at the prospect of their taking over all intelligence workin time of war, Ray has urged him to get out a detailed war planovering travel control, censorship, interrngation, Vulnerable Points, etc.IS he believes tha should a crisis arise the military would probably in theind be only too glad to pass the responsibility to someone who nad a planind knew what he was doing. Colonel Bajhat has already made a start on this,ut he is not very optimistic about the attitude 0f the Army at a time oftrisis. He is anxious to get any assiatance he can from us about theormulation of his wan plans.The other matter which seers to interest Colonel Bajhat is theecruitmen of agents, although he realises that conditions here are veryiferent to those in his own country. In Irag the Police get no voluntaryssistance whatever from the population. The idea of doing somethingbecause it is in the national interest never enters their heads. If aunder is committed many people may have witnessed it, but nobody 1srepared to corne forvand on, even when gueationed, to identify the culprit.fe gave ma an example of a mnurder committed in a cafe, when he and some friendwere sitting in an djoining house. He went round himself dmmediately andnterrogated the proprietor, who pleaded that he had seen nothing. - EvenWo men who had been sitting on the same bench as the mundered man pleaded,he one that he Wafi reading a newspaperat the time, and the other thatte vas thinking of something else and had only heard the report of theevolver!' The only method of coping with a situation of this lind,lolonel Ba that said, was to take some fifty people who vere present inhe cafe and put them all in jail. After some hours of confinement,people bagan to admit the t they had seen somethi.ng and eventualllyifteen witnesses, corroborating each other S stories,wer procured. Thistory he said, would indiobe how difficult it was to get informante; theinly method 1s by using a personall or family connection and exploitingromne situation where money a the primary factor. The average citizenn Irag does not see any reason why he should count troubl.e by beooming angent, and he further takeB the view tha it is contrary to the tenets ofthe Koran to act as a spy on his felllow men.It vas clear to mne that the relations between Ray and Bajhat werextremely cllose, and that the latter had a trerendous respeet for all thedvice and help which Ray had given him.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 AT (4) OF 1968. THE PUBLIC RECORDSJulu200Michael Serpell talked to me aboutHe said thatanas still in a, very vindictive frame of mind. Serpell wantedme to speak to Fressanges. I said tha t I would do So on Thursday,by which time I hoped that. Skardon would have been able to makecontact again.June.I told the Deputy Directors at the J.I.C. meeting to-day thatfrom enquiries we had made with the Prison Commission the statement into-day's Daily Express on FUCHS had 1o oundation whatever and wasinaccurate from start to finish.came to see me. I had been told that he was jibbingbout going back to S.D.F.E. S. D. F. E. after his leave. He is an ablle officerIt a curious type,seemed to be suffering from some feeling o1 frustration and clearlythinks that he is not being given the scope Which His experience wouldindicate. I do not think that he has got on very well withbut this, I think, is probably largely his own fault. He had various95.ideas about expanding the work of the S.1.0.and tit isdifficult to see why he has not put them into practice, although hemay not have had a great deal of encouragement.T told hir that I could see no reason why he should not EOahead; the only limiting factor being his relations with the local 8.B. B.Provided he could cary them, and it seemed to me tha his elations therewere entirely satisfactory, there was obviously a great deal that could bedone to improve the production of intelligence, Both letter and telephoneinterception could be developed on communications with adjacent foreignterritory. There was also a lot to be done with regard to travel control.Having got his rather nebulous grievances off his chest Tollsonseemed qui te content to go back.I gather thathas been told on the telephone that thematter of his pension is likely to be settled to his satisfaction andthat Skardon Would like to discuss things wiith him. He said that hewould try and arrange a mneeting at the end of this week.We went to see the F.B.I. film, "Walk East on Beacon", whichiaa conglomeration of the FUCHS/GOLD, GREONBERG/ROSENBERG/MARTIN casesall telescoped into nihourrof rapid action, with F.B.I. agents everywhere,fast cars, cameras in headlights, television, etc. None of it was venyconvincing to us, but the apparent speed of the operations and incessantpressing of bu'ttons may hoodwink the public.! Mr. Hoover was. of course,in personal control and seemed to have full powers to call out the Fleetand to frustrate Russian attempts to kidnap an eminent Professor on theatomic team'THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION12th June.3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT1968.JuluAt the J.I.C. to-day I spoke to Freesanges abouttold him that at aal costs we did not want to exacerbatefeelings.Ve should be seeing him towards the end of the week and we thougnt thatwe 00u1d then m2lre it to him thet he 1ola veceiye his pensionprovided he behaved himself, and that he would be getting an officialnotification.Freseanges seemed entirely in agreerent with the line we weretaking. He thought tbhet although the man waB a fb o. to have got himselfinto the position t at he had, his subsequent conduct under obvious duresswas at Leaat understandable.Young of D.S.I. mentioned at the J.I.C. to-day the case ofDr. Call STEIMEL, who vent to Russia in 1916 - whether voluntarily 01?not it is not clear and returned recently to his old job as a Directorof Telefunken in Berlin. It seemed that his information was likely to heigh-grade: not onlly had he a considerable knowledge on hiB own subject,namelly, electonicB. Radar, eto. but he had also had certain policy diis-Cusaions.96.Personallly I am inclined to think. that the Ruasians have reached thepoinetwhere they consider that they have got all they want f'rom the Germans,and/it and, it iB better to cut their losses now before they embark on new develop-nts. If this i8 8o, I can only wish that our own research establishments,ich ane cluttered uD with Germans, will do the same.THIS IS A COPYDORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958fusne 2910997.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958uune2ooaJeI talked to Cumming aboutHe is going to get intotouch with S.I.S. and do anything he can. to help. The proposal is to getover here as soon as possible.We have decided to let Special Branch go ahead in the case ofMARSHALL and to effect an arrest at the first opportunity. It is hopedthat this may be done at a moment when MARSHALL is handing over documentsto KUZNETZOV.13th June.Kitchin came to see me. I had a long talk with him about hiswork in Delhi. While the flow of information was somewhat one-sided,he did think it important to maintain the post, sinee there was no doubtthat the Indians appreciated what we were doing for them. He thought itwould considernbly help the S.1.0. if the D.I.B. could from time to time bevisited by people from home.Kitchin thought, however, that the time might come when joint S.I.S.operations might be possible. Overtures by C.I.A. in regard to thesupply of training facilities and equipment had been unfavourably regardedby Mullik; the approach had obviously been crude.Kitchin said that Mullik saw Nehru about twice a week, and hethought that Mullik, reinforced by information from ourselves, had, withthe support of the Home Minister, succeeded in making Nehru more aware ofthe dangers of Communism.The operation planned with Special Branch to pull in MARSHALLtook place successfully yesterday evening. They were followed to therendezvous and S.B. moved in after they had been sitting talking for sometime. They were both taken to the police station and a charge waspreferred under Section 1 against MARSHALL, in which KUZNEZKOV wasmentioned by name. This procedure had rather alarmed the Foreign Office,since it was customary to refer to the representative Df the foreign Pover.We explained that although this might have come later, it was inevitablethat KUZNEZKOV'S name would come into the proceedings, since they Wouldrest largely on evidence of pervious meeting of a clandestine kind, and thefact that KUZNEZKOV was an eneiny agent. Nothing of importance vasfound on either Suspect, except E25 on KUZNEZKOV and a note of thenurbersof three of our cars. MARSHALL had 8 paper which elated to certainWirelesa schedules, showing the times at which transmissions were made;service. was The case, therefore, must reat on the accused being able to showthere nothing in this that could not be obtained by any monitoring98,that these clandestine meeting were otSor a purpose prejudicialBurt rang up Dick, and from the conversation it seemed that he waslittle bit worried. He indicated that had it heen possible for hi.m toconductthecasehemighthaveexxtractedastatementfromMARSHALL,whichwould have made the outeome of the proceedings more certain. This, however,would have been extremely delicate matter. We learnt afterwards tha t Burtwas trying to dilscover whether we thaught S.B. had made a mesa of things!In point of fact, I think the action has been right, since clearly we couldnot allow these meetings to 80 on indefinitely. It is to be hoped thattheAttorney General will give his fiat, even if he thinks that the proceedingsmay fail, since g a clear impression must be left in the public mind thatthese meetings were not purely social and that something in the way ofespionage was afoot.MARSHALL was taken to his home. in order that his room might besearched. His father asked whe t it was all about and Hughes, the S.B.officer, suggested that the son might give the explanation. This, however,the son declined to do, beyond saying tha he had been "out with a friend,At the Court proceedings today MARSHALL indicated that he did not want bail.16th June.Yesterday Dick had to go down to Chartwell to see the P.M. He foundhim in bed with all the Sunday newspapers laid out in front of him, a cigarin his mouth, and a large box of cigars at his bedside.! He was extremelythe spot and wanted to know all about the case. He seerned quite satisfiedwith the action that had been taken and, having offered Dick one of his cigarswhich the latter refused, requested him to have a talk with the "Profi(Lord Cherwell).Cherwelll had a bee in his bonnet about the FUCHS story which hadappeared in the Daily Express last weel. He thought that the Communistshad 'planted' the information on the Daily Express. Dick said that in hisview the more likely explnnation was that an old lag had seen a way of makingE5. According to the story that we have got from someone in touch withthe Daily Express office, the paper received a call from a man calling himself'DAVIS' who said that he was a warder from Stafford Gaol and that he hadsomething to communicate. He said he would meet a reporter at St. Paul'sChurchyard. The reporter met him and was shown what was apparently a forgedprison order for FUCH'S transfer from Stafford Gaoll to Pentonville. He thengave the story ab it appeared in the Daily Express, but for some reason O1another said that his real name was ROSS. The Express had rung up theGovernor of Stafford Gaol, from whom they had had a non-commital reply; theyhad therefore aesumed that the story was confirmed.Cherwellll is still not convinced and would evidently be prepared to into teil thetheAmericansthatitwasaCommunistplotdesignedtothrowaspannerworks of AngoAmerican co-operation. We frankly think this a bad ideaunless there iB some supporting evidence.99.'c rang up to-day tD say that he understood we were refusingto allowto accompany Renney on his visit to FUCHS. He wasdistressed about this as he felt very strongly thatwith hiswide knowledge of the intelligence side of atomic energy, would be ableto prompt Penney on a number of points which would probably arise duringthe course of the interrogation. He wondered, therefore, if it woulld bepossible forto go instead of Skardon.I snid that in our letter to Morgan we had said that we wantedSkardon to be present in order that he could maintain touch with FUCHSand use to the best advantage tthe bond of confidence which undoubtedlyexisted between them. Apart from this, ve had felt that three might berather a crowd. We had therefore said to Morgan that we hoped it wouldnot be necessary to send more than one representative.'C' replied that Penney knew FUCHS, and implied that he would not,therefore, need anyone to effeet an introduction. I said that this wasnot really the point, and that in any cane Penney, as far as T knew hadnot seen FUCHS since his trial. Finally, hovever, I said that if 'c' reallyfelt strongly aboutbeing present, we would certainly reconsiderthe matter but Skardon would in any case have to be there. I promisedto ring 'c' back.I spoke to 'c' on the telephone in the evening. I told him thatwe did not wish to objeet if he wishedto go in addition to Penneyand Skardon. It ViaS agreed that 'c' viould tell Morgan that this matterhad been settled between us.Jack Morton came in to discuss with Dick, Horrocks and myselfatelegram from Leighton to say that he now only wants the services ofCarrell for research work within the Malayan Union S.B.Morton has agreed, subject to review when he gets out there at theend of September. If he then feels the services of Gee are necessary hewill let us know. What he is trying to set up within the S.B. is a kindof B.2.b. to eamry out research Work and indicate cases where profitableaction can be taken.Dick seemed to think the idea was all right, provided the S.B.particularly in their outstations, did submit such cases for examination.We thought we ought to get this matter quite settled with Morton beforeGerald Templer descends upon us.. The latter arrived back in London to-day -true to his last words to me before leaving: "I shall be back in about sixmeekssp raising ain in Whitehall" I am inclined to think that most ofthe Cain will be raised in the Colonial Office!Dick teils mne that KERR, who got into trouble with a woman in Moscowa short time ago and was brought home, has come forward to say that hebelieves that MARSHALL was also visiting the Russian canteen waitre8scalled NINA. This is in fact confirmed by an entry in MARSHAIL'E diary.It seemd likely, therefore, that where KERR resisted approach by the M.G.B.,MARSHALL sucoumbed.100.A former Transport officer an Moacow has allsp come forward to saythat he belleved that MARSHAII waa a Comunist The Foreign Office areincensed that the Embassy in Moacow did not dispense With NINA'S servicesearlier OP tell thern about MARSHALL'E assooiation vith the ginl, about whichey seem to have known.There is no doubt that on security in Moscow is positively lamentablle.17th June.Dick talked to me about getting prior approval from the D. of P.P.before taking action in espionage cases. He said that this treateda certain Bwlvardness when we called in Special Branch, since the policewould normally consider that they wished for freedom of action in goingforward with a case such as that of MARSHALL.I said that as fax as I could recollect it had always been thepractice to consult with the D. of P.P. before taking action, mainlybecause there wais always the political implication to be considered, eventhough this might have been previously eleared with the Foreign Office,but perhaps more because it was extremely important not to stultify theofriciall Secrets Acts in any way. Criminal cases were entirely different.It might, too, be argued that Special Branch - and Burt in particular -would have the right sense and approach in initiating action. Thie mightnot apply in the case of many Chief Constables. If irresponsible actionwere taken, we might end up by getting the 0.S.A debated in the House ofCommons,vithdisastrousresult.didnotthinkitwaspossibletolayGoyn any hard and fast rule. In the present case I did not think there wasneed to consult the D. of P.P. but in other cases it might be importantto carny hir, since it is he who has to advise the Attorney General.There have heen two interesting developments. It nov seems that theformer Transport Officer in Moscow, BARTHOLOMEVI, who came forward to saythat he believed MARSHALL to have been a Cormunist, was either trying tocover uD activities of his own O1 to obtain information. An examinationof his banking account,a and that of MARSHALL, shows that he has paid MARSHALLseveral sumes of 220 and allso that he paid a girl Oommunist, who went toRussia years ago and felll on evil sircumstances; for some reason or anotherthe Rusians alllowed her to return here. BARTHOLOMEW'S own account hada balance of soething like E1,800 at the time that he waa making paymentsto MARSHALL.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958diss1101.18t71 June.At the J.I.C. thi.s morning we discussed E letter fror GeneralKirlan asking for guidance about making contact with the Geran SecretService. We agreed that it wag ifficitit to answer General Kirkman'equestions until we knew whether the Germans themselves had made up theirminds about who was to ru the Service. It seemed to lie betweenVon Gehlen and Heinz. Von Gehllen controlls the RUSTY organisation andHeinz is head of what is known as the Heinz Bureau, which also seems to berunning agents.It was clear enough that the Germans would have a Secret Serviceand that our only course was to establish friendly relations with thatorganisation.It waB agreed that before making comments, the High Comrisstlonershoud approach Dr. Adenaeur and that this should be done, if poesible,before General Kirkman's visit to this country on July 30th.19th June.At the J.I.0. Director meeting to-ay I nde a short statementabout the MARSHALL case, emphasising that it was based very largely onassociation and vas the kind of case which could only be brought by acountry having an Ofricial Secrets Act. While we did not think that anythingvery serious had Eone wrong, it was an association which we could not allovito continue. The information being passed related to times, frequenciesand call-signs used for Foreign Office communications.The Foreign Office said they had received a communication from theirAmbassador, expressing a certain alarm that KUZNEZKOV had been searched.They thought that reciprocal action might be taken against members of theEmbassystaffinMoscow. The Ambassador has issued speciall instructionethat nobody is to carry any documents which might be at al1 compromising.I might have asked why such an instruction had not been issued before,since the precaution seemed a fairly obvious one. Apart for this, if theRuseians did arrest one of ou people in Moscow, they are fully capable ofplanting documents on them.When I got back Dick told me that the Soviet Embassy have put theirfoot right in it. They protested about KUZNETSOV being searched and went onto belleve that they just happened to sit down on the same bench! Thisto say that the meeting vas a purely casual one; in other words; we are asked vinlnot ED very well in Court, since MARSHALL inimself has admitted to mttingKUENETSOV seven times, and the Vatchers willl report in some deta1l about thefuntive movements of KUZNETSOV, not only at this meeting but at the twoprevious meetings. Apart from this, KUZNETSOV had the numbers of threeout cars in his notebook!THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 19581102..6./A reported at the Appointment Board tio-any that a letterhed been received from the Colonial Office enquiring Whether or not anydecision had yet been reached regarding the opening of the poat in Aden.F.O. was asked to join the Otreting at this Btage. She was informed thatthe estimated cost of the opening of the station would loe at the rate ofE5,000 p.a. or about 52,500 in this financial yean. She gave it as heropinion that this money could be found. She then withdrew. It was feltthat, owing to the difficiilty of obtaining an adequate number of trainedofficers to fufil the demands made on the Service, oticeably in Malaya,it would be hard to find a suitable officer for Aden. In addition theBoard did not feel whipley convinced of the immediate intelligence need,It was therefore decided to recommend to the D.G. that consideration afthis question should be deferred until later in the year - (possibly aftera projected visit to the area by 0.S.). The Colonial Office should beinformed accordingiy.1ITHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDin DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 19582ooC1t wag agreed to recornend to the D.G. that Mr. MANN'E applicationD be appointed to the staff of the security Service on his resignationfrom the Glasgow Police in September 1952 should be accepted. The D.G.subsequently approved and sta ted that Mr. MANN should be appointed to theestablished staff.D.C. reported that Generall Templer was searching for a SecurityOfficer for Kuala Lumpur. There was some discussion on this matter anda general feelling that we should do all we could to help to find asuitable ofricer, but the matter was reserved for further consideration.2oth June.Billy ROBERTSON looked in. He was formerly in B.1.A. but left uSin1911 to W or for U.N.RR.A. when U.N.R.R.A. folded up he went on toU.N.0. or NATO and is now employed by the Council of Europe.Apparently Eden'e speech, indicating a more active part in theaffaire of the Council, has been rather a shock to the Germans, who thoughtthat they were going to have things their own way.23nd June.The MARSHALL case came up again on Saturday, when a remand wasobtained until next Thureday. There had been a legal meeting before withthe Sollicitor General, lanningham-Buller who seemed to be generally ratherof at the sea! At one stage he gaid to Gambier-Parry, a propos of the significancepiecepaperfoundonMARSHAIL:VIthinkIknowthemeaningofthigi. Gambier-Parry then said: "I do not think it is the kind of103."slenicicance that yon think 1t ism After these oryptic pemark.e theroom waa cleared Tor Gambiep-Parny and Mrmningham-Buller to go into ahuddle, at the coneusion of which, Bass, the Treasury Counsed, nemarkedthat SO fan he had heard nothing about the evidence which seemed to hairimportantSome time after midnight Dick was pung up from Chartwelll by theP.M's secretary. The P.M. had seen the evening papers with the newchanges and had got rather excited. After a conversatior lasting abouthalf an hour with Oates (the secretary). the P.M. seemed satisfied,I saw Newsam this morning, when I talked to him about the principleDf imposing Warrants on a soldier in B.A.O.R. For technical reasons thishad to be done by the Army Post office. The point arose therefore, as towhether the Warrant should be igned by the Secretary of State for dar orby the Home Office. Newsam thought that Sir George Turner should call ameeting on this point.At the D.G's meeting to-day the question of a new post a t Adenwas considered. It was pointed out that financially the opening of sucha post would be possible. as for the remainder of the financial year itwould cost about 2,500 and that this money could be found on ourpresent estimates. The annual coat, however, would in future be E5,000as far as we could enlculate.on the question of suitable manpower, the opening of such if postwoulld be an ernbarrassment, since it would be ifficullt to find a suitableofficer without disrupting over mope important wo.rk. The position hedbeen made more difficult by our agreement to supply two and s9iblythree, officers on secondment to General Templer in Malaya, but of moatimportance, it seemed to us that there was not really an intelligence need.In Aden therenwere ne serious security problems at the moment; the onlysuggestion of/intelligence need advanced was that ve should be buildingan important refinery at Aden in 1953.As regards British Somaliland it seemed to us that this could besuitablle nun from Nairobi, while Khartoum could be as easily, if not moreeasily, visited from the Canal Zone..The demand for a station in Aden hed arisen largely from the mutinyin the Sudan Police rather more than a year ago. Since, however, thepossibility was not known even to t he Commissioner of Police. it is unlikelythat our officer woulld have been any/iiser. The C.-in-0. had, however,felt at the time the t he ought to have beenfbrewarned if any additionalforces wene likely to be committed in the Sudan. For this purpose he hada G.8.0.1 or G.8.0.2 situated in Khartoumt,The D.G. agreed that, on present information at any rate, the openingof a post at Aden could not be justified, He thought however that theposition could be re-examined by Alec Kellar when he ttended the AfricanS.1.0's Conference in October. Meanwhile, we Ghoulld have the dvantageof a discussion with the Cormisaion o Baistant Commissioner of Policein the Sddan who vas attending one of our Coloniall Conferences here inJuly.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958Rine2001alone25th Tune.One of the Assistant Chief Constables for Lancashire County',Palfrey by name, and Chief Superintendent Lindsay came to see me during atour of the office.26th June.I talked to Miss Small about the case ofa refugee ofGerman extraction who is now domiciled in the United States. He iscoming here shortly for a visit to an ex-colleague of his in E.M.I.namely, GerhardThere is reason to think that thesetwo individuals may have some connection with the ROBINSON case.ROBINSON was a Russian agent operating in France during the war andvias captured by the Germans. At the end of the war vie obtained certainrecords which were in the possession of ROBINSON when the Germans raidedhis premises. one of the documents vas a comunicatior from anotherRussian head agent here known as "JEAN". forwarding papers which itappeared had been in the possessior ofIt seemed that,possibly unknown tosome individual referred to as "The Professor"had had access todocuments which covered the field ofelectronics. We had asked the F.B.I. to interviewon theassumption that the latter was an innocent party, and with a view toKing out whether he ld-suggest anyone in E.M.I. who might have hadaccess to these documents.gave a number of names, but did not includewho now seems to have been a long standing friend of his and iscomingonavisit to Europe.Running parallel to this case, and possibly connected vith it,is that of Guntherrelative of the man here, who is stronglybelieved by the Frencn to be a Soviet agent. We are taking all stepsto coverduring the period of the former'e visitto this country.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958une 2000103.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 Jins ne 2009106.27th June.I had a talk with Graham Mitchell about ERSIG. He is looking into thequestion of indoctrination and office instructions.The proceedings at the MARSHALL triall before the Magistrate yesterdaywent reasonably well, although there were one or two minor slips du toCounsel not knowing enough about his Brief, and to a rather bad witness fromHI slope.The case has gone for trial at the July sessions at the Old Bailey,and it is unlikely that we shall meet with much difficulty , although theaccused's Counsel, APPLEBE, has close Party associations. He is however,I thinlc, confused about the technical implications of the information whichhas been passed. It is difficult to see how he can get enlightenment onthese points either from MARSHALL or from the Russians, since it woulld beembarrassing to both of them to tell him the t ruth.Both June.I asked him for our list of Warrants submitted at the beginning Ofthe year, in accordance ith a request thet the Home Office should beinformed about alll Warrants who ch had been imposed for a period of twelvemonths. This list is normaiiy returned, but Newsam had lept bo th this year'sand last year's He promised to have a good look among his papers. Heopened severa drawers revealing memoranda of a Top Secret kind: he thenlookced a little confused and explained to me that such document wereperfeotly safe. I am not at all convinced that they are, seeing that hefrequently leaves his room for long period with the door wide open. Iwongered, too, whether his drawers are locked at night.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSAOT 1968. Jul 2009107.lst July.I attended themeeting, which was 'c''s last appearanceas Chairman. As his 'swan song" he implored the Board to have dueregard for the security of any future successes withHe was convinced that it was only by the most rigid imposition ofsecurity that we had won the la'st war. He had-see seen the P.M. and askedhim to give his support to any proposals whicl reached him regardingfinances which had been adopted by the Board in connection with theimprovement of our sources of information. It seemed unlikely that theBoard Would get more than about half it had asked for.The P.M. is vitally interested in this source of information andintends to pay a visit to G.C.H.0. very shortly.2nd July.Robertson and Skardon came to see me aboutThe Air Ministryhave not yet sent off the letter tellingthat he will be granted hispension. Skandon rang upyesterday and the latter took theattitude that there was nothing to disouss until he got thie letter.Meanwhileis in fairly regular communication with the PolishEmbassy.I undertook to speak to Group Captain Paul at the J.I.0. to-day.I spoke to Group Captain Paul after the J.I.C. meeting about thecase ofI outlined to him in some detail the various stagesofthe case and the point which had now been reached.It seemed to me that there had been a certain amount of mis-understanding, and perhaps even a feeling of vindictiveness againstwhich might have a serious effect if, as I understood the AirMinistry point of view, the primary objective was to preventfrcm going back to the Poles and possibly divulging information of evengreater importance about wlich he may up to now have remained silent.Wehad asked the Air Ministry fo give us the advantage of notifyingabout the continuance of his pernsion four or five days before he receivedthe official letter. This had been done some weeks ago and we had had apromise from Mears, on the 18th June , that the letter woulld be sent offforthwith Our officer had been in touch withonly y esterday, whenthe latter took the line that there was no point in discussing his future,since he coulld not settle down until he knew about his pension, and that S0far he had received no official notification. Meanwhile, we knew fromour own sources that he was still in weekly contact with the Polesnin anendeavour to obtain a Polish visa. If our officer was to stand any chanceof reasoning withwho was we thought, mentallly unballanced and ina difficult state, 1 t was of paramount importance that he should receivethe notification forthwith. T understood thathad been in touchwith his solicitor on the matter, and t might be that this had resulted inthe whole case being side-tracked in the Legal Department of the AirMinistery.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONOF THE PUBLIC RECORDS19582009)108.Group Captain Paul said that he WD uld look into the whole questionimmediately and endeavour to arrange that the letter should be sent offat once, T asked him to let us know as soon as this had been done.3rd July.Kirkman, of Intelligence Division Germany, took up most ofthe morning at the Direetors meeting of the J.I.C. to-day. Hecertainly has some difficult problems to solve, but was rathertedious and pompous about them!There was the question of his staff, whose contracts come to anend on the lst October. Are they to be established or kept on on contractblue bonus? This is really a matter for the Ministry of Defence and theTreasury. If they are established it is very difficult to see how any ofthe Intelligence branches can give a guarantee of absorbtion which may be intwo, three, four on five years time.There was also the question of relations with the German IntelligenceService. Kirkman thought that the High Comissioner should tackleAdenaeur, as previously suggested. The Committee made it clear that theyfelt that there was a distinction between the setting up of a SecurityIntelligence and a Secret Service and some body like the D.M.I' departmentwhich would do the colllation work. There did not seem to be any difficultyabout going ahead with the Secret Service, provided we kew who was goingto control it. Anything in the nature of a D.M.I's department raisedifficulties, since such a department would be a part of, on a nucleus of,the German General Staff.Lith July.T have discussed with Bick and Peter de Wessellow the case ofAndrew REVAI.Hugh GAITSKELL and Anthony are supporting him in a renewal ofhisapplication for British nationality. Anthony wants to discuss thematte with meAfter very careful consideration of the files, it seems to me thatup till the end of 1926 REVAI was about as far left as he could be - if hewas not actually a Communiat. I should say that he was probably complletelyline with BURGESS, with whom he was on veny intima te terms.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958une2009109.In the autumn of 1917 REVAI paid a second visit to Budapest, when he wasffered an appointment in the Foreign Office, and subsequently a job ashead of the Hungarion Information Bureau in London. He refused the firstand temporised Dn the second. Later he refused the Becond, but offeredhis services as an assistant to Miss SZABO, who was placed in charge ofthe department. This continued unti] March 1948, when he ceased writingfor the Hungarian newspapers and ceased any contact with the Embassy,probably because Miss SZABO was pushed out.My own impression of the whole case is, that ideologically REVAIwas with the Hungarian Government and that he probably is still. Herealised, however, on his visit. owing to the liquidation of the SmallholdersParty and the subsequent amalgamation some months later of the SocialDemocrate and Comrnunists, that his services here during the war and hisEuropean background would be likely in the long run to make him the victimofapurge.HethereforehesitatedtotakeonajobinHungaryandrefusedthe job in London; the latter because he thought that it might prejudicehis chances of being allowed to remain here; he would then have had theworst of both worlds. I cannot, therefore, feel that he is a very suitableperson for aturalisation.7th July.I gave a talk to Colonial Police Officers this morning.The question of a possible move of S.I.M.E. during the next yearto Cyprus wan discussed at the D.G's meeting to-day, allthough we have heardnothing official about it. The suggestior is that if we do move we shouldhave our own accommodation and not be dependent upon the Army.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958onet0Marriott came to tell me about recent information from8Bfmaans some other iin his University days than we previously belleved.informant Suggesting that Anthony BLUNT was a far more acti110.While I do not exclude thin nossibiniity L should not fee tooconfident about information fromwho now poses as ahot anti-Communist. While I do not doubtconversion, I thinkit likely that people who have gone through such a change are inclinedin self-justification to exaggerate things. For example, it was saidthat BLUNT vas responsible for X or Y's conversion; this may, of course,mean a great deal or very little. but how precisely does the informantknow? While I believe that BLUNT dabbled in Communism, I still thinkit unlikely that he ever became a member. He vaB, however, on hisownadmission, deeply interested in the Marxian interpretation of art, and isinfact still 80 interested. He denies however, that he ever believedin the Russian application Of Marxian thought. He has nearly all hislife been so absorbedin artistic natters that it seems unlikely that hehas ever been really interested in politics. I nk,however,itlikelythat, in view of his close assocdation with BURGESS, he may welll have beenindiscreet in discussing matters going on in this office. He woulldhaveexcused himself on the grounds that. we were fighting with the Russiansand .that BURGESS himself was in Government employ. It is also possible -although I am less sure about this - that he did imnot in far greaterdetail exactly what BURGESS was up to.8th July.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958une200020.9th July.his that naturalisation, and enlis that ted the the latter S upport had of written Mr. Hugh to Gaitakell the Home told for meAndrew I sav Anthony REVAI had Blunt yesterday at the Travellers Club. HeSecretary.ownstatement I told Blunt about that himself. I had gone It seemed very carefully to me that once more through REVAI'Sin been slowly 1947, sympathetic and that, very owing reluctantly, to the to his regime European from inHungany, conversations background but that that he ideologically he had had realised, had in he Budapest very hadall he had probability lived outside become Hungary, a victim he of would the never next purge. really and be the He trusted leng had th and of time would tha inhis Minister, accept posiitio office possibly here here, vis because either a ae he head thought of the that Hungarian in so doing Information he might refused Bureau compromise to or asconsiderably reinforced by worried a statement at vis the by possibility the Blunt, British to the authorities that effect that (this REVAI view had was been ratherifheBritish conclusion ie. best find being himself of that both unacceptable of worlds, 'gated' ith his his memprandum, but, on present both his rather to return) REVAI the tardily, Hungarians had in given other saw words, and as the one dangers to were of he the his had to British. of go hoped reasons getting abroad to At for get the he the becomnin might worst, thestatuscurious the interests that he of should his work. have obtained Lastly, a it it new seemed WaS Hungarian diffi to cult me passport that for him it was in to November, a travel little in 1948.fit would would and In have be proper the wise considerable light not subject to of pursue the to difficulty above be the naturalised. facts, matter. in it perguading seemed I thought, to themselves me that therefore, the tha Home REVAI that office REVAI was athe pos1tion. Blunt saw the force of my argument and did not dispute my analysis ofand that, again I realising drew in Blunt's February, that attention BURGESS 1918, BURGESS was to the had fact denounced that towards REVAI, the the end inference of January beingsevered his relations wi th REVAI.trying to pump him for information. very BURGESS close to had Hector therefore McNeil, more REVAI or was lessbeen that REVAI Blunt and told BURGESS me that, had as had far a as row he on could a purely recollect, personal it was about There this had timeintervened a fift to between try and BURGESS smooth and things Peter out. (? Peter This POLLOCK) had annoyed and issue. BURGESS. REVAI hadhe therefore, woulld not have be acceptable thought the to time the Hungarian Government. to have made BURGESS up his tight, mindsince I it suggest was about ed to this Blunt time that that the REVAI motive seemed might have been Somewhat more sinister thatIt seemed even possible that REVAI opportune knew more to about put a BURGESS spoke in activities PEVAI'E wheel.night vise to think get in and first. that BURGESS, fearing his own betrayal by REVAI, thought than it we) lid y the fact that BURGESS had other denounced theory REVAI and he on tho was occasions evidently very first shakennot Although seem to Blunt rule thought out the that the personal motive was the more likely, heccasion on 3lst January, 1948, and the second on February 20th, (the 1948).THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958dune2oo9102.There is to be a melting at the Home Office to-day to discuss areport Which We have put in, showing quasi blackmailing operations bymembers of the Soviet Consulate, who have been making contact withcitizens of Satellite States in an endeavour to get them to return toeir own countries. These officials had also been distributingpropagand. Quite a large number of cases had come to ou notice,and Lord Vansittart haa nov put down a Question, in which he wishes toknow the policy Df H.M.G. We are recommending that at least one of theSoviet officials shall be expelled, and that the Government should saycategorically that they do not intend to tolerate such activities infuture.At the J.1.C. to-day T made a statement about the two defeotors,RAKHMANOV and RODINOV, a sergeant and a private who defeated in Germanyin 1951 and were accepted here after a stay of three to four months onthe Continent. They had been found employment at eight to ten poundsn week, had been well reported on by their employers, and expressed nodissatisfactior with their treatment. At the end of June, however, theyhad asked whether they could work in the mines, which they thought would offerthembetterchancesofremuneration,andRODINOVhadsuggestedthathemightdo better in Germany on economic lines. He had also remarked that hepreferred spending his leisure hours with German women! He would, hovever,be prepared to go into the mines in this country if RAKHMANOV went with him.At the request of both of them, enquiries were being made about gettingthem a Job in the mines. Meanwhile, they had gone ff together to GermanyVia Ostend. RODINOV had been turned back by the Belgians as his re-entrysa to Germany was out of date. We had seen him on his return he re. Hede adamant about preferring life in Germany, although he had no grouseagainst his treatment here. We have told him, therefore, to apply to theGerman Consulate. We have always taken the v1ew that defectora wereperfectly free to come and go where they liked, and there was nothing thatwecoulddo to prevent their departure. There was no reason, however, tothink that they would go back to the Russiana. It seemed to us possible thatunder the new arrangements, by which defectors would be sent here within sixweeks, they might possibly settle down more easily, not having had much ofa taste for bourgeois life in Germany.I felt bound to point-out that the press had got wind of theeparture of these two Russians, and that some agreed statement betweenthe Home Office and the Foreign office had to be made. This might lead toquestions being asked about the rehabilitation of defectors, the organiaationresponsible, and the sum of money being expended. This was a point whichwe had drawn attention to when we urged that rehabilitation should be on theopen vote.On my return from the J.I.C. I told Malcolm Cumming what I hadsaid.THIS A COPYORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958135.loth July.At the J.I.0. today it wag agreed that Service officer houlldbe reminded that it was their duty to report to Directors of Intelligence,through the appropriate channels, when they received invitations fromRuaaia.I said that where such invitations appeared to have significance,it would be helpful if the Security Service could be kept informed.l1th July.Dick has returned from the S.1.0. meeting in Brussels, whereHirgch gave an account of the action of the French Government againstthe Communists. From information received, the French were satisfiedthat there was a definite plot to come out in the streets in oppositionto Ridgeway'e appointment and all that it implied. They felt, there-fore, that they had to take the bull by the horms. While the raidshad been successful, little information had been obtained that was notalready known to the surete. Whilest. however, it WaB fair to admitthat iharge quantitie of documents had been burned before the Police couldgetaccess to them, information of some interest had been obtained inToulon about the collection through the dockers of reports about theFleet. Thia was being folowed up. The most important fact, howeverwas that the French Communis Party had signally failed to react; the factwas that the rank and file of the Trade Unions were sick and tired ofstrikes for political motives. This was a healthy sign. There was nodoubt that the Party had received a severe shock.At the Appointments Board to-day the D.G's Directive from thePrime Minister was discussed. At the Directors' Meeting on 7th Julythe D.G. asked the Board to examine the Directive given to him by thePrime Minister on 20.4.46, as in a recent discussion with the HomeSecretary the latter had asked him to ubmit a new draft Directive.This was discussed by the Board and a draft drawn up for discussion withthe D.g.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 19582009101.wyTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 uae 7009115THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNOER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958A.1 raised the question of the use of our internal telegraphicadaresa, Lorimer, as most persons seemed to be unaware of its existencealthough a circullar had been issued on it in Maroh 1950. Itvasagreedtht A. shouild re-examine the situation and if necessary registerSnuffbox with the G.P.O. 80 that internal telegrams could be deliveredto Leconfield House.The MARSHALL case finished yeeterday after a two may hearing.MARSHALL rather stupialy insisted in implying that the documen't foundin his poesenston had been pllanted on him, and when cross-examined inthe box put up a very poor show.The fourth charge, namely, that of procuring information, waathrown out on the grounds that if he wan entitled to have it he could>not very vell be charged with procuring it. but a conviction Mas obtainedon the other three charges, the sentence being five years.It is gratifying that this case hns been brought to a successfulconclusion, in spite of the legal doubta. It must, however, have beenbundantlly clear to the July that the elaborate precautions taken byKUSZNETSOV to avoid detection could only imply that the meeting wae fora purpose prejudicinlt. in spite of the fact that evidence was lacking onthe fact of the actual transmission of information. The evidence waspurely circumatantial.It was also satisfactory from our point of view, since it i8 thefirst case that we have had where the evidence was entirely our own.Through T.C. we came to the conclusion that KUSZNETSOV was a man who waErunning agents, and the reat of the case was based entirely on successfullohservation. since it was through watching KUSZNETSOV thet we were led toMARSHALL.15th Jully.IT her a talk with Kellar before a meeting of the Dixon Committee.I told him that Dur line should be one 0f COropertition wiith O.P.O. onthe basis nf a fairly full disclosure of what they intended to do. Thiwould be in their interests as much as ouns, and that we shouid also insiston the right of veto by Governors, if they thought any measures proposedwere lilcely to be a BDurce Df greve embarraasment.116.Hillcen telephoned to ask whether he and a party four coulld comeover to study our Registry. They contemplated a drastic reorganisationof their on and wanted to learn as much as they could about ouP system.We discussed the revision of the Charter at the D.G's meeting to-dayon the basis of B draft which we had prepared. With some slightamendments, the draft was agreed and the D.G. asked me to write a coveringletter to the Home Secretary.Newsam telephoned to me about an article which appeared in theEmpire News last Sunday, in which it was stated that KUZNETSOV'Shad been tapped with the permission of the Home Secretary.Heasked me to l0ok up the article and speak to him again.Victor looked in about the case ofwho wasemployed by the Agricultural Research Council.Victor had been introduced tothrough Briscoe someyeans ago, when he wished to be instructed in higher mathematics.He knew thatwas at that time highly Left Wing or Communisthe had subsequently givena job at A.R.C. whenhadassured him that he no longer had any connection with the CommunistParty. Recently, however, .R.C. had received a visit from Battersby,tho had stated thatwas a member of the Party of eight yeansstanding. The Establishment Officer had reported this to Victor, butdid not seem to know what he was required to do.Victor said the man was not employed on any secret work. Isaid that this was the normal procedure; the probability was thatwas a current member, although he might not be particularlyactive. Having discovered this and that he was employed in A.R.O.a classified undertaking, it would be our duty to report the factin case he were employed on secret work or in case such employment ofhim was contemplated in the future. Victor said tha he would be gladto know how active#as. I promised to let him know.16th July.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UIJER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958James Robertson came to talk to me about the case of MAKEEV, No. 2in the Tass Agency who has made a somewhat crude approach to an old agentof Vickery's known as "SPOONER" MAKEEV wanted information about thewas a cllandestine one, and if SPOONER has anything to say he is not toImperial Defence Conference and on a number of other matters. The meeting117.telephone or write, but terey to send MAKEEV a copy of the IrishIndependent; this wil.l be the signal for further rendezvous.This approach is interesting as showing that in spite of theMARSHALI case, the Ruseians ane continuing to probe in a rather blatantmanner.Sir Alexander Grantham, Governor Of Hong Kong, attended theJ.I.C. Directors' meeting to-day. He was asked at the outset to givesome account of the situation in Hong Kong and his general policy lines.He said that there were four main sources of rritation inHong Kong:a) Unemployment, which was increasing not at an alarming rate.This of course vas due to the restrictions placed upon tradeviith China.b) Industrial disputes.c) Deportations, which generally caused fairly strong reactionfrom Pekin and a good deal of vireless propaganda fromCommunist China.d) Fires in squatter settlements. At the oLtset he thought thatthe Hong Kong administration had been a little slow off themark, but they now had adequate machinery and, through theexpenditure of considerable funds for relief purposes,coupled with good publicity the Government had even madea certain amount of capital out of these unfortunate events.When he left the Colony on July lst, things were generallyfairlyquiet. Before his departure he had made a personal tour of thefrontier districts in leased territories and had ound that security hadbeen considerably tightened up. During the ytime there was a sentryabout every hundred yards, and at night these numbers were considerablyincreased. Crossing over the frontier by bunauthorised persons wasconsequently a much more difficult matter.The policy of the overnment was to be firm but not provocative.Each case as 1t anose had to be considered on i.t8 merits and, providedthe point was won, efforts were made to avoid a situation where the Chinesewere foreer to lose too much face, As examples of thie policy, he mentienesthe prosecution of three papers for seditious libel: the Government, havingwon its case on appeal against one paper, dropped the prosecution againstthe others. Another case of this kind was that of the New China NewsAgency, which had refused to register. The alternatives were to prosecuteand close down the paper, or persuade it to conform to the registrationprocedure under threat of expulsion. The latter course was suecessfullyadopted. A third example Of this pollicy was the deportation of sometvelve Chinese, who were engaged in making propaganda films in Hong Kongfor the Chinese Communist Government.An encouraging sign in support of the Hong Kong Government'policy was the spontaneous rmation of Right Wing Trade Unons,TheTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMIEN RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UIy ER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 19582009118.The Left Wing Trade Unions, who control, amongst other things,most of the Utilities in Hong Kong, had caused diseontent amongst theirmembers by the constant promotio of political strikes, and this hed beenthe cause of the break-away. The Governor thought that the creation ofthe nev Unions would be interpreted as a sign of confidence in theovernment, since those who sponsored the movement were an obvious targetif at any time the Islland fell into Chinese hands.The D.M.I. was inclined to be critical of the Hong Kong Government'epolicy. Hong Kong was about the only window into China, providingopportunities for rnaking contact with the Chinese people and extractinginformation. At the moment there was a singular dearth of suchinformation from other sources, and the Chiefs of Staff were constantlyurging the J.I.C. to improve the low of intelligence.The Governor said that he entirely disagreed with the theory thatthe Chinese have a time table and that whatever we do they will, accordingto schedule, occupy the Colony. It was his business to hold the Colonyas long as possible, and the moment when the Chinese might consider thatHong Kong under its present control was no longer of any use to themwas an indefinite one, but could easily be provoked by action calcullateto cause the Chinese to lose too much face. Each case, therefore, hadtobedealt; wi th on its merits in the light af the si tuation at any particulartime. He mentioned that the Colony slaughterer more pigs than any otherplace in the world, except Chicago, and that at least 50 of the vegetableconsumption came from the mainland. If these suppllies were in any way cutoff, serious disturbances in the Colony woulld be the result. He was askedwhy the Chinese had not done this already, to which he replied that theyclearly thought that the Colony was of too much value to them fra thepoint of view of trade. This brought the rejoinder that we could,herefore, with advantage to ourselves, adopt a tougher attitude.The meeting then proceeded to discuss the interrogation of Chinesewho were resident in the Colony and visited the mainland, and those who wereentering the Colony as defectorg or refugees. The Governor said thata pilot scheme for three months had been vorked out by the L.I.C. inHong Kong and has his approval, provided the necessary personnell andfunds could be found from sources other than those of the Hong KongGovernment. He was criticised for saying that he could not subscribeany funds on the grounds that the Informatior obtained from theseinterrogations would be of no interest to the, Hong Kong Government.Itseemed to the D.M.I. and other members of the Committee that it must bea matter of considerable importance to the Governor of Hong Kong to knDvsomething about China's intentions. At present there was virtually noinformation on this subject. The Governor was certainly on weak ground,but took the attitude that the scheme proposed would not, in his view,produce any intelligence of value, and that he would not feel justified,therefore, in giving it financial assistance.I asked whether if the pilet scheme was found to be successfulhe would change his view. He said that he woulld be quite prepared toreconsider the matter in the light of events in theee months time.A.6.A.S. (I) usked about reconnadssance flights for the purposes ofdirect verticall photography in Sonth China. The Governor thought thatuch flights woulld clearly be provocative, but on being pressed, he saidthat while he would not ob jeet to an occasional light,any ht,anyithing jin thenature of regullar reconnaissance flights would be extremely dangerous.It was pointed out to him that the Americans had been doing this for sometime without any awkvard reperoussions.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUVENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958119.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCINACAD RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT WMER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958Jusae d0I gave John Shaw an account of the J.I.C. discussion withSir Alexander Grahtham to-day.l8th July.I had a talk with Gee. I told him about Grantham's pointof view in Hong Kong and the decision at yesterday's J.I.C. to proceed120.with the Interrogation Centre in Hong Kong if the necessary finance and.prnsonnel could he found.I asked Gee about Machell.-Cox, the representative of the ChinaBureau who is doing the interrogatione of British and foreignens in HongKong. He said he thought Machell-Cox was a rather eccentrie person:while he was doing quite a useful job, nothing much had come out of theinterrogations of counter-intelligence value.218t JTuly.Druce came to see me.He did not make bad impression.Iasked him about the Police. He said that while it wa.s true that if it evercame to a show-down AKEL would be reduced to impotence in a very short timeon the. arreat of its leadens. He did not think that the Police wereparticularly well-informed; it was a lleged tha they had a Secretary whogave them information about the aotivities of the Executive Committee, butno details were known. Some doubt was cast on this informant, since ifshe were GO placed she should be able to do better. Ashmore was notuncooperative, but rather apathetic and, of course, had always maintainedthe attitude that the D.S.o's office Was euperfluoua. The Governor waspleasant enough bilt would not take a strong line with Ashmore.Druce did not think that the positior and work of the D.8.0. inCyprus would be much affected by S.I.M.E's transfer to the Colony, whi.chany case would not take place for at least eighteen months.ORIGINAL This IS A COPYNDEPARTMENTRETAINEDACT (4) 19FR OF THE PUBLIC UNDER RECORDS SECTIONHolmes came to tak to me about laison with O.S.IAir Force security organisation in thia country. It had seemed that itwould be more profitable for P.L.S. to carry this, seeking assistance fronB. or C. Divisions when necessary.Holmes willl give effect to this decision and is well qualified todo 8o, in view of the frequent approaches by 0.8.I. to local Police Forces.In SO doing he will give O.S.I. a copy of a memorandum on the situationwith regard to the British Cormuni at Party, which was prepared a short timeago for S.H.A.P.E.We do not mind the Americans communicating with the Pollice on purelylocal personnel matters, but for wider question in matters of policy theyshould look to us and work in co-operation with the Provost Manshall'sdepartrett.Serpel and Skardon came to see me about the case ofwhoordon has seen in the presence ofsolicitor.Apparently thelicitor was apprehensive lest the interrogation had anything to do witha prosecution. Skardon assured him that this was not the case, and thathe merely vished, on security grounds, to ascertain precisely whatinformation had been pageed to the Poles and what kind of treatmenthad had whilat in prison. The soicitor was mos't co-operative and wagquite agreeable that such an interrogation ghouild be carried out, provided4121.Skardon would confirm his statement in writing.During the course of the interview. Skandon forcedto ndmit that he had been to the Polish Consulate and that he hadsaid nothing about this to his solicitor. The effect on thesolicitor was considerable, since he now eeallises it is clearlya security case.The D.G. was anxious that before Skardon ent his letterthe approval of the Air Ministry should be obtained. It wassuggested, therefore, that I should ring up Fressanges and arrangean interview between him and Skardon.22nd July.I rang Fressanger, who agreed to see Skardon. The interviewwas entirely satisfactory; with one minor alteration, Fressangesapproved the letter and said that he woulld have been quite preparedto sign it himself. He is nov fully acquainted with the wholeposition.II lunched with Curnming, Thistlethwaite andI had previoualy had correspondence withthe latter abput certain of his students, and a satisfactoryliaison has now been fixed up. Althoughdoes nofof course cover the whole University he will alvays be a usefullconsultant in matters affecting other Colleges. He seems tobe thoroughly sensible and disoreet.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSAOT 1968.Julis2009.122.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958ne 2000123rd Jully.T. went to see Patrick Reilly about the Political Adviser in Hong Kong,whose term of office, ve were informed by the S.L,o. comes to an end towardsthe end of this year. Aldington, the present Adviser, isa weak cha raciterand of lit51e assistance to intelligence on the L.I.C. If, therefore, wecould get sore.one who would give and the Services support against thedead weight of Mackintosh. there might be a hope of some change of attitudefroro the Governor's staff.Reilly waB very gratefnl for the tip and has promised to do his bestto see that a suitable apppintment is made.2lth July.At the J.I.0. to-day Reilly read out several recent telegrams fromCairo from Which it appeared that Ali MAHER had collaborated with MahoredNEGUIB in the mili itary coup a'etat. Cresswell was apprehensive lest thedictatorship should be the corver for a strong Left wing Government of theKerensky type coming into power. The King seems to be extremely orriedabout his fate.In Persia it will stated that the recent rioting had to a large extent,been Tudeh Parity inspired. The Shah's position had been much weakened, andthe prospeet of the country getbing back to normal or planning its budgetseemed extremely remote. Sti0d mone remote was the question of a ettlementof the 0il dispute. Meanwhile, however, it seemed that the British Minis terhad been allmost embarrassed by the appreciationg he had recelved from Persiansand others, of the verdict against his own sifeyby the British Judge at TheHague Court: this incidenit seems to have restored a modicum of Britishprestige! The effect 18 nderstandable, since ve know that the Persianshad been endenvouring to lobby all the Judges for some considerable time!It may be that some of them are wondering which member of the Governmentsucceeded in bribing the British Judge, and how much it cost.There was a very Dong diacussion about the Chinese attitude to thearmistice in Konea. It was shown that the Chinese Forces had been built upto a very consideeable degree, and the view was expressed that the armisticea ussions had been apened by the Chinese in onder to achieve this end.re was no doubt that they had wanted a breather, It was felt that theyhad got 9LI they wanted within the armistiice negothatinn except the returnof 144,000 Chinese priponers, which wan a matter of 'face' to which theyattached considerable importance. Time was no obiect, since the present123.politilct sitieuitdon 17818 nrly 111 their fvbur. Btrong thought that weshould not be oomfdent on the Quetton bI the 1,000 prisonens, and Imentioned theft the Chinese had already whatever the outcome, lost face'on this insve and were continuing tu lo0e fact as long na the negotiationsvere protracted. Even if the prisoners were returned, everybody would knowthat it was against their will. T asked whether it was felt that anarmist tice would necessitate an increas in the U.N. Forces, due to the factthat the Chinese would then be allowed to construot aerodromes in NorthKorea. Nobody seemed to knoiy the answer.Turnes of D.S.I. gave some details about the preliminary interviews withDr. STEIMEL, the German expert in electronics who had recently returned frorRuesia.From what he had said S0 far, it seemed fairly clear that the standardor development in electronics by the Russiuns was ilstinotiy low. Wp to1948 their development had depended almost entirely upon placing sampleorders for equipment, which they enreavoured to cop, and since that datethey have been relying on published infommetio: and a certain amount ofinformatio obtained covertly. In this connection, Amenican curtailmentof official or trade publications on the subject of elleotronics had heldthinge up Considerably.So far the highest priority in electronics had been given to jammingapparatus, and to copying Western devices. Although a certai n amount of workon long-range bombing navigntional apparatus had been carried out, little hedbeen done in practice and there was no evidence of any significant developentaattributable to purely Russdan effor't.STEIMEL Seemed to think that the slavish copying of Western deviceshed somewhat atifled any original, thought. There was no doubt in his mindthat at the moment the Rusniang were a long way behind in electronica.There was an acute shortage of really ligh-grade materials, and suchallocations as there were vere going to jet aircraft factories.STEIMEL haa heard Df El deceptiol proicct to fill an aeropllane up wi thcomplicated electronic gear and craah it in Some area where the Allies wouldget accesa to Its contents. This idea, which was ultimately abandoned, waspresumably intrnded to give us the impression that the Ruseians were moreadvanced in the field of electrontos than we imagined; in other words, to covelup their own deficiencies.German scientists are apparently oming back in considerable numbers,except those employed on atomic energy projects.Apropos of his statement, I asked Turney to certain for us twothings:-(a) the nature of any covert information which there might be reasonto think WEtS obtained from British sources., and(b) the reason why the Ruasians seemed to have made up their mindsat this moment to dispense with the services of a number of Germanteehnicians.He andertook to obtain any information he could 01 (a). With regard6b) he t ought i.t posaible that certain high persona lities in the SovietTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOGHENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958Union had talked fairly freely to STEIMEL on policy matter, and would,therefore, have been unwilling to oppose his departure, since this migh thave involved them in diaclosing their own indiecretions to the M.G.B.I spoke to Victor on the telephone to-day. I told him that theinformation on current membership was firm, but was delicate and could notbe used. Moreover, it seemed that, at any rate within the last year,had taken an active interest in Party affairs.Victor fully understands the position and will take special care tosee thatdoes not have access to any secret information.At the Appointments Board to-day, D.0.8. reported that he had hada discussion withwho agreed that he could handle the Maltastation if he had the ss1stance of a good girl to deal with certain ofthe interception work. It was agreed to accept this in principle andthat D.E./A. would take the necessary action as regards selecting theindividual and arranging training byD.C. sa1d thathad requcated overseas service,but it was agreed that it would be necessary for him to have furtherexperience in the office before he could be considered eligible to takeover an overseas station.D.0.S. reported that he had not yet received from S.I.M.E. thereport he had requested concerning the return ofto Cyphus.25th July.I was rung up this morning by Sir Hugh Lucas-Tooth. ParliamentaryUnder-Secrotary to the Home Office, about the case ofwho works in the Medical Secretary'! officeat the South London Hospital for Women. The information regardingthe ne ture of which is not known to the Home Office, wasfirst given to the Minister of Transport, Mr. Lennox-Boyd, who passed iton to the Minister of Health, who in turn rang up Air Hugh Lucas-Tooth.I said that we would get into touch with Mr. Lennox-Boya's PrivateSecretary, in onder to find 01t: the netnc ef tha iaocuuauion ana, JInecessary, to send someone over to look at any papers there might be on thesubject.Later we rang up Mr. Gingell, Principal P.S. to Lennox-Boyd whosaid he imnew nothing of the case but would ask Lennox-Boyd, He rang backlater to say that Lennox-Boyd had bean given the information through one ofhis orivate onnections, whose name he would not divulge to Gingell as hedid not want her to be involved in any way, to the effect that she hadVisitedoffice at the hospital, where she had seen a numberof documents, including a plan of the complete lay-out of the hospital togetherwith some names. These: documents seemed to the informant to indicate someSIof Communist organisation within the hospital.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958We were asked to inveutictite the leakoge of informiiuion byon the disputic which Wal going on between Lord Cherwelland Duncan Sandys, about the control OI atomic energy.Hill's information, placed on T.C. bein sont br him inrather obviou form to Wilkinson. This is a legacy since it b1 We an old felt brBctid: thatunless carried the out Ministry under of Supally sav the raw material. they would not DONormanBrook'instructions,able to aBsess what wa going on.Hollis feels, and T agree, that this practice should cease,themore 6O since security in the Ministry of Supply is lamentable.28thh Jully.I spoke to Shaw about the J.I.C. M.E. paper which in to comeup for discussion at the Deputies' meeting on Wednesday. It deals withthe state of intelligence in the Middle East and surrounding countries.and recommends that we should Bet up a post in Aden to cover the Sudanand Somrliland.I pointed out to Shaw that,as far as the Sudan was concerned,8 suggestion was made that we were not in touch with the right peopleand that ve should make contact with the Assistant Commissioner in chargeof S.B. matters, an active officer named DOEB.Shaw said that ve were in touch with the Police, but it WaS notvery clear whether we had any direct contact with DOEB. Apart frcmthie, Stephenson, Chairman of the J.I.C. on bis tour of these territolhad suggested that the Sudan liaison might be more properly covered fromFayid.I felt that ab the J.I.C. it would be sensible it I could agreeto someone from S.I.M.E. visiting Khartoum for a discuesion with DOEB,and that, as suggested, DOEB might come up to .I.M.E for a shortcourse. Thie matter seemed important because DOEB will be the operativeperson when the Budan has self-government.At finet Shaw said he did not think this was necessary and thathedidnot agree that the Sudan could be run better from Fayid thanAden. In the end, however', he agreed to a letter or telegram beingasht tE Otayhens, atu3ting to catabldah olosor ccataot thosudan on the lines suggested.We then discussed the question of Aden. I rend him ont theIntelligence reasons given by the T.I.C. M.E. which were inspired byStephens, and said that to me they read like a lot of hypotheticalblurb! Even Borneo, Indonesia and Malaya were drawn in s-havingapossible influence on what might happen in the Hadramuth OP the Yemen.I felt that on that basis WE might establish posts all over the worldlike the C.I.A.Shaw then said that he could not see that our post in Cyprushad any more raison iletre than the one in Aden. I did not agreeabout this, but said that if it was so it did not seem to me to be areason for establishing another post in Aden.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT ANDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958Diane126.We finally agreed that would say that we had been giving the postin Aden consideration, but that in view of general financial stringenoywe wished to look into the matter more closely. An officer would begoingout in the autumn to do this.As regards the Sudan, I woulld say that we had always been in touch withthe Commissioner of Police, and that our visiting officer had seen SpecialBranch. but that we would re-establish contact with DOEB and, if necessaryinvite him up to S.I.M.E. Shaw seemed satisfied with this proposal.I said that the whole question raised a rather difficult issue.Stephens had more or less committed us to the policy of a D.S.O at Aden,by talking to the G.0.0. before referring the matter back here. I thoughtthat in a matter of policy of this kind we should be consulted before anylocal proposal was made. Shaw then said that he had been out and lookedinto the whole thing and that he fully endorsed what Stephens had proposed.I said that that might be all right, but we had, nevertheless, been atleast half committed in advance without any really satisfactory statementabout the intelligence needs in Aden. In fact the only ones previouslyadvanced were that Aden was on the main route to the East, and that theymight be building a refinery there in 1953, when foreign labour would havetobeemployed.Thefao'twasthatweneverhadaD.S.0.inAden,notevenduring the war, and since the war it was difficult to see tha t any newsituation had arised there which coulld constitute a real need.I went to seeabout the revised Charter, the D.G. having had aletter from Bridges on the omission of para. 9 of the previous Charter whichitlined our relations with S.I.S. Bridges had said that he sawinojecti on to the omission of the paragraph, provided we were satisfiedthat the previous para, 9, or something on those lines, represented thestate of our relationship.I had told the D.G. that in my view we could very properly replythat it did SO represent our relationship, except that things had developedeven further on the lines of the Brook Report, which was endorsed by 'c'and hiself at the meeting on the 30th July, 1951, under the Chairmanshipof Bridges. If any dispute should arise, those documents were on record.It seemed torme a lititle inappropriate to define our relations ith S.I.S.in such detail in a Charter of this kind, when we did not define them withthe Police or any other department with whom we were in touch. There wasthe added difficulty in that we could not make much use of the Charterwith Colonial and Commonwealth Governments, or with the Americans, if itdefined our relations with S.I.S. The D.G., however, felt that we shouldinclude something about our relations with S.I.S. in the Charter, and, whenI pointed out that we should have to clear this with S.1.8., he asked me todo SO.I had no difficulty in gettingapproval, Sinclaiaway. on our filling posts in adjacent territories He was convinced of thein fact, woulld have added something about the advisavallue of integration and of having an M.I.5 officer,LG was nace, however,hear that he was in favour of this policy, which we think of bringingforward for discussion with S.I.S.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUJBLIC RECORDSACT 1958209127.29th July.The D.G. saw the Home Secretary and Newsam yesterday. Itseems that the D.G's letter addressed to Bridges regarding hisretirement had been considered by the P.M., who had recommendedthat the D.G. Horrocks and myself should stay on until after theCoronation.The D.G had drawn attention to the 60 rule, which he thoughtought to be adhered to, but the Home Secretary and Newsam feltthat it was not worth while going back to the P.M. on this issue.It had therefore been decided tha't we should stay on if we wished.I said that I should be very pleased to stay on and askedwhether I was now free to vrite to Bridges about the succession.The D.G said I could do exactly what I liked in this regard, butthat personally he thought might be wise to defer it until theNew Year, since things were rather apt to get lost sight of.Isaid that I woilld think the point over. I am, however inclinedto believe that it would be better to clock in now.The D.O. is, I gather, intending to say on until the end ofAugust if possible in order to complete his pension year.The D.G mentioned 0 to the Home Secretary that I proposed t toapply for the post of his suocessor, and tha t Newsam had remarkedthat he had not really thought the question over at all. WhyNewsam should necessarily be thinking it over, I do not know!THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958une128.I rang up Auberon HERBERT with regard to two requests: (1) to beplaced in touch with Colonel Perkins, and (11) to be granted facilitiesfor seeing TOKAYEV. I told him that I had already spoken to Perkinsand that the latter would ring him up. As regards KAYEV, wewerenothis keepers and he should apply to the Foreign Office. He expressedhisintention of ringing up Fred Warner. I added, however, that unless hehad a fairly strong case, his request might not be viewed with favour,since TOKAYEV was a rather difficult and touchy customer.Auberon explained that he had been mobilising certain emigre groupshere and that some Caucasian major had suggested that he should talk toTOKAYEV. He apparently staged an anti-Communist meeting at Manchestera short time ago.30th July.Jonas, the new Deputy A.C.A.S.(I (I) came to see me to-day.Lth September.I returned to work to-day. Roger was away but Dick seemed to behaving a fadly easy time- in fact itowas difficult to find that anythingivas going on in the office at all. I think the answer 1s that 50j0 at leasof the time is taken up in answering questions from outside bodies, andthat during the holiday season things are put on one aide awaiting theofficer's return.The D.G. told me about the decision that he should retire in Augustafter the Coronation, and that the date of retirement for Horrocks andmyself was the 13t1 June. This waB now in the open and it was up to meto do what I likced in making an approach to Briages.5th September.I saw Holmes about a note that he has written suggestion somereplacement for Boddington. He makes out a fairly good case. Itwould obviously be difficult to run the section when both Pelling andHolmes are out in the provinces together. Apart from this there isnow a much closer relationship between P.L.S. and B.1. The latterreallise that there are quite a number of jobs where a man like Holmescan help them considerably in case work. other work done by P.L.S.has, of course, been the interrogation of Germans and Polles employedonsecret work. Personally I think that Holmes haB made out a case,and T am going to consider it at the next Appointments Board.Dick tells me that there has been a considerable flap in the ForeignOffice about the article which "Time" and "Life" wished to publish relatingto HEWITT, BURGESS, BLUNT and WARNER. WARNER i8 alleged to be ahomosexual and a spy who associated with MARSHAIL. The article is,of course, thoroughly inaccurate and groBsly misleading; it can, moreover,129.do a great deal of harm in creating a false impressipn that the Civil Servicei8 riddled with homosexuals and spies!The Foreign Office are anxious that something should be done to proveor disprove the statements about WARNER. our view ia that WARNER is not ahomosexual - although it is almost impossible to express nvopinion on amatter of this sort. Neither do we think that WARNER was involved in any ofBURGESS' more serious activities. Bedell-Smith, who passed the articlewhich it is proposed to publish in "Time" and "Life", said that if he couldget some assurance about the inaccuracy of the document he might get itsuppressed. The suggeation was that the Police should interview HEWITTand also SEAMAN of the Daily Express, who is said to have had an interviewwith HEWITT in which the latter said that he was 'shared' by BURGESS, WARNERand BLUNT. HEWITT, of course, is a notorious lliar and has already beenpaid money by the Express: he might well be prepared to say almost anythingif he were paid. For the police to go to him now and to ask him whether thisstatement i8 true or not is tantamount to asking HEWITT to incriminate himself.They could hardly do 8o without going to SEAMAN first. This maybeembarrassing to Bedell-Smith, 80 that point must be cleared first.Superimposed on al.l this have been letter written by de COUROY toEden, and several D ther influential people, making allegations against WARNER.De COURCY'S letters are clearly libellous and it may be for considerationwhether WARNER should not bring a libel action against de COUROY and "Dime"and "life" but this would obviously raise a real hornet'e nest and a lot of mudwould stick to the Foreign Office, since whatever the truth about WARNER, heis certainly rather a disreputable person.6th September.Burt rang me up to say that Reilly had been over to see the Commissiabout WARNER, but that he, Burt, was not very happy about the whole thing andwould like to come over and discuss it D n Monday.8th September.Dick and I had a discussion with Burt to-day, as a result of which heexpressed the view that unless authority could be got for the Yard to interviewSEAMAN before seeing HEWIITT, there was nothing which they coulld really do: hedoubted, moreover, whether anything satisfactory would result even if suchintervidws should take place. He was much more in favour of WARNER bringingan action against both de COURCY and SEAMAN, or "Time" and "Life". He prpposedto tell the Commissioner so.Roger returned from leave to-day.9th September.Dick and I went over to see the Commissioner at his request, withtheD.G's approval. It waa agreed that the Commissioner would see theBoreiign Office and explain the difficulties.130.O.P. sources indicate that three members of the military Junta InEgypt are Communists and that this may not be Mown to Neguib. TheCommunists clearly see that Neguib'e policy of breaking up the big estatesB a leftward move and something of a slippery slope. We are not entirelytisfied about the authenticity of this information and propose to getmhe M.E. to check up.10th September.Iattended the J.I.C. We discussed a raper an Persia and what theeffeets would be if the Tudeh Party were able to take over pover. Thegeneral feeling was that the Russians would not wish to turn Persia intoa satellite power on the lines of Czecho-Slovakia, but that they would, infact, to a large extent control the situation and obtain facilities for 3building aerodromes, eto. which would be of great assistance to them shouldat any time globall war break out.T drew attention to the conditions. Which Russia had made in November,1940, when they were invited by Hitler to join the three-power pact. Oneof these conditions was that the area south of Batum and Baku, in the genera.direction of the Persian Gulf, should be recognised as the centre of gravityof the aspirations of the Soviet Union. and that it was impertant to mentionthis as it was one of the few occasions on which the Soviet Government hadexxpressed this in writing on a matter of foreigh policy, which was clearlyimperialistic in its designs.We discussed also the case of DAVIDENKO, a Lieutenant in the Sovietmy who had defected. This man had taken up residence in the Viestern Eonesubsequently became the head of a gang 0f thieves. He had been arrestedthe Germans and sentenced to ll1 years penal servitude. The Russianshad asked for his return, on the grounds that he was not a defector but hadbeen retained in Germany against his will. DAVIDENKO expressed hiswillingness to go back to the Sovet Union. The Foreign Office had the idesthat they might use their good officeswith the German Government to getDAVIDENKO released in exchange for a British subject named BUNDOCK, who since1948had been unablle to go outside the British Embassy in view of a sentenceof 18 months imprisonment standing against him in a Russian court for having,infected a Russian girl with venereal disease - it is believed, in fact, thatthe girl infected BINDOCK.The J.I.C. felt that this kind of horse trading was otireally a goodidea and that DAVIDENKO'S return might have a serious effect n/defectorprogramme. So it looks af if the unfortunate BUNDOCK will have to emainconfined in the Bhitish Embassy. It appears that diplomati privilegedoes not extent to all the lower members of the staff, hereas in thiscountry, as far as I know, all the cooks and the doorkeeper have diplomaticprivilege. The Foreign Office are, I believe, proposing to advise BUNDOCKto serve his sentence. The questionwas raised whether this was wise onsecurit grounds, Although BUNDOOK would not normally have access to anyconfidential information, he has of course been continuously beenassociating with people engaged on confidential duties within the Embassy.Apart from this, something of a dangerous preeedent is being created sinceny of the lower orders in the Embassy could be arrested and blaclnailedito giving information.THIS (5 A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMEN RETAINECIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEC'(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECOrS1968Julu2009031.I spoke to Reilly after the meeting about WARNER. He sadthat he had seen the Commissioner and Howe and that the suggestion wasnow being made to the Foreign Secretary that clearance should beobtained from Bedelll-Smith to allow the police to interview SEAMAN.The Foreign office do not approve of the idea of WARNER starting alibel action; they think that too much mud would stick, however innocenWARNER might be.llth September.The D.D.M.I. (Johnstone) came over about the case of an officercalledwho has been indoctrinated and is employed on M.T. duties.had asked to resign his Commission in order to take upjournalism. The arroffice thought that has he had been indoctrinatedthis would be undesirable, and refused his request,who hasobviously been having a good deal of domestic trouble, has nowdisappeared. The police have been asked to look out for him at theports and the security police have been making enguiries at hotels.I pointed out that even if he turned up at a port, there wouldbe no power to stop him unless al warrant were issued for his arres underlitary law, for absence without leave. Meanwhile, it did not seem tome that there was anything usefull tha't could be done.has venylittle money, as far as can be ascertained, no passport, and did not leavehis home with any clothes. Itt is quite possible, therefore, that forpurely domestic reasons he wishes to fade out of the picture for the timebeing.I lunched withWe discussed the Electionhepectsof America. He was inclined to think that Stephenson wouldwin, celinemany way s he was a more experienced and more intelligentman. At the same time, as a srtaunch Conservative, he felt that a changeof party would be good for the country, since he doubted whether thereturn of a democratio President would ever bring about the clean-upin the administration that was 8D vitally necessary. This led him totalk about the vast sums of money which were being expended. Whil.ehewas al in favour of assistance being given by the United States, hethought it could be done at about the cost. He referred to the immensenumber of people who were literally falling over each other in theadministration,an not least in the Intelligence world.I said I wondered whether the many projects which were put on footwere in fact profitable.said that he often heard seniorpeopibe of his organisation say that Russia was a tough target, but thateverything must be tried, from which it followed that the most air-brainedoperations were carried out without anybody sitting down and asking whetherif successful they were worth while. He agreed with me that to pushagents across the various frontiers was by and large a wholly unprofitableoperation, which could not really result in telling us what Russianintentions and capabilities were. Me might learn that a harvest incertain places had not been good, or that some village had a sectionof anti-aircraft guns, ete. but such information is really of little oYne value It dii bowever, enablle people to say that they had put SOmany agents into Russta Or a satellite country. IT seemed to me that theTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS19682009132.urge generally came from the constantly changing high-ranking Servicepersonnel, who as soon ae they were beginning to get gome idea of Intelllligencework were removed to other spheres. In my view there mere roughly threeprofitable operations. Firstly, it was desirable to get as much overtormation, on an exchange basis, which gave a frame into which to put anyce of hot information that might come in, and to assess it against thebackground of the picture. In our particular line we wanted to get asbroad a picture as ve could of the enemy's Intelligence organisation, whereverit manifested itself. Secondly, one should have feelers out which wouldenable one to encourage/ponsibl defector who could give ormation of realvalue. Thirdly, one could decide that one wished to obtain a particulartype of information, that such information was available in a particular place,and that such and such individuals had access to it. One could then sit downand. endeavour to plan 8 careful operation. I doubted whether there wan muchelse that was really rofitable.D.D.M.I. tebephoned in the afternnon to say thatwife was gettxrather agitated. He wondered whether it would be better to put out anall-station enquiry through the police. I said that the wife, of course, wasat liberty to ask for this if she lived, but that my inclination would be tolet things ride for the next twenty-four hours.At the Apppintaents Boand to-day the following points were discussedAliene Reception Centre.I said that I felt uneaay concerning the present situation, and themachinery which had been set up for the receptior Of aliens who might evacuateEurope in case of wan. I felt it was desirable that, 8O far as possible,nationalities should be routed to a pecified ports where they could beinterrogated by officers interested in the countries from vihich they wererefugees.D.B. said that officers of it he Dutch Securi'ty Service had approachedhim, and SO als0 had the Foreign Office. It was really a matter for theHome Office, but Newsam was not prepared to initiate any action, consideringthat the attitude taken was defeatist. The question of settiing up anintermediate stage between the port of arrivall and the A.R.C. was primarilythe responsibility of the Home Office and without their support, nothing Couldbedone. D.B. said he would examine what progress the Home Office had made,and it was also agreed that a study should be made of the lists of fficersfor one who could carry on the planning, and even perhaps be the officer toset up and control. A.R.C. in the event of war.D.B. pointed out that the question was properly one for A. DivisionA.l replied that this would involve a considerable amount of work and time,to cope with Which there was not the staff in A. Division If it vereonBidered that it was an A. Division responsibility, it would entatil anincrease in the staff of the Division.Candidates for A.S.1.0.A letter from S.L.0. Nustralia to D.E./A. of 25th August was discussedbut it was agreed that in connection with paragraph 6, far more detail mustbe given concerning conditions of service before the proposal wascincularised to members of the staff. A.] undetoolcTHIS IS A COPYAustralia.ORIGINAL DOCUMMENI RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 19582oof133.Vacancy for appointment of ommissaire. Surete. TangierThe letter from Brigadier Roberts to D.E./A. was discussed a ndit was agreed that officers should be circularised SO that at leastthey should have the opportunity of putting forward a claim shouldthey SO wish.Police Liaison Section.The points put forward by Mr. Holmes were discussed and theBoard agreed that a replacement for Major Boddington wae necessary.Possibibe candidates were to be examined from among a) present staffand b) applicants from outside, preferably with Police experience.Aden.It was accepted that a decision in principle to fill the postof S.1.0. Aden had been agreed. 0.S. was going out towards theend of October on a tour of the Middle East and for the NairobiConference, and one of his ports of call would be aden where he woulddiscuss the question of accommodation and what was necessary for thesettingup of the station. The Board felt it was important to makean early selection of an Officer for the post in order that he couldbe briefed. He would have to be an officer of' some calibre S0 that hecould talk with experience and authority to Police and Governmentofficials in Aden and Khartoum. The names put forwad were those ofExamination is to be made of thelists for further candidates.(I found on my return from leave that ve had been committedto opening an establishment at Aden. The D.G. took the view that asthe J.1.0. M.E. and the Colonial Office had supported the appointment,We should go ahead. Administrative details are to be worked out byAlec Kellar when he visits the area in October).Cairo.The question of additional staff for Cairo was discussed.Itwas not quite clear from Mr. Foulkest demand, whether he wanted anextra intellligence officer or a general purpose administrative officer.The Board felt that it was possible to put in temporary assistance fromS.I.M.E. H.Q. and to wait until Mr. Drower had had the opportunity ofsettling into his new post, and then to see how things progressed.D.0.S. woulld write to H/S.I.M.E. in this connection.Visit to Ceylon, New Delhi & Karachi.D.0.S. informed the Board that Mr. U'ren had been selected to goout to visit these stations, primarily at the request of the officere incharge, S0 that they could be kept up to date with Head Officeactivities in connection with their spheres of influence.Port &e Travel Conthoi Counse.It was agreed that a Cocktail Party should be given torepresentatives attending the Course, to be held on the eveningof 26th September at 6 p.m.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958que20001344.THIS IS A COPYIN ORIGINAL DEPARTMENT DOCUMENT RETAINEDACT 3(4) 1958 OF THE PUBLIC UNDER RECORDS SECTIONJulu2009D.O. suggested that the confidential reports on officers,irrespeotive of their Divisions, should be circulated to allDirectors. This was endorsed by other Directors.One of the Post Office operators hag overheard a conversationbetween A photographer in London calllled GOTIOP and a woman called"NAIDA' in Birmingham. GOTLOP was trying to persuade the woman toreturn the sum of 2500 to an individual unknown, not to be a traitor,and not to go to Ostend but to report the matter to the police.lle know the woman's address and the firm for which she worksin Birmingham. Holmes is going up to-morrow to see the Birminghampolice,12th SeptemberI has Dunch with9from which I gather that the rellatiorebetween the Surete and the D.E.C. are much the same, but that somecompromise has been reached and relations are just ticicing over.13th September.Homes has returned from irmingham. The GOTLOP case, asweexpected, turned out to be a mare's nest, although there are a fewtag ends still to be cleaned uD. Holmes' impression of the womanis that she is a "high-etepper" and a liar! He thinks thewholetelephone conversation waB part of a love intrigue by her!15th September.Bill Drower came to may good--bye. He is off to Caird tosupport Foullkes, who seems to be a bit overwrought and to be over-working himsellf Instead Df decentralising on others. His main worryio to pick up the disintegrated pieces of the 'Orchestrat and, ifpossible, to build up a new organisation. Meanwhile, Stephens seemsto think that he needs the aaditiunal services of an dministretiveofficer.our view is that ve should await the effect of Drower's appointmentStephens has also asked for a second administrative officer inCairo and suggests that Aden should have two officers, the second onebeing, an attached Air Force man. We do not tink that either of theseappointments are necessary.135.l6th September.Jaclo Morton came to see me. He is leaving shortly to take uphis nev appointment Intelligence Adviser and Corondinator forGerald Templer: eMfully rerlises the formidable nature of his taskHe is aninus to retun here in cighteen monthe time. Meanwhile,reports received from Leighton seem to indicate that sore progress ha'sbeen made and that Young, rather contrary to his and my expectations,has succeeded in creating a better atmosphere within the police. inspite of the fact that he knows nothing about intelligence matters.I had a long talk withThere seems lit.tle doubt thathe is slightly resentful at having been uprooted as a matter of urgencyto join the integrated unit in .I.M.E., only to find that he hadpracti.cally nothing to do, and that in consequence he has been turnedover to C. Division duties. He is here now under instruotio inC. Division matters.At the present moment the integrated unit consists ofas head,They scancely have a dayswork, dur think largely to the fact that source of information arefew and far between. Greece has now came into the orbit of N.A.T.0.and willl therefore cease to be reporting to S.I.M.E. Persia haspractically dried up, owing to the ithdrawal of the Police Adviser,Briance, who was providing about 90, of the information.In Irag the situation is under control and we are well documented onthe subject of Communiem there, owing to the extensive work donepreviously by Philip Ray. The flow of information, therefore, isonly amalleIn the Lebanon and Syriaand there is little information coming in. In Egypt most of oursources have been cleaned up, but Foulkes is struggling to rebuild.From the Canal Eone there is a certain amount of information on theIKHIAN and other activities, and Cuckney seeme to be doing quite auseful job.As regards Aden, there seens to have been hardly any cormuni cationin the past or any real demand.knew of no particuar problemsthere, unless they were created by the foreign elements which would beintroduced when work on the new refinery Commenced. In Argeisha, heknew of nothing, except an occasional report about activities of theSomali Youth League. In the Sudan there was no real Cormunisit problem.There was the General Union,0 of whose officials had a ttended aW.F.T.U. conference in Prague some time ago there had, however, beenno significant developent since this individualie return. The policeorganisation there was not well co-ordinated fre the point of view ofSpecin] Branch information, and it seemed that the chances of effectingany improvement, now that the country was in a state Of transition, vrerepretty remote.As regarde C. Division commitments,had visited the oillarea of the Persinn Gulf,There might be some advice to be given to theTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1968200%336.Irag Petroleum Company, but apart from this there did not seem to be muchthat vie could do. There may be other vulnerable points in the area, butthis 1.6 being reviewed.As regards Egypt the Foreign office cover B.M.E.0. and the soldiersare responsible for their own ecurity in the camp at Fayid. Vle shouldonly intervene if we were asked to do 80. There remains, therefore; thevetting committment, which at present is a small one. From all the aboveI feel that some sort of stock-taking of our position in the Middle Eastis necessary, the more So since integrati with S.I.S. in the area seems17th September.At the J.I.C. to-day we discussed a paper on the implications of aTudeh regimc in Persia. The main conclusion reached was that the Russianswo old not attempt to occupy Persia, but would put in missions of one kindor another under cover of which they would build aerodromes, barracks, eto.which would facilitate their paasage through the country in the event ofwar. There had been no mention of the effect this upon Turkey andPalistan. Bill Magan was inclined to think that the Turks, feeling them-selves outflanked, might lose the will to resist.I raised this point at the meeting. It was felt that the effect uponurkey should certainly be considered by the Foreign Office, and, if necessarafer to the Ambassador. At the same time it was pointed out that Turkeywas now a member of N.A.T.O. and strongly backed by the Americans Herarmed forces had been considerable improved and it was heped in a year ortwo a really efficient fighting force woulld emerge.This led tD furtherconsideration of a possible RusBian advance from the Caucasus to the Levant,but it was fellt that if the assuption with regard to Turkey was right, theRussians would be reluctant to leave a strong force on their flank.As regards Pakiatan, t seemed doubtfull whether she would be preparedto allow herself to be used as a base for operations against Russia, unlessand until the Kashmir diapute had been settled. It wan ght,thereforethat her present attitude would be a neutral one and that this attitude mighitbe somewhat strengthened by Russian dominatian of Persia. The effect onMiddle Eastern states generally would be to cause them to tighten theirrestrictions, but to avoid any incident with the Russians. Egypt wouldprobably only use auch an event aa a bargaining counter in negotiations withourselves designed to Satisfy her national aspirations.The positian in Egypt at the oment is 8O fluid that the Committee fel'tthey coulld not do more than neoduce a memorandum, pointing out variouspossibilitiea which they would use for their own information. Any documentprepared for the Chiefs of Staff woulld be certain to be out of date beforeit got into print. Reilly explained that there was at the moment adivergence of views between the British and the Americans about upport forGeneral Neguib. The Americans wanted to give him wholle-hearted supportd arts, whereas the British were more cautioue in their approach. Thisis unfortunate since it gave Neguib an opportunity for playing off oneside against the other.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958Lsae 2c09137.Nann came to see me about a leoture in November to Scotitish Police,on the suhjeot Post Report. He wondered whether MacDonald or Marsshould attend thin meeting, since NacDonald would be two months out ofdate and liars would hardly have got a grip of the subject. T told himto discuss the matter with them and with Dick White.Mann also told me about an incident in connectiin with OperatiorMAINBRACE. I NavalrComander was apparentl Bent up to Glasgow todeliver the orders, etc. to the C.-inmC. aboard H.M.S. Vanguard. ongetting out of the train he placed his suitease containing the ordersonthe platform and went 6ff to get a taxi; when he came back the bagwas missing. It subsequently transpired that a German woman travellingin the next compartment, who was visiting the firm of MeBsrs. Brown &Polson, placed her bag neot to the Navall Commander'a. She waa met by aMr. lcDougal. of the firm, who, thinking that both bags belonged to her,picked them up and put them in the back of his car. The German Womanfinding the two bags deposited in her room at the hotel, at first thoughtthat the Commander's bag would subsequently be eleimed by Mr. McDougl,When she found that nobody turned up, she rang McDougal, who collected thebag and delivered it to the Police. Meanwhile, the Naval Commanderhad been placed under arrest by the Admiral.!The D.G. told me thet he had seen the Home Secretary, who was anxiousto come over and discuss with those concernedthe results of the largenumber of Warrants which are imposed. I told the D.G. that we hadand I reviewed the applications very carefully to see the they werewithin the four walls of our Charter. ThiB large number of checkswas partly aecountable to the fact that we had 8o many cases whether itwas deRirable to clear up one way or a nother whether an individual servingin a Beoret department was a current member.18th SeptemberI spoke to D.0.8. on the telephone and gave him Iy views about theMiddle Eastern situation, which T thought ought to be revieved. Hisfeeling was that this could ony be done when Kellar went there nextmonth.I agree that thi method of assessing the situation Woulld be the moetsatisfactory but am a little doubtful whether we shall get qui tetherightanswer from Alec.At the Appointments Board to-day I stated that L had noted manydifferent practices for the custody of the keys of cupboards, etc.and I felt that the matter shoulld be reviewed vith a view to achievingunfformity and additional security. D.C. agreed that C.1.B. wouldconsider the queation and report.A.R.C. D.B. stated that he had discussed the matter with theHome Office but they had no Fixed policy and the present head of thatsection concerned is about to entire.The gueatior Would have to beTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUIME RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT URLER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958138.raised with the new head when appointed.The Board felt that we should do a certain amount of lanning forstaff on a basis very similar to that which obtained during the last war.It was also felt that this was a tasl for A. Division, and D.E. 1A. statedthat it would be necessary for him to have a further officer in A. Divisio nfor this purpose and to supplement present 6taff. This was agreed inprinciple and D.B. said he would consider whether or not Colonei Gleggcould be made available.D.E./A. stated that he Would circulate confidential report onOfficers at monthly intervals.D.E./A. reported that the Registry strength had now been broughtu upto over 200 and there vas a waiting list of-applicants for the Registry.Thia was largely due to the success Of the Schools campaignHolmes came to ask me whether he should enquire ith the YorkshirePolice about a miner who had written to the General commanding U.S.A.Air Force for facilities to take a party of individuals to the American2one on a Eood will visit. The writer gives every assurance that he isnot a Communist. T told Holmes to ahead.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958AA2o0139,The Miniistry of Heart ith rang up on Wednesday evening after 7 o'clockwith an urgent request to the N.D.0. to ve.t someone named THOPSON, aboutwhom they had rather inadequate particular. The vet was done to the bestof our' ability, after the Ministry of Health had refused to give us anyreasons. Further enquirica to-day by Graham have caused the Ministry ofHealth to refer us to the Ministry of Supply.Graham think that the enquiry may relate to an individual known as"The Luminous Man", a man who has been yorking none of ouP atomic energyestablishment and has become radio-active. Apparently he shines in the dark.If this is 80, it is difficullt to see why there shoulld be so much secrecy -in fact I cannot imagine hov the Press have not already got on to thisextrsondinery case, since it is clearly a matter that cannot be kept inthedark! It sesma possible that THOMPSON may be the doctor who is going to talehim under special observation.19th September.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS8ACT 1958I have been studying the file of Dr. Carl STEIMEL, who returned afew months agD from Soviet Russia where he had been employed on eleotronicprojeets. The report indicates that the Russians had derived a considerablamount of information from American periodicila, that security measures toprevent these periodicals leaving the country had been taken, resulting ina slight hold-up, but that subsequently information had been obtained fromother sources. Information had come from the R.O.A. Laboratories inPrincetown up till 1947. When these links were severed they continued toget their information from the Tungsram firm of Budapest, which still hadAmerican contacts. The dry-up of Amerdcan publications took place in 1951,but subsequently the flow had been contnued.Dr. STEIEL had seen the original Bet of America M.I.T. handbooks.His general new about Russian progress in electronics is on the wholereasouring. He considers that their weakness is due to their present policyof copying; this is causing a lack of initiative but is producing apparatusquickly and is training the middle-class technician. Good class men are 8obusy organising this "copy" programme tha t they have no time to demonstratetheir originality, even if they had it. Those with new ideas are neluotantto publish them for fear of being committed to realise ther. without technicaequipent facilities, as a resul.t of which they may themselves be brandedas saboteurs. Russian weakness in electronics may not be a yardstick for thei]weaknesses in other fields of development, since electronics were not includedin the first three Five Year Plans. Nevertheless, Russian isollation from theinterchange ot ideas if a Severe handicep. He thinks it very unikely that theRussians could produce a nei weapon in warfare, such as tanks, Radar, V.1 andV.28, if it needed a large scientific and engineering background. On thedeception question he considers the Russans are prone to gullibility andwould swallow 50,0 exageeration of claims by Western nations.1Io.Graham vindited the Hinistry 0f Supply to-day where he sawDr. Vlansbrough Jones, thin scientifie adviser. Jones then proceeded toexplain the reasons for the request by the Ministry of Health for an urgenton a man ramea THOMPSON.Bacteriological trinls have been going in from Stornovay, to ascertainwhether or not bubonio plague germs could or could not be used in wartime.The experiment involved the release of a number of these germs - O imagineover some vessel containing a! number of unfortunate animals. At thecritical moment, when the cloud had passed over, a fishing trawler fromIceland was bearing down on the scene of the experiment. It isregardedthe signals to keep away, and it vias calculated that it might have been onthe outer fringe of the cloud. The question then arose ab to what actionshould be taken. High Devel conferences went on, when the rather carageousdecision was made to limit the precautions to informing the medical officerat Fleetwood, and also the skipper of the ship, that if during the courseof the next three weeks any member of the crew, or anybody in Hleetwooddeveloped boils isolntior precautions should be taken immediately. Thealternative would have been to innoculat all members of the crew and a 11rats on board the ship with trepto-myoscin, or some other drug, thus makingthe nature of the exxperiments quite clear with all the resulting publicityand criticisms.'The man we were asked to vet was the medical officer at Fleetwood.Dick and Holllis and I had a long talk about the Middle East.Hallis' asseesment of/C. Divisior job for S.I.M.E. is that such an officernd have practically nothing to do, unless it was intended that he shouldeneroach on everybody else's field.Dick is writing a minute, based on his conversation withpointing out the present state of affairs in S.I.M.E. as depicted in tnotes on my conversation. I have talked over the wholle position withMagan,who, at Dick'e request, is going to put down his views for therationalisation of S..M.E. which in the ircumstances he thinks, withoutmuch reflection, might possibly be reduced to 6 officers, without ore ejudice,of course, to any scheme by which M.I.5 officers would man outstations inforeign countries. He is a little inclined to think that an alternative toJ.I.D. might be an M.1.6 officer attached to S.I.M.E., who vlould ob tain forS.I.M.E. some facilities that they would in normall circumstances get underthe integration scheme. He thinks this would reduce the weignt OI 3.1.S.control, which they seem to exercise over the J.I.D. in favour of P. Secti.onwork. On the other hand he is rather apprehenwive as to whether thi's willheregarded as a1 retrograde step an not quite oure whether this solutioris really satisfactory, since I have sensed in the past a feeling in S.I.S.that their contribution to S.1.M.E. and S.I.F.E goes to the credit of theSecurit) Service rather than to that of thei.r own organisntion. It wasto satisfy this feeling that we agreed to an S.1.8. individual being at thehead of J.I.Ds.22nd SeptemberThe Americans appear to have solved the curious phenomenon whichoccurred in their Embasiy in Moscow some months ago, namely, the occason141.on Which a member of the staff' heard a conversation in the Ambassadon'sroom on hia wineleeg set.. By the use of detectorg it was found that:there was a small microphone situted in the tail of a large golden engleover the Ambassador's deslc. This had clean been done when theAmbassador had his room edecorated by Soviet workmen, presumalyunsupervised. We hope to get details Of how this microphone works.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED3(4)IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONACT 1955OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSRosWe had a panty for the Colonial offieers attending the Port Ec TravelControl course. I talked to Doeb from the Sudan. He aid that he issueda weekly report on security matitens inkhartoum; that he received report fromCommandante inthe provinces which he embodied in a monthly report whichwas sent regullarly to S..M.E. He seemed to think that the positio in theSudan was adequatelly covered, at any rate as regards Communista. He didnot think that Communism had any change or success, since the Governenthad taken over the land, had divided it up amongst tenant farmers and, insomne cases, previous landownars, arrangements having been made that thetenants should pay a proportion of their profits to the State and to theformen landowner, making what they could out of the rest.In this way142.everybody seemed reasonably satisfied, even the farm vorker, although hiswages might be small. There vas a Union in the country which hadaffiliations to the W.F.T.U. Which had sent a delegate to a W.F.T.U. T. U.onference in Prague.The atter on his return apprently disappearedrom the scene, and there do not seem to have been any reactior fromhis Prague visit.23rd SeptemberAt his me etin to-day the D.G said that the Home Secretary wasvisiting us, and asked me to work out a programme.25th SeptemberHolllis wants me to give a talk to the Port &: Travel ControlGroup on the Work of the Security Service during thewwar.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958Gune 2009126th September.Whittick rang up for information about Charllie CHAPLIN. The Homecretary was going to see the P.M. 9 who might possibly ask him aboutCharlie's political views. I said that Charllie was probably not moreLeft Wing than Sybil CChorndike; that he had come under review during theHollywood purge; that he was the kind of person who might well give moneyto the various Front organisations, but that we had no evidence to show that143.he WEs a member of the Communist Party. He hed successfully defended himselfsome years ago in the courts against allegations of abducting women, and hehad never become an American citizen. For all of the above reasons, theAmne ericans do not like him veny much.27th September.I attended a lecture given by Palmer, Cookie's number two, who is anex-S.C.0.. on the work of the Port aind Travel Control Group in the war. Histalk, I think, was quite good, although possible a little dull. Cookde arrivedafter the lecture, having risen from his sick bed, and conducted me round thepremises, which are spacioue and well-equipped. He certainly has a knackofgetting what he wants out of the War office and of inspiring loyalty amonghis staff.29th September.THIS I A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958he20001He had just returned fromGermany, where he had been on a conducted tour of the East-est frontier.He was astonished by the progress the Germans had made both in industry andagriculture, but thought the frontier &one extremely grim. The ground hadbeen ploughed up along the frontier in a belt thirty yards wide. and all thehouses had been destroyed. There was one case whether one house remai ned inthe Western zone and the emainder of the village minus the houses destroyedin the Eastern zone. On the Rusian side there were strong-points mannedby the Beiritschaften.Cimpermar came to tell me that a man callled de Rocherent, who wasformerly in 20th Century Fox, had taken up the idea of doing a film of"Animal Farm'. The construction of this film was in progress in Londonand would shortily be completed. He said that when I mentioned the matter tohim two years ago he had given a copy of the book to hie friend Larry Kentf 20th Century Fox. Kent had sent it with a recoimendat. tion to hisead office, bit nothing had transpired. Subsequently de Rochemont hadad a rOW with 20th Century Fox. Cimperman thinks that he may have gothe idea from Larry Kent, and that he is anxious to wipe the eye of theld firm!ilst October.I have been studying the paper on integratio and T think thatbefore we go any further I should call a meeting of the Directorsin order to try and get an agreed policy. The file is covered withconflicting minutes.THIS ES A COPYORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNIER SECTION3(4) OF THE UBICRECORDSACT 19583rd October.D gave at talk 5o the Pont Orevel Control course on the goincipleswhich we employ in our Vorit and on the epplicetiol of thete principles toO modue operandi goiId stund in any future wab. I isouaned in venywork we did airing the war. Lnstily I discussed hor far' the principlesconsiderable detail the work of the L.R.C. in the let yar.115.FhJames Robertson and Evelyn MoBarneit came to see me about a recentement by GOUZENKO, that he recoieoted a mesnage in the latter half94l which indicated that cer'tain Counter-Intelligence personnelwere visiting Canada and that there would be some general tightening upon Soviet etivities. The mesnage vaa in the form of a warning.It appears that PHIIBY had some conversafio with T.A.R. beforeleft for the United States on July 17th, and that my visit mightpossibly be alluded to in this message.I said that my diary for the period showed that it wa.s immediatelyprior to my leaving for the United States that we had for the first timecontemplated close co-operatlon with the Americans on Communist matters.It had been suggested that the F.B.I. should send a representative overhere, but this had been turned dovn by the State Department who fellt thatsuch a alose laison on this matter might be politicallly dangerous ifit came to the notice of the Russians. It was. of course, at this time thatRoosevelt, and preaumably als0 the State Department, were preening them-selves on their oin view that they had got Stalin eating out of theirhands and woulld bring Ruania back into the comity of nations. In the endit was agreed that T should BO over to America. Although one of my objectsin doing S0 waf to discuss with Cyril Mills GABO'S notional agent andthe WATCHDOG case, I doubt whether I had much discussion on Communismin Canada.It is possible that some intimation of collaboration by ourselveswith the F.B.L. on Communist matters may have reached the Russians throughthe Stite Department, but I doubt whether it coulld have done so throughPHILBY. His discussion with T.A.R. were much more likely to haverelated to the GARBO case, or to WATCHDOG, since T.A.R. had nothing to dowith CommuniBr at the time.Montagu-Brown of 11O Downing Street nang up about certain telegrams,from Communist or other sources. which frequently peached the P.M's office,protesting against the van in Korea or other matters. Downing Streetdid not wish to keep these elegrams and would prefer to send them on to us.If ve did not want them we eoulld destroy them in about three months time.I have arranged that they should go to B.1.6th Ootober.I gave a leeture to the Colloninll Police on the usual lines.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 19587th October.I vent to see hiome preliminary shots of "Animal Farm which seemetobeextremey good. The film is to come out in the Bpiing.No finaldecision ha been made about the concluding seenes, which viill obviously haveto be somewhat altered,iHloO1117.Hollis Was asked that Holmes should 8O up to intervieythe "Luminous' Dr "Radio-ctivel man, the circumstances of his casebeing rather peculian. All employees ap at Risley ane teated forradit-activity eveny day and, if necessary, decontaminated. Thisparticular individual, although he is no longer in contact with plutoniumcontinnes at varying periods to show strong reactions. He had been away ona month's holiday and on return was tested without reaction. Thefollowing day, however, showed a strong reaction on the lip and in thegroin. The Treasury have been considering whether they ought to get ridof him and pay him a pension, but now there is soms suspicion of fraud.The question arises whether the man has been drinking plutoniumwater, or whether in fact he has some means of getting hold of plutoniumwhich he is selling to some unauthorised person.8th October.The D.N.I. rang me up about Persia. He thought that I wae worriedabout the Intelligence coverage as a result of a conversation that I hadhad with Courtney.I said that while I kew there wvas nothing like the coverage thatthere was,I believed that there waISalimited amount of information. coming out of Persia, apart from officialsources. The point T had made was that the J.I.C. report on Persia, whichwan forwarded to the Chiefs of Staff, shoud be accompanied by a coveingletter drawing attention to J.I.0's previous report 53, and also toMid East report, conclusion D., both of which indicated that a coupd'etat wan a serious danger. I had infacit put this to the J.I.C.Secretariat, but the only result had been to refer to 53 at the beginning ofthe report. II felt that we might quite easily wake uo to find a TudehGovernment established in Persia, but I did not know what anyone WaSprepared to do about it.The D.N.I. said he thought of raising the matter at to-morrow'sJ.I.C.THISISA COPYORIGINAL DOOUMEN RETAINEDIN IDEPAREMETUE(4) OF UDLICILEACTSuneRotI have been reading the J.I.C. paper on Communist intentions inKorea. I find it a little difni cuilt to belleve that the forciblerepatniation of prieonens is the only obatacle to an armistice in Korea.It seems to me more likely that China and Russia regard the present situationas a running sore in the United States - which in fact it is - and, moreover,that it might be a source of friction between members of the inited Nations,on the grounds that America is carnying moat of the burden. It is di fficulltto see otherwise why the Chinese do not accept the obvious advantage theywould enjoy from a cessation of hoatilities. They would be able toestablish air bases in North KCoren and the United Nations would, inconsequence, lost some of the advantage deriving from their air supe riorithey might even have to increase their ormitment in view of the tacticalair support whio ch nould then be available to the North Korean forces. TheChinese might, on the other hand, be able to withdraw gome of their forces anduse them for causing trouble elsewhere.148.I would not, hovever, suggest raising this matter unless one ofthe Services wishes to do sol since it is quite clear that there is notsufficient evidence on which to base a J.I.C. appreciation. One &uSSSti.sreally as good as another, and it may be that the Foreign Office are rightin their assessment of the situation.The D.G. has attended a Cabinet meeting, where a new law asrdisoussedfor preventing suspects like FUCHS or PONTECORVO leaving the country. Thedraft is, I believe, being thrown back to the Legal Advisers.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUELIC RECORDSACT 19589th October.Sir Alvary Gascoigne, our Ambassador in Moscow, attended the J.I.c.to-day.He began by saying that Jt must be understood that he and his staffwere living in almost complete isolatiin, and that alll the usual channels,thgouth which the Ambassador might hope to gett an impreasion of the policyof the Soviet Government and the views of its people and its officials, werecomplletelly closed to him. Those whom he gaw at the Ministry of ForeignAffairs acted like mobote and rarely gave an answer to anything inconversation. Any question which was in the least bit awleward had tobe referred tD higher authority, oP to be given further consideration.From the diplomatic point of view his mission had 80 far failledcompletely as regards Austria, Germany, Trieste and Korea. If he wentto Vishinsky to-morrow on the question of Korea, he would merely be tolldthat the solution had nothing to do with the Russians and was entirely inour hands.The Sino-Russo Conference. the Ambassador thought, was more importantfrom the point of view of vha't it had not revealed, namely the degree andnature of future co-operation between the Chinese and Russians in theKorean war. He thought it likely that the Chinese would get more assistanceboth in the military and economic sphere and that the presence of theMongoliand might imply that the Russians could use Mongolia for the transitof troops if the necessity should arise.He did not believe in any talkof a Palace revalution or a serious splitwithin the Party. Stalin would remain in power until he died and would notbe "undressed before he went to bed'r.The Ambassador wa convinced that anything in the nature of high-leveltalks would produce no results and would merely impair the will to resist bythe Western Powers.He did not think that Russia wanted war; in fact he belleved she wouddo everything to avoid it. There was some indication in the Five-Year PlanOf an attempt to increase the standard of living of the ordinary citizen,which, of course, according to our standards, was still extremely low.Such149.an improvement would be at the expense of the armament programme, but wouldaffect it only in a very small degree. It might, however, stimulate theworkers to greater effort.IIn Germany he thought that the Russians had given up the idea of &.united Germanye and would be careful not to push their obstruction in Berlintoo far. He thought that they were fully awane that the Allies intended to de-fend Berlin and that they would not carry their offensive action to the poiintwhere there was a real risk of starting a global var.He did not think that the Ruseians really believed that the Allieshad aggressive intentions, at any rate for the time being.He did not think that propaganda activities directed against the1.8.8.R. were likely to have any effeet as resards radio. He had given upany attempt at listening to the B.B.C. oP any other station, since jarmingmade this irritating if not impossiblle.There had been repeaited attempts at euborning his own staff, but hethought that this positior was now in hand and the Foreign Office had agreedthat infutlre only those who had both feel well on the ground, whateverposition they might be called upon to f1ll, should be sent out.He was alll in favour of reciprocity for reathietion on movement, etc.boing imposed on members of the Russian Emibassy and Trade Delegation in thiscountry. A point of some interest waB that the diplomat of Satelli teentries wert subjected tothe same restrictions and persecutions as the Allies.thfact, Blagovn, the Blugmnian Minister, who his a ptaunch Comintern background,eporeased hor disapproval of this reatment.It hnd been yarticulanly noticoable that the Russians were going outDf their Way to aecommodate the Indian roperesentative, who was invariably abedto mo ony funetions to which the representatives of other nation were not invited,MENON, the ne Ambassador, is shortly to amive.When asked whether any Bourgeoia tendenceee wene developing in Russia,the Ambassador replied that there was of course, good deall of class distinctioncarrying various privileges. Broadly speaking, there were the leadingGovernment officials, the enginears, and the people - with a wide gulf betweeneach la BS.T asked the Ambassador whether he had any comentis on what appeared tobe a development one the last year, namely, attempts by Russians officials,both here and in Canadn, to make contact with local officials among theServices. He expreesed some interest in this matter, about which he had notpreviously heard. He thought that lthough the Ruasians had a ready-madeeapionege weupon in the Communiiat Parties of foreign countries the tendencywas not to trust them and to srely to H large extent on their own ersonalabservatinn. He thought it possible, at my suggestion, that the Russiansmight feel that their prevdous policy of isollation had enused them to be lessvell-informed than they would like. Equallly, he thought there might De adesire to drive a wedge between the Commonwealth and the Americane.THIS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 19582o09150.On the subjeet of the M.T.E contribution to SH.A.P.E. D.Brmade it quite Clean thet the maximum number of bffigere that the couldontribute ould be two.On the uertilon of filling the Senior officer posts, it wasdecided that no diseussion shoulld be held until the return of D.E./A.loth October.Burt rang up to say that he had hd two intervievis with HEWITT,fromwhom he had nov Eot a clear statement. He had also had aninterview! with SEAMAN of the Daily Express. Both denied that theyhad made any allegatione about WARILR Lt the Foreign Office, and thatto the best of their knowledge there was no evidence whatever thathe was a homosexual, Burt intended to see CHRISTIANSSEN before takinga statement from SEALIAN. He wouila then see the representative of "Time"and "Life". He strongly recommended that with the evidence nOM in ourpossession, HARHOR should bring a libel action against de COURCY. Thelatter would then be obliged to disclose his hand, and it was extremelydoubtful whether he could possibly affor to alow the case to comeinto Count.Con Boadington came in to say good-bye. He is to be number twoin the Admiralty Conetabulany branch under Cormander Clayton. He seemsquite happy at the pronpect of a job which should give him considerablescope.I was very shocked to read a B.J, from the Turks. It seems thatwe have aslced them to use the goon offices of their Ambassador inTeheran to make Monsadsa more: amenablle to the llatest British roposals.The Turks, although ready to. and capable of giving onsiderableassdotance, wet somewhat shocked to her that we had made similarrequest to the Belgians the Dutch, the French and the Ibalians. Theidea of a queue vaitings outside osnadeg's office or some five differentnationalities, whe yiould bo asking him to be nice to the British, woulld,I should imagine, produce entirely the opposite effect to that intended-ein fact, I cannot think of a wonse diplomatic blunder.151.l1th October.Holmes has been up to interview various people at Risley on thesubject of the "Luminoue Man" or Radio-Active Men"'. He has not seenthe man himself, but there is a theory which might poseiblly fit thefacts. Radio-aotive infection can apparently bring about sterility.Itispossible to tale some gort of mild solution of plutonium andwater. The mRadio-/ctive Man" is a Catholic, so he may be tryingto dodge the Pope!llth October.I gave a tell to the Police course at present going on.James Robertsnn and Miss Russell-Kine came to see me about thecase of Fndtzvon NIDDA. The Home office are anking whether theDeportation Order against him should be cancelled.Von NIDDA was correspondent at one tire of the VollcescheBeobachter, the leadin Nnzi paper, and woS belleved to have suppliedacertain amount of political information from this country, which WASnot for publication, in his paper. He was on the whole, ae far RS weknow, a sornexvhat passive Nazi.withMiss regard Russell-king to Gepmans. wanted I said to know that generally she could what expect our that policy the Germans waswould gradually build up an organisation here they already had a Securi tyService and Secret Service, and they were being brought into Europeandefence. It VuS true that at the moment they could not manufacture ars,but sooner or later they would begin to do with or vithout permissionThey will, therefore, be interested in development here.As regards Fnitiz von NIDDA, I thought ve could well leave the matteruntil he applied for a visa to visit this country, since he is at presentI believe, in the United States.15th October,Rich came to say good-bye. He has got a job in some Ministryin Scotland.ORIGINAL DOCUMENTTHIs IS A COPYAOT 3(4) 1958 THE PUBLIC RECORDSDEPARTMENT OF UNDER RETAINED SECTION2009152.16th October,At the J.I.C. (Directorg) meting today the War Office made astatement about the movement of troops in East Africa in order to dealth the MAU MAU. The idea is that the troops shoulld get there firstand that subsequently arresta should be mde of leading members of theKenya -African Union, including KENYATTA.Evelyn Baring has told the Government that strong action must betaken.Things in Persia have reached a climax, he British reply rejectsMossadeg'a terms; a rupture of diplomatic relations is expected.Dick and II lunched withand Culver Ladd, Mickey' brother,who is pas ing through here on his way to Istanbul.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958AANE caMP. Vernon.153.Horsbcka told us that the D.G. was considrt ring a PoJcctto the Home Secretary aboiit the grades on this ofic0. Hive presenproposal was that When Horrocks aind T eave, the throe main Diraetoasshould be B. C. and D.0.S. that Establi shments would be down-graded to Assistant Director, and thnt three or four AssistantDirectors shoud assist the Direatons of B. and O, and prestimabily 0.8.Horrocls was by no means clear a6 to what the D.G. wanted ug todo. Did he want ouP views on this nroposall, oP were e to acceptit an finnl and to decide where the Assistant Directors should go?Dick, Roger and I felt very strongly that the three fundamentaltask of this office were Establishments &e Finance, Intelligence andProtective Security. and that Ove sean should become absorbed in A.B &c Cwhatever the task in hand. We should dn fact have to any 80, since anynew D.G. might well aak us why we had subscribed to anything else.Vecould not agree to one thing with the present D.G. and to something quitedifferent vith his successor. We are going to try and get someclarification from the D.G. at his next meeting.I attended a cocktalll panty for the current police course.17th Oetober.II have read a report from Oughton which at last Eivee ui8 someidea as to what ig going on in the Canal Zone. On Stephene'ins tructione the D.3.0. Canal one has assumed responsibility forsecurity in the whole Zone and for presenting the picture to theG.0.C. He has by-pasted the 0.1(I), directs the Field SecurityPolice, hasagents, and has the neiv Specinl Branchunder Prerdengast under his wing. Apart from this, he seems to havesome joint S.0. commitmentinvolving the destauetionoftagets if further disturbanees break out.lIt is quite clear from the above that if anything goes wrong, o?there is a dearth Df information, the whole responsibility is now onthe D.S.0. instead on the Local Intelligence Committee. of which the.1(T) was formerly the Chairan. It may De that this arrangementis more efficient, but organisational ly in foreign hostile territorysecurit must be a matter for the Army.I have asked Kenlar to sound the ground veny carefullythen he goes out. It is rather characteristic that this fundamentalchange hould Haeta stalcen place in the Canatil Yone without our evey beinginformed.20th October.T attended the Brook Committee meeting to-day on whichSir Harold Purker, Sir Robert Gould, Baker, Nicholle and Peckwvere present, Brook being in the Chair.He were to discuss 9 memap made by the Chiefs of Steff intheis paper on Global Strategy, where they express anxiety thatTHIS 4 COPYORIGINAL DOOUul RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 195820059154.susniedent wng not being done to deal with Cormiuniat asonita in thiecountry and in th Oplonies, and that Armed Forces wene no good if themoralle of the coun'try as a whole vas undermined. Brook aaked who Fundlike to begin. and I auggested that the Committee might like to hearery brierly what we do, what degree of coverage ve hnd, and somethingabout our estimate of Party strength in the moat important spheres.T said that ye set out to identify both C.P. members and sympathisers,that having done BO we reported to the Ministry concerned with a viesy toappropriate action being taken where individuals had access to secretinformation; thnt we passed to the Police 801 infomation about Communistand sympathisers in thein arens. We vere in close liaison with a1l thePolliee Forces in this country and had urged them to pay special attentionto Special Breinch work. We gave them counses here and periodicallymeeting Df $.B. officers in the provinces were attended by officers fromhere. In adaition,we vere passing information about Oomunj sts in theT.Us to the Niinistry of Labour and slso reporting on strike tetion whereCommuniiBts were concerned. We were also listing tenchers, both at theUniversities and nt schools, in accordance with a previous decision reachedbythe Brook Committee. We estimated the Party strength at abbut35,000 3,000 Y.C.L. and ye thought tha't ivith our present coveragewe had between 80 and 903 of these people on our reconds. Sympathiserswere difficillt to estimate, but we thought 150,000 would roughtly bethe figure, although we had 250.000 on our records, who at one time oranother had come to notice with regard to Communist activity. In theCivil Service there wer'r, some ,600 Communists, none of whom had accessto secret mork. Under the purge ve had dealt ith 95 cases. Estimatingthe Civil Service at 750,000 the percentage seemed amall.. In the PostOffice there were about 862 Cotmunista out of 350,000Thosepurgedwereincluded in the 95. In the ser'ices there were about 610 Communistut of 850,000. All officers detected were pureed, and other ranka, ifthey vene in the Regular Army. There were about 3,100 Comgunists employedin firms which had secret eontracts but they were all excluded fromGovernment work under a special clause in the contract. In the educationalfield we had detoeted at the Universities about 126 Communists and about117 sympathisers, the Panty claiming 169. At the schools ve had liatedabout 700 out of 2,000 cadmed by the Communists. In the B.B.C. there wereabout 147 out of a staff of 12,200. There were 250 Communist journaliats.We thought the major effort was concentratedo the Union a nd an the Frontorganisations.The Committee seemed to think that the situetid wag, on the whole,satisfactory, and that if appropriate action were taken in time cf warthe organisation would be crippled.Sir Robert Goulld said that he would not like prepipitate action takenagainst the exxecutivea in the Trade Unions; he would prefer to WRd and seehowtheyrencted.Hewouldnot,however,disapproveofanyactiondirectedagainst the shop Stewards.sir Harold Parker mentinned Vullnerable Points. I said that we weretaking powers to ensure that such people would be laid off in time ofemergency as a precautian againat sobotnee.The Committee then went on to consider the 6old War situation. It wasenerally felt that there was little more that could be done. I.R.D.lnimedthat they were already in touch with a large number of people,that they did not let opportunitics skin, and that wherever there WaS achance of counter action by the Press they seppiseaguidinghand.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUIMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958une O09155.It van finally agreed that a report on the above lines should goto the Defence Commnititee, in the hope that not nnily the Chiefs of Staffbut Miniatera might be enlightened about the situation in this country.Sir Robert Gould expressed the visw that little headway was beingmadein the Trade Unions, the Communisits having suffered several severedefeats. The Trade Unions seered to be ready to oppose unreasonablevage'claims and the Ministry of Lahour. more often than not, had to putatuffing into the employers. I aslced the Committee whether they felt thatin general the morale of this country wag being undermined by Communis tactivity. The Committee flt that this was not 80.21st October.Dick returned to-day from his meeting of the N.A.T.O. SecurityCommittee in Paris. It vas a fulll-dress EfFair ith microphones inthe the PalaiB Chaillot aind, as far ae I can see, he is the sole delegatewho seems to have held the floor: The net result of it is that thereis to be meeting twice a year of 11 the N.A.T.O. powers. Dick, Ithink, made his point, that to Eo outside general policy and a broadexchange of information, Would be unrealistic and that the normal liaisonchannels would fil the gap.The Danes had ideas about Betting up a burenu in Paris, but wereridden off. The Americans at first refused t.o speak until they hadheard the remarka of pthers, and then said they would have to takeinstructions fror Vashington. They concluded with the remark that theythought that "yhat you fellows ane doing wap on the right lines" Walraven:who was Chairman, replied, somewhat sareastically that the Committee wereglad to know that what they proposed found satisfacblon among the Amehicans.THISI A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958fsaewinethinks that the arrangement at present in force may quit te possibly theI hed a long talk with B11l Magan about the Middle East. He beright one since the situntion is not realllly comparable to one of peacecontribution war. to make and that if we reverted to the L.1.0. with the l(I)He thought that the other membe rS of the L.1.0. T. O. really had no156.in the Chair, it might look better on paper but woulld have little effecton the collection .colllation of information.23rd October.At the J.I.C. (DirectorB) meeting to-day, Hilken gave Bone accountof the deliberations of the Standing Group Intelligence Committee, who aretrying to get out an agreed paper on the order of battle in the Soviet bloc.Considerable difficullties have been experienced, as the Americans invariablyturned up with a brief from their department from which they could notdeviate without going back to the Pentagon or to O.N.I. A case in pointwas where the Americans claied that the Russians were capable of building7 cruisers a year: the French estimate was 3 and ours 43. When challengedon the information which had led them to their concllusion, the Americansproduced two Lieutenants, Who said that their "graph" indicated that 7 wasthe figure. It finally emerged that their "graph" was based on the slipways;noother factors having been taken into consideration. euge the allocationof armoured plating as between warships and armoured vehicles. The sameapplied to RADAR equipment. AlIL these factors have been carefully weighedby ourselves, and while it vas perhaps true to say that there were sufficientslipways to build 7 warships, this was an estimate which, in our opinion,wasvery wide of the mark. The Navy Department refused to budge, andeventually a bracketed figure of 3-7 was put into the report. Anotherfactor which clouded the discussions waB the belief that Russia might turn thewhole of her strategical Air Force on to destroying the U.S. potential withatomic bombs from the outside.In discussing the Perimeter Review, Reilly said he did not think that,even if the Bonn Governent succeeded in obtaining ratification of thecontractual agreements in November, there was any chance of getting over thedifficulties raised by the French until January or February.There has been a new development in the Faroes, where the Russianfishing fleet seemed to be engaging in reconaissance. It would, of course,be a very serious matter if in time of war they seized the Faroes. Areport is being made to the Danish Government.The position in Indo-China is regarded as obscure.The French havecllearly suffered a lo88 of prestige.At his meeting today, the D.G. was asked by Horrocks to clarifyhis previous directive given to Horrocks, that we were to consider theorganisation of the office on the basis of three Directors, a downgradingof D.E./A to Deputy Director, and the interposition of an intermediarygrade equivalent to that of D.E./A. under Directors B. and C.The D.0. made no mention of the downgrading of D.E./A, or of thecontinuance of 0.S. Division, but the meeting went on to consider a suggestionthat all officers on reaching the top of their grade should pass on to thenext grade after a pause of three years, unless their reports vere un-satisfactory. We alll agreed that there seemed to be much to be said forthis arrangement in a small organisation such as ourselves. Horroeksundertook to get out a tablle with dates Showing the present position.157.I saw George MeClellan and Superintendent Lemieux, who 18 likelyto succeed the former in the not very distant future. Lemnieux is anolder man, of French extraction. He has a pleasant personality.Nothing very sensational seems to have happened in Canada, exceptthat they have a line on a Soviet diplomat who may prove to be of omeinterest. It is also interesting to note that the Japanese have startedup again; one of their Consuls got into touch with a former agent of theJapanese, who is now working for the Canadians. The Japanese appear to beinterested in aln information relating to Communists, but they may of courseexxtend their activities to other spheres.2lth October.I went to see Ropnie Howe and Burt, after receiving a message fromKeith Randell in Germany about a Dr. MEYER of the Ministry of the Interiorin Rhine Westphalia; who Was visiting the Yard with oficials fror the otherLaender. Randell told me that MEYER was being difficullt about securitybeing in the hands of the Laender Bureaux; he thought that the whole matterought to be handed over to the Police. B.I.0.G. did not want this, as thePolice might develop Gestapo tendencios unless they were controlled by somemore bjective body. Burt undentook to speak to MEYER and explain to himhow well the situation worked in this country.Burt showed me various documents which he had obtained from theExpress in relation to HEWITT. It is quite clear that the Daily Expressin publlishing the letter Whitten by BURGESS and purporting to implicateWARNER of the Foreign Office was in part a forgery. Gurrin, thehand-writing expert, had told the Express that he could not say with anycertainty what the missing word vas, and it seemed highly probable fromthe enguiries that Burt had made that the original word was "me" and that"Fred" had probably been written over the top of it by HEWITT and then theWhole thing erased. There is no doubt that HEWLTT had tried to misleadthe Express in ordert to obtain money. In Burtte opinion there was nova cast-iron case for WARNER to prosecute de COUROY for libel, but it seemsextremely doubtful Whether the Foreign Office Will allow him to do so, evenii he is willing himsellf.Burt was a little inclined to think that Randolph Churchill may havebeen responsiblle for trying to sell the story to "Time" and "Life".Drew came to talk to me about the reorganisation of his staff inthe Far East. He agrees with the B.D.C.0. suggestion, that Koch de Gporeynd,his senior representative can be witharavn, but he is anxious to maintainOak-Rhind under cover of the umbrella of S.1.F.E He said that hig proposalwould not in any way affect Generall Templer, Since D.P.S. were in Do senseresponsible for tactical deception in Malaya; they vere only concerned withstrategicaldeceptionintheFarEast.Therewaslittlethathecoulddountil we had Some agreed policy with the United States, but meanwhile hedid not wish to lose such contaets as he had been ablle to make; he wantedOak-Rhind to maintain these, and when not engaged on this work, to performany tasks Which H/S.I.F.E. might allot to him.T told Drew that I would refer the matter to the D,G, and would lethim know the resuil't on Monday.158.25th Oatober.The Home Seenetary has callled a meeting to-day to discuss precauitionsfor TITOR visit. He have expressed the view in writing that we do notbel eleve that the Corunnist Party as such will do more than stage a demonstrationbut that DoSBibly the Russians mneoht instigate some terrorist organisatipn, suchas the Croat Ustashi, to do the job. vie had had one such vague report throughthe C.I.A., C. but no deteiils Were given. We would undertake to pass to thePolice any information that ve might receive. We were not Bumnmoned to themeeting; but I asked Potter to make a review of our files to ascertain whetherthere was any information about Croats, Montenegrans, Or folllowers ofMichailoviteh which we might usefully pass to the Pollice.27th October.Burt tellephoned to say that he had seen Dr. MEYER and informedhim about the reJ.ations between the Security Service and the Police, Whichw7o7ked satisfactorily in this country. He thought MEYER was duly impressed,but he had expressed anxiety about the Police ever supplying informationto the Securit Bureaux, and it was for this reason that ne thought thatsecurity would be better placed under the Police.At the D.G's meeting IL raised the question of Oak-Rhind serving underS..F.E. The D.O. said that, provided B.D.C.C., the Chiefs of Staff andGenerall Templer, were in agreement, he did not mind. He did not vish,over, o give the impression that he was aiding and abetting Drew to getroad the B.D.C.0's recommendations.After the meeting Shaw and I dratted an amended version of Drew'sproposed letter to B.D.C.0. Which was based 01 the D.G's instructions.28th October.I saw Dici and larriot about the data Which we are supplying to theBrook Committee to be incorporated in their report to the Defence Comitteeon Communism in this country. The Chiefs o Statf had suggested thatsufficient action was not being talsen either against Corrnists or to ensurethat the moralle of the popullation was not being undermined. Our faotualstatement on this subject is pretty comprehensive. Frther enquiriesarebeing made about Comminists in the B.B.0.II gave a lecbuns to the Registry on the general principles of our work,and subsequently there was a discussion coverin a wide range of subjects.There seemed to be considerallle interest and keenness among those presen't:29th October.This IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 19582000159.30th October.At the J.I.C. Directors meeting to-day, Reillly stated that althoughagreement seemed to have been reached between certain parties in the Sudanand the Egyptian Government about the Sudan's future, there was apossibility that the ters inight be repudiated by a large proportion of thepopullation who were not represented art the tallls.There were Do other specially interesting items in the PerimeterReview, and the res't 01 the meeting was talcen up in stuaying the monumentallvork produced by. the Standing Group Intelligence Committee on the orderof battle in the Sovieit bloe and Sovlet capabilities.Peter Shortt, who headed. ou delegation, took the meeting throughthe report and drew attentin to the major differences of opinion. Onart strategy there viaS a strong belieti in the U.S.A. that the Russiansstrategic bomber force, sore 300 to 500 aeroplanes, might be whollyconcentrated 0n the U.S.A. on a onerway flight. This may take thefor of a kind of Peanl Harbour, With atomic bombs designed to put theAmerican war potential. completely out of action.Fressanges said that he had deteeted a Btrong political motivefor this point Of view, which was bound up with the internecine warfarebetween the Pentagon and the Navy Department; the latter were even cllaimi.that they were the only peoplle who could efectivly deliver the atomicborb, and that they should thereore have larger appropriations. Therewas, however, a very definite realisation in the United States that Americawas not definitely in the target area and Enemy No. 1 as far as Russia wasconcerned.There had also been differences on Russian capacity to build warships,Which I have mentioned previously, and allso some fundamental differenceson logisties. These difficullties had resulted in braelce't Figures. TheD.M.I. thought it better to indicate the differences of opinion if theycoulld not be dispelled in argument. The French had. made a valuablecontribution, in particular Coloneil Petit, since although they had notvery much data of their own they vere etrenelly good in mailing logicaldeduotilons ror data supplied by the other Povers. The French were venyinsistent on a paragraph being inserted on the weapon of subversion anddiplomacy, which had been used 80 effectively by the Russians in the past.The D.M.I. noted a lack of interpreters, which had handicapped the operationsof the various committees. There was not a single American present with aknowlledge of Frencn, and When a discussion took place on radio jamnming theAmericans had to convoy their meaning by some variation of the wond"confiture"!THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOGTAENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENI ER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958une2ooo160.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958MneDooThe D.G. has attended a meeting about DAVIDSON of Atomic Energy:Whose parents ane still in Russia. The suggestion is that he should befound employment in some University. Coekcroft has wished to promote himto take over the word fortaerly done by FUCHS. Cherwell talked airilyof sending him to Canada, but they would be unlikely to receive him in anycase sinee he is beleved to be subject to T.B.Drew telephoned. IL told hit that we had accepted his fimnall.draft rezanding deceptiou in the Far East.31st October.I saw Newsam this morning. He talked to me about the meetingof the Brook Coinmittee. He thought that if T.R.D. wanted to do somethinguseful they might well arrange for some ol the Germans who have returnedto the Hestern Zone from Russia to come over here aud speak at meetinze.While in Germany he had been told that they had done much to discountComunism in the Western Zone.Battersby, on behalf of E.D.C. is going to have a Look at Germansecuri'ty. L told hin about the general. sert up and hehas read myconversation with Ritter von Lex, Which took place some months ago. Itseemed to me that the only thing he coulld do would be to ascertain whetherthe Gertnans had a plan for the classification Of those Places where secretinformation was to be obtained. Secondly, whether they had adequateprecautions iu these places, and thirily', how the employees were vetted -whether Geran security records wene consulted and, if SO, were they ofany depth? Also, were names passed over I.O.G. records, and lastly. whetherany positive enouinies were made about people Who were to be employed onparticularly secret work.Is't November.A trooper in the Ary, DEWICK by name, has written to the Y.0.L.offering to supplly them with information about euipment, etc. in hisarnoured unit. He has applied for weekend Leave, but will be stopped as hetloi.Leaves the Bapracics and searched, Siardon Wil oe there to interviewhim.3nd lovemnber.Skardon interviewed the trooper on Saturday and has got a statementin which he admits his guilt. Nothing Was found on him, bu't there wenea certain number of Y.C.L. pamphlets in his locker. He is a youugfellovoabou't 181. The Army are considering whether they shoud prosecute for"an act preparatory to an act Our view is that it would probablybe better to discharge him. He appeans to have been thoroughlyindoetrinated. This i.s a little bit disturbing as the Y.C.L. is ratheraweal spot in our coverage. Ve shall have to devise means of maicdng aarive on the organiaationIf this young man had not behaved soFoollishly we might not have deteeted him.Shav mentioned that he hau had a blegram from Kelllar abou'tthe request of the Governor in Nairobi that he should look iuto thewhole security position in Kenya. Kellar had suoges'ted, 1n the D.G'sinstructions, that there might be some parallel with Malaya and that themethods adopbed there might be useful. While the Governor did not thinkthat blalaya was any parallel, he seemed extremnelly anxone that securitygenerallly should be examined, and this was endorsed by the SecretaryofState for the Colonies. Kellar is going back to Nairobi after hisvisiit to the Middle Eas't.Shaw allso mentioned the possibility of troublle in Trinidad 011fields, Which is to be concerted with Left Wing aetivitie: in Jamaica.It is, hovever, by no means cer'tain that anything will materialise: butthere is evidence to show that the W.F.T.U U. are taking a much more activeinterest in Caribbeao affairs.This IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958une2co%162.lth November.Alderson, C.c. Mommonthshire, came to see me. He said that hehad been keeping a close eye on his Police Constable RUFFLE, who some timeboclo had communicated with King Street. He had had Do opportunity ofthing rid of the man because his work was in every may satisfactory.RUFFLE was under the eye of a very good, Sergeant who had detected nothingwhich might indicate that RUFFLE was in any way politically active. Mean-while RUFTLE. had developed a keen interest in athletics and had comnpetedcreditably in the Police walking championships. RUFFLE has no access toM.I.5 material and is not in any pos tion Where he might do harm.I told Alderson that, as far as I knew, we had heard no moreof RUFFLE, but that if we had we would let him know.I then asked Newsar about the Home Office views on proposale made(me time ao for dealing with a Jarze ineluxx of Continentall refugees inthe event of Wall There had been one meeting under Murrde, since whenno further discussions had taicen place.Newsam said that he had mentioned the matter 1.0 the DefenceTransition Comittee where the view had been taken that the problem coulldbe deallt with by refusal to admit ships - he referred to the larger cross-channels boats. I said DI thought that this was a sorevhat unoealistic view,the more SO since, according to our information, refugees had alreadybooked passaged on trawlers, tramp steamers, etc.. and would dootlens comein every kind of smal boat. Apart from this, vas it our policy to turnshipsbacl? In the last van We were anxious to get a.s many ships here aswe could. I told Newsam that ve had written to Ross about this OD the27th September, but that 80 far we hed. had no reply. He promised tolook into the matter and let me know.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958Anerr(63OOi1 I10i ii sial111111615 NerenberI asked Holines to come and see me about his Visit to the Yard inan endeavour to obtain closer co-operntion with Special Branch.Had T been away of this visit (I shoud probably have advised againstit, since I had discussed the matter very thoroughly with Burt some time ago.had explained to But that we now had veny extensive relations with theSpecialBranchesalloverthecountryandthatofficersuptotherankofSupertntendent had been here attending couses -- not solely with the ideathat they might Learn Something, but viith a view to effecting betterrelations and to let them now precisely what we vere doing. This arrange-ment had ed to far better relations than we had erver had before, andSuperintendents had responded in a most remarlcablle vay. I thought it wasapitythatSpecialBranchwereoutsidethisscheme,particularlywhenwehad representatives hwere Prom the Counties surrounding the Metropolitanbe area. It seemned to me that if he sent one or two of his o:fficers, it ightagoodthingTorthemtohaveclosercontactwithpeopleinthisofficeand to becomne better acnuainted With their neighbours. I made it very ollearthat I did not wish to press thig matter in any way i the idea was notlikely to be well received. Burt had promised to sound the ground.Hecame back to me after several days, saying that he had sounded the groundad that the Viev Was unfavourable. He went so far as to say that there wasmind o0 innate jealousy in the Branch Which he vas trying to overcome, butthat it was not easy to eradicate a feeling of this Mind vith a stroke of thepen. I said that while this was regrettable from every point of view, thebest thine to do waB to forget it. T coulld not Franily understand theattitude, since, allthough T had been doing this work for nearly 34 yeans,I had found the lectures of our officers extremely good and interesting. Thescene was constantly changing and there was always something to Learn.Apart from that, such gatherings did much to improve personal relations.There the matter had rested until Holmee and Mann had gone down to seeWilkinson and Jones, with the suggeetion that perhaps Jones might llectureto oe of these counses as he had previously promised. to do. Jones hadclearly been very inuch on his guand and had, in Fact, agreed to mnakce a d.abebubneet to approval.. He and Wilkinson, however, had constaotlyreiteratea the assertion that Special Branch had direct nesponsibilitiesto the Home Secretary and could not, there:fore, be compared in any way withprovincial Pollice Forces. Wilcinson hed been aslced to the coclctail pantyo1 police officers here, but had, on instructions, turned it down, and Joneshad finally ruog up to say that, owing to the possibility of Burt being away,he would bie unable to lecture in the near future.Heanwhile E learned that Burt had approached Skcardon, evideatly ratherhunt that the renewal of the susuestdon that Jones Bhouad lecture had not coneto him through Dick White or inyself. ALT this seems to me extremely tiremamne and further evidence o1 the lind of superiority coraplex of the Yaraich gets them into such bad odour with all other Pollice Forces.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958fine2e165,OLiffe tellephoned about the inormatiol Which Norman Brool yecuiresalout Couwmunists in the B.B.O. L tola hii that eve since the meeting ofthe Bnaoic Committee we had been Lopkina into this more carefully; that we tendhad pheviuusy had discussions with Generall Jacob, and that as Boon as Igot all the facts T was proposing to come over and see Norman Brook.6th November.At the U.1I.C. to-day we had a long diseussion on the criticismsof the J.I.O. by the Working Party set up to enquire into Its oeganisationin peace and wam.There was a general feeling that when problem such as that undertakenby the Vorkiug Party had to be worked out, there was great difficulty irproviding staff of the right callibpe. Reilly thought that the Ministry ofDefence should do more to assist intelligeuce in organisational matters: anda suggestion was laade by Gardiner, the basis of his eight yeans experiencein the Secretgriat, that soneone might be appointed to that orcanisation totaice the Chair at Working Parties. He thoughts for example, thet he couldhave saved the Yorkint Party on OrganisatioD a great deal of trouble, since hehad an intimater lnowiledge of the Workings of all Departments. The appointmentof someone on the S Seeretariat had the added advantay that the Ministry ofDefence wa's responsibll.e for its persobnel. This, hovever, was not the wholeproblem:ServiceIntelligenceDepartmentsweredesperatelyunder-stafed,particularly when it cane to a reall Job of work in devilling out Tacts.TheBugsestion tha't a kind of planning J.I.8. Should be Bet up wa.s vetoed, on thegrounds that it was necessary for suci officers to have the 1ull backgroundof theite Directorate, and, in fact, ito be a working member of it. Onesusgestior for consideration is that ongarisation and security shoiil.d besub-divided and that an organisation comittee should meet once a fortnight6r once three veels.We then passed to consider the suggestion of a map root. TheSeries were all in Savour of it. Keineth Strong vias indifferent, butoD the whole seemed to think dit was necessary and DosBibly misleading. Hethought tha't the Pertmeter Review shiouild provide the Committee with all itwanted. to itnov On the nuestior of earlly verping. 'o' thought tha't theintereet in such a map room would Plag after the first six months; he allsothought that there Was a grave Becaxity issue if SIGINT material yas tobe portrayed tin graphic form. D.S.I. Said he iked the idea, provided themaps were not phown to Ministers or to people who did not kov the streng'thoff the indicators.J said that I did not hrene any experience of map rooms From the Servicepoint o1 view, bub that applied to our work they vere often misleading.Generalll.y spealcdng, IT waB agreement with Mauviews,The uoshot was that the Seenetariat were asked to go into the cos'ts, ete. 2and eport back.There was a diseusston about witini a paper on Korea. J.0.8 and theForeign Office were 8t11 reuctan't to do BO owi.og to a Lacle of innformatbiion. D.i.I., however, dmev atteution to the deberrmined natureof the attaeks 1e Korea and though'e that if they were gone into they migh'tTHIS IS ACOPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 19581.66.provide soe indeabion 0f Clinese and Rusbiam lntenutonssened tome that whattevel Chinese and Riiseian intentions me have been, theysareDOW thowi back Into tie meting pot by Eisenhower! dec.sion o Visi'bKoxreae There will T DO oFerS fonthcominu for a se tlenent 00LI hi.sveturieRiclands of .8.0.0. is neturnini to iatralia to-day. He hasbbeen v/ith us Cor four or five weeks and seems to be pleasd with theinformation and knowledge that he has acaired. He made a very Goodimpression with all the staf here.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958Mne2000D.H/A vas asked to ampange that the Meeting of the I.D.C. shouldtaige place at the Ministry of Defence, and tha't the Meeting of the Trimartite Commission should be in a better room than the present ConferenceRoom.ID was agreed that D.E/A should aBGertain if it wou2d be possiblein principle for 1IS to nominate an officer to attend the I.D.C. Wha'twould be the overalll geperall conditions.It vas agreed that all Direartors would give to me their ideason the future organisation of the Service with a view to a laterdiscussion.Moverchenhad a long talk with Skardon about the attitude of the Yardin parbicullas Special Branch, towands polli.ce liaison. There no doubtthat he thinls the Buperiority couplex is extremely irritiating; hebelieves, however, that Burt is up against his subordinates in thismatter and that the reall. trouble comes From people likeandSkadon thinles it rddidullous that Special Branch do not send a couple otfofficers. to one OL ou counses , and that we ought to get tough. He feelthat our wholle attitude towands the police in politely suggesbin to thenthat they shoud do this or that is wrong This office is undoubtedthe repositony of all imormation on Ooumunism and should. have authoritydirect the police.Personally T feel ghite satigfled with our pellations with theprovincial. police, with one 00 two exceptions, but they hare nervey? reallybeen satisfactory with the Yand. The basic troublle ie their guperionity167.oompl.ex, which gete the in wrong vitl e0.1 provincial. forces, bothab pemirde the O.I.D. and 8.0.TO ezpeet Burt; wil.l raise this teatter with me some time when Iindend to te1l l1im fraplly What E think I have, in fact: done goalready sonE time ago.8th November.I got D.O.S': plan Dor the reorganisntiot of this office. He hasthree Direetors, one for orcanisation and establinhmen't, another for B.Division, and another or C. Divist.on, with an Assistant Director responaiileto both Direetor B. and Director O. for overseas work.To my mind this is unsatisfactory. The organisation and adniniatrationof overseas stations should be in A. Division; Intelligence and.Investigation should be controlled by a reconstituted B.3 and there mightperhaps be one olicer in al. Division who aould act as and o postboxin order to see that enquiries from overseas are properly dealt with.l0th November.At the D.G's meeting to-day I mentioned Norman Brool's request fora break-dovm of Cormunists in varous departments of the B.B.C.Thisrequest had arisen from a Btabement made by me at the last meeting ofthe Brook Committee. Brook was considering an approach to General Jacoband, with the D.G'E ayprovall, I proposed to see him and give him somebackground about ou previous approaches. There are apparently only27 full Party members and some 75 sympathisens. There are TO Coxmnunistson the higher staTs of "The Listenerit.nth November.at oue time in Passport Control, came to.see me.Hehas been doi.ng various Government jobs siince the war and thinks his presentone, with the Foreign Compensation Ooramission at the Foreign Office, may@ome to ah ena in 9 vean'f time and he would like to be considered foremployment here.I told him that we were only taking on younger men to the permanentstaff, but that occasionallly we had regueste made to u8 for the nanes ofpeoplle we could recommend for security jobs of one kind O1 anotheroutsidethis Department. If he cared to fill in a form vie could let hit Tmowi0 any such appointment came along.made quite a favorirable personal impression.ohnny Ciaperman andcame to Bed me,is over here forripartite Security Confexence.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 19587009.68.I had. a talk with Potter about the proposa.. to HollerithPost Report. The Home O0fice have Said that they cannot carny theburden of rilling in a coding sheet when interviewing aliens underPost Report. This peans that the whole burden will be throvn uponanselves.It seems, moreover, tha.t the job is a more fommidablle onewas at first anticipated. The most dificult job 18 the cuttingof areas under the J.I.B. requirement from which an alien comes. In hisreport he will name the place o1 his birth, Which may probably be speltin three or our different ways this then has to be looked up tn theGazeteer to discover whether it comes in Area 11 or Area 60, according toWhich it would be Coded.I attended themeeting to-day. The estimates wereconsidered: they now totaland a further increase is required.12th November.I attended a coektail party for the Tripartite Seeurity degatesin the Ministry of Defence, and subsequently dined withandof the Belgian Surete.13th Novemnber.59.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS19682-00914th Novernber.The Governor of Kenya ha.s aslced the Colonial Office to request theG.to go out to Nairobi to discuss security problems in regard to the MAUU, and they have allso asked Cor an officer who can remain there for a periodsome months to impllerent any decisions reached. It is proposed that theGr. should take MacDonal.d to fill this Dost. Meanvhile, Kellar is beingd to return to Nainobi to join in the discussions.Ciffe came to see the D.G. to have a discussion with D.B. and D.C.1 the security aspects of tumning atomic energy into a private corporation.It appears that the Cabinet Oomnittee has been set up to setule thistter under the chairmanship of Cruikshank, with Monckton, Macmilan andmnan Brook as its other metabers. The Comittee is reallly the outcome ofdispute between Chenwel. and Duncan Sandys. From the security point of viewthink that it would be prererable if atornic energy remained under thenistry of Supply.I went over to see Nopman Brook about the B.B.C. and left withml a note showing where Comaunists and Party associates were emnplloyed.also left him a note of my own, explaining our relations with the B.B.C.I told Brook that ve had allrendy investigated a Foreign Officempllaint in 1947 and 1948; that broadcasts to Eastern Europe were not incordance with Foreign Orrice policy. We had discussed certain evaence,icn Eeeted to indicate dplidity on the part of some of the employees ine Eastern European Section. These were open to R dual interpretationd, after further investigation, we came to the conclusion that General JacobS probably night in saying that the thal.ks had to beradjsted to some extentonder not to offend the suspeptibillities of the llisteners.ie had again looked auto the matter of Communists in the B.B.0. aort tilne aso, after representations had been made by Sin Vlaldron Smithersthe Prite Minister'. T said that our view, taking in'to aecount thee't that the B.B.C Was likely to atbractt Long-haired individuals, there didseen to UB to be an uodue proportion of Conunist or Left-ivingers. Thereroughly 1100 in a staff of 12,000, 27 of whot wene Il Party merubers.Brools agreed with thi.s view, but said that owing to complaints that1ad received. fro Nutting, the arliamentary Under Secretary a.t the Foreignfice, nne vas going to hae a tali with Jacob. - The only specific complaint170.that putting had made vas tha't the broadcasts on Soviet policy in the ThirdProgranme were harmful, in spite of the constant announcements made duringthe talk that the vievs given we:ie the Soviet views and a sumary of theSoviet press; and in ao sense sponsored by the B.B.O or the Government.uthhing argued that somebody might tune in after the announcement had beeninad and switch off before it vas mnade again. I said that if that was themeasure of the interest of the listeuer, IL did not think the talls could dovery much harm.L said to Broo. that while one frequently heand of a general Sthean overthe B.B.C, one never got any specific details of the talls complained of or theWis used. T instanced the case o1 IRD, who at the meeting of the BrookComitte had suggested that there vas something serio sly wrong with the"Listererl. Our enguiries had shown that there was no trace of any memberof the senior stame of "The Listener" on our records.Brook said he thought that any of the complaints were imaginaryand unbalanced. He seemed staisfied that we were doine all we could,particularly on the vetting side, which was really soewhat out of proportionlith what we did For other Departiente.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION17th November.3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958791D.O.S. tells me that there is an an awlward case Teting To the badbiies in Palestine.A man namedformerly of the Palestine Police,as confessed to the Lincanshire Police that he and others were concerned inthe explosion which took place in Ben Vehuda Street in Jerusalem, when arumher of jews were killled and a large amount of property destroyed. At thesim the Government denied in good faith any complicity il this and, in spite ofaccusations by the jews against ourselves, the incident was written off as beingpromoted by the Arabs.We have said that this is not a matter for us but for the police, theD.of P.P. and, above all, the Governinent. Clearly it is most desirable thatthis incident shuuld not be revived, particularly in this way, but if thesonfessiou is ignored there is always the chance thatmay go to theewspapers. We have suELested to the D. of P.P. that he whould consultrafford Sinith of the Colonial Office and also the Foreign Office.After consultation with Hill. I have written to Drew in nepand to the.eakage on Plan FORTITUDE in Chester Wilmot'e bool "The Struggle for Eerope"have said that although we do not wish to engaze in a witch hunt, it is rathermportant to lcnow hov it cane about that this information waB published withouteference to the authorities most concerned, namely, D..PP. and ourselves.rom reading the Appendix and the Preface, it seeins likely that weeneed Look nounther than the Historicall Seetion of the War Cabinet, and to Bil Williams,onty'e Chief Intelligence Of'ficer? of whom Chester Wilmot expressed hisndebteaness. Brian Helland, who has a copy of Roger fleetwood-Hesiceth'seport on Plan FORTITUDE, is now emplloyed in the Historical Section and isentioned by name.At the J.I.C. ineeting on 12.11.52. Hilken, D.D.N.. suggested thate night approachwhot ne knew well and who lived in hiseighbourhood, on the question of getting soone to write a book on theassian Theory of War. I seemed to recolect that we had some record of71.his man and therefore loolced to the file, which T subseeuently discussedith Mr. Whyte. We both agreed thatand his wife had been more 0D lessleared of any suspicion, although it might be thatin his work for theivil Service Commissioners, was rather inclined to disregard securityuestions when recormending scientists for employment on Government work.Ido not propose to say anything to Hilken.The D.G. told the meeting to-day about his visit to Kenya at the requestof the Governor to Joolg into security, with particular reference to MAU MAU.acDonald is to accompany him and may remain there for some time.He dtoesot wish his visit to interfere in any way with the Home Secretary's visit tohis office on londay, 24th.18th November.I attended a special meeting of the Directors of the J.I.C. to coosiderrawing up a plan of out Intellisence organisation in peage and in var.Wepent the morning in dealing with certain criticisins of the .I.0. structureadeby the Morling Party. These related larcely to the procurement offormation and to the list oE priorities. I did not intervene as theatter was largely one for the 3emvices. It struck mne, however, that thereRS an absence of reality in the minds of the Ds. of T. as to how Intelligenceas obtained, namely, a tendency to think that once you have given a target toI.S. all they have to do is to recruit a suitable agent, equip him withfalse beard and secret inks and send him off! They cannot get it into theireads that the obtaining o1 good intelligence 1s to a lange extent a matter 01uck, or of recognising an opportunity When it arises. Nevertheless, thereeemed some sense in a suggestion put forward by the Air Ministry, that theorking Party on Measures to Improve Intelligence might useully go throughne priorities and consider whether there was any possiblle means of acquiringhe information.This rather goes to show what I have always believed, namely, thatnene are only three major tasks which ad Intellligence department can usefulorform, firstly, to acquire information,lar overt, Which will form a frateato which tho mut ay hot informtion which: by a stroke of pond lcic. cnea ourBy - in other words, if you get a good agent O1 defector you want to haveoie background against which to assess his story. The second task is to havene necessary lines out to encourage a defector or to acquire an agent,andlirdiy, to sit down and plan some special operation. If, for example, youish to get the Soviet ciphers from the Soviet Embassy in Ankara, you woull.d>gin by taking a study of those who had access to that information and oflein habits, and then try and establish contact. Operations for droppingBople behind the Iron Curtain, OP landing them by rubber boat, seem to me to> largely futile. Such mistakes might be avoided if people sat dovn in advancdaskedthemselves the question; whether if an agent crawling about behind thecon Curtain for several mouths was likely to be ablle to say anything of anynportanee if and when he got back.-4THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958172.9bh November.I attended the T.T.C. today when we discuased torins of reference forthe Comittee which ts 6O 3o over to ceriany to exalhine the B.l,o.c., on thefhBis o:f inevitable cuts: Which will arise as soon as the Gerans regsinpir iuli sovereignty. he susgested procedure 18 that the Gomit tee Shouldirst of all ascertain from Denanrtents here hov an their priorities aebeiogmnet. They shoulld then examine in Germany those parts OL the I.0.G.which are producing this information and also the other parts which are notproducing anything of particiilar vallue. On the basis of this examninattioniey will talce recommendations.do not envy there their task.Although I reallise that tit mnay welll be possible to get betterintelligence From Gerany for less money the preseut organisatiou coateabout $3,000,000), the Committee will have to bear in Blind that for evenypiece of hot iufomeation L6 often necessary to comb throuch abou't 9910 ofsecond grade stuff. I, tneefore, you cut away those who ae erylloyed onsiftini, you may not get your 15.Diclt and I had lunch with Colonell Einthoven. His main prolto be comnectef wi.th his B. Division. He has got the equivallentunder two separate directors; one part is dealing with the gebemalol the C.P., ani the other part is dealing Mitil individual and also withspine. He cannot tet then to collaborate, nor has he established aproper dividing line.We explained to hi that he coulld not hope to study the individual casesCouunists, except against the baeaground of those who were dealing itherall trends. Tie: two should be together, but when it wa8 discovered thatamindiiduall-beheanalienoramemberoftheindigenousO.P.-was>engaling tu esnionage, he should pass it over to the eSpionaye section. Hismain trouble, I think, LB due tr the Dutoh nigid character.Einthoveu also discussed witi Dici before lunch the questtion obringing his whole Securiity Somvice, wath a bensomnel of about 500 lncludinethein Wives and children, in the even oe a global war. Dick Btalllledthis one, sayng thi't the Houe Ofice had not yet rystalllised their ideas.He Baid, however that we should centadinly vant a percentage o: llis personnel,with Yithitheir records, to aesisl a il the ezcamnination of refugees.20th November.The Directors of Plans attended the J.I.0. meeting to-day to discussacriticism by the Chiefs of Staff on the Intelligence paper prepared bytheStanding Group on Soviet Capabilities.The Chiefs of Staff apparentlytake exception to this paper.D.M.I. Said that his brie:f had been approved by the Chiefs of Staff;that he had got a large number of points accepted, but tha't in a Tripartitemeeting any document produced was bound to be compromised. It seemedapparent, moreover, that if this docunent were going to be used for planningeposes by the N.A.T.0. Power, there was not very much that could go wrongd,ng the next few years, since the threat that they had to meet was farbeyond their capabilities for counter-action. If we now attemp'ted to alterthe Intelligence paper an impossible situation would be created in fact itwould be of very little use in having a Standing Group Intelligence CommitteeTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUJBLIC RECORDSACT 195820091173.at all. The most that could be done wouid be to Let the N.A.D.0.Powers send in their criticisms Which could be embodied in the nextreportThere folllowed a diseuseion on the likelihood of war, which seemeto be a good succinct and short report Which might well. have beenaccepted.The Service representatives did not like it, because it did notreview in detail all the various incidents Which might affect a futurevar, e.ge the ratification or non-ratificiation of E.D.. were notconsidered in detail. The DB. of I. then pleaded that the Chlefs ofStaff needed education in these matters, particularly since two of themwere new since the previous report was issued. Ultimately somecompromise was reached, by which Service Directors woulld enlarge certainaspects of the report.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN IDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE RUBLIC RECORDSACT 19582008174.21st November.Mann told me that Mars's visit to Scottish Police Forces had been a greasuccess and that they were now tauch clearer about the operation of Post ReporHolmes came to tallk to me about Boddington, who Wants to visit us whenevwe have a Police course. He does not wish to attend the course, but likesthe opportunity of talking to Police Officers. He also wants six 0f hisofficers bo attend. future course.While I do not think there is any real harm in Boddington ineeting PoliceOfficers when they are up in London, I agree with Holmes that i1 they are toattend a course it shoulld be a different one to that given to Police OfficersThe suggestion is that we might give one such course, including P.L.A. andother odde and ends.Mr. Bolam, Editor of the Daily Mirror, rang up to-day. He said that hehad noticed in the papers that the D.G. was away, and would like to come up tothe office and see his Deputy on a confidential matter. I asked him if hecould let mne know the subject Which he wished to discuss. After somehesitation; and after, as he told me later, requesting someone in his officeto withdraw, he said that he was concerned abou't a decision made by the WarOffice to refuse permission for a member of his staff,to proceeto Korea. He could not understand this, ashad carried outaccredited journalistic missions on previous oecasions,LAP one toand there had never been any suggestion thatAnything was wrong.I said tha't I had heard something about the case, but that yas he wouldreadily understand, it Would be impossible for me to discuss it in any detailWe had a rigid rule on these matters when communicating with anyone exceptofficials of Government Departments, and if we departed from this rule orposition would be quite untehable. We were extremely grateful for the helpthat he had given us on a previous occasion, and I was very sorry to appear Sunhelpful to him in being unable to meet his request. The only adviceIcould give him was to address himself to the Public Relations Departmentat the War Office. He said that he had already done this and that, inaddition, he had spoken to Dugdale. They seemed embarrassed but could givet4r ne evplenation: Hie paid the mather was ane of great importance. bothGO nIs paper and DO the Future career ot the individual concerned. I saidthat I fully appreciated his difficulty, but I hoped he appreciated mine.He then said that he would lilce to ask me one question; he wouldnot expect an answer if 1 felt that I could not give it. There had beenan announcement in the Press that no American journalists were to be allowedto proceed to Korea to cover Eisenhover's visit. The three Americanjournalists already there would do whatever was necessary, bu't that nothingwould be published until after Eisenhower's return. Had the rafusallofpermission toanything to do with this announcement? I said thatwe were not the approving authority in this matter, but I could say that to tbest of my knowledge there Was no connection between refusal toandthe case of the American journalists.T again said how sorry I was that I could not give him any furtherassistance and he rang off quite amicably.THISISACOPYORIGINALDOGUMENTRETAINEDIN NDEPARTMENTUNDR SE SECTION(4) OF FTHE PUBLICRECORDSACT 1958a0ot175.I told Dick and Roger about this conversation and suggested thatHollis should ring up Rumbola at the War Office and tell him what hadtranspired.Roger has spoken to Rumbold. The Mirror have earmarked anotherjournalist to go on the Korean mission and have asked the War Office tolet them have an official letter indicating their refusal to grant permissiontoThis Public Relations have done without stating any reasons.Ido not know whether we have heard the last of this, but I hope so!22nd November.Marriott, Loftus Brown, Miss Bagot, and Malcolm Cumming all came to seemein regard to a letter to Barton of the Colonial Office on possibilitiesof influence, Commnist or Indian, at the back of MAU MAU. ApparentlyIngrams has started a scare that in view of KENYATTA'S former associationwith Communist activities, the Whole MAU MAU movement may be Communistinspired. The letter drafted in reply to him did not seem to be in linewith our brief 'to the D.G. and the necessary ad justments were thereforemade. We do not believe in either Communist or Indian influence. At anyrate there is no tangible evidence at the moment.They also showed me a telegram from De Quehen to Nairobi, copy toLondon, which had reachedsus by bag. The telegram suggested a visit bySouth African police officers to Nairobi. We sent a wire back toDe Quehen, copy to Nairobi, pointing out that anything of the kind wasentirely contrary to Colonial Office policy, and that therefore the ideashould not be encouraged, unless heGovernor approved.I learned later tDuplessis had, in fact, arrived in Nairobi.His visit had been sanctioned by Baring, provided his presence was keptdark.24th November.The Home Secretary paid his long-promised visit. He court 110yueawlluus; one apout our general coverage in relation totheComrnistParty.TothisIrepliedthat,asfaraswecouldsee,thecoverage was reasonably good - we were not complacent about the matter, butwe had had the opportunity of checking lists of membership, obtained bysecret means, against our records. This had shown that our coverage extendedto something between 80) and 9093. It did therefore really mean somethingwhen we said that we had "no trace" on our records. It was a good dealmore than saying: "This man does not happen to have come to our notice"He then asked me about NUNN. MAY. The Prime Minister had suggested thatNUNN MAY should be kept in for his full ten-year period, instead of beingreleased next month in accordance with the normal practice of giving remisssionforgoodconduct. I said that we had examined this question. While itwas difficult to know exactly what was going on in NUNN MAY's mind, we werereasonably satisfied, front his own statements, that he had no intention ofengaging in any fubther acts of espionage, or of giving assistance to theRussians. He seemed to wish to settle down in some job as Soon as he got outof prison and was asking for guidance, since ha realised that he vas almost176.bound to run up against difficulties if he applied for a job at any placewhere secret worl was going on. It was true that he had refused to give UBwar' oerhaps understandable and a point of view Which one could respeet. Weany information about those with whom he was associated in espionage, bu't thisthe ht, therefore, that if we could find him employment and prevent the Pressfror hounding him, there was a reasonable chance that he Would settle downand become a useful citizen. If he were to be kept in, however, for anotherand, in so far as he might be able. would become a serious security risk.three years, there was no doubt in our minds that he would be aeeply embittered Onall grounds, therefore, we should be strongly opposed to any suggestion thathe should serve his full ten years.The Home Secretary said that he entirely agreed with everyting that Ihad said, and that he would do everything in his power to oppose the PrimeMinister s suggestion, which he told me would be debated in the Cabinet.After giving the Home Secretary a brief outline of our organisation,Dick Each of these officers gave a brief account of his work and answered theWhite took him over and introduced him to Robertson, Marriott and Cumming.Home Secretary's questions. After three quarters of an hour he went on toHollis, where he met Furnival Harrison Jones, Mitchell for quarter and Hinchley-Cooke. of an hour. Before Lastly, lunchhe he saw listened D.0.S., to Alan the record Roger by BURGESS, which had been the subject of questionsandin the House of Lords, but just as we were Before going leaving to start he lunch told he me received that hean urgent been extremely call to go impressed to Downing by the officers that he had mad and that he feltStreet.had entirely satisfied that they were well on top of their jobs. we He were asked in me awhether we were still keeping an eye satisfied on PHILBY. with his I said case. thatgeneral way. We had to never a dual been interpretation, the cumulative Although effect much of it of wasthee cousiderable,and evidence was open the point that had influenced us against so mildly PHILBY, to perhaps themore than any made other, - any was ordinary the fact person that he would had have reacted been up in arms and madeaccusationsfrantic efforts to clear himself.by a a man called MORESBY, who had died recently, was a box labelled "M.I.5" hadSpecial Branch officer, to the effect that among certain documentsPotter came to see me about a message that his secretary had had held fromI acted as Legal Adviser to this Department. The box probably to the bontained first Worldtold Potter that MORESBY was a relation of Kell's who for some time hisopinion on MOREESBI" cases Which relatives had arisen WONC during prepared and to subsequent hana oven he to to uB:we war. would look it through and destroy or keep any relevant papers.who is due for promotion to Under Secretary. Newsam I tookthe line that there vas nothing secret in the Ministry of Housing.replied that, as far as I knew, a man with the rank of Under Secretary mightbe transferred by the Treasury from one Ministry to another. Apart fromwell this, it seemed likely that he would see Cabinet should papers endeavour on occasions. by alll means Ithanght, t,oo, that it conclusion vas important in a that case we where a man's future in the CivilService t each was a positive at stake. Newsam finally agreed, rather reluctantly, to sinkhis liberal principles!THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958une2091177.25th November.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSAOT 1958gone2o09Bolamn is seeing the Secretary of State for War in regard toand the S. of S. is seeking for guidance at the Cabinet meetingto-day.T therefore passed to Whittick details of the case for theinformation of the Home Secretary. We have told Head tha't he can sayano more than thathas been closely association with the ComrunistParty.At the Appointments Boand ve discussed in some detail the Directorsplans for the reorganisation of this officey on a Three-Direcbor basis.I began the discussion by saying that I thought we could mostprofitably proceed by considering the major difficulties, Where threeDirectors agree ana one Stooa out. L woula uaen canT upon tie Directorwho differed to justify his proposal. There were three such points:D.B. D.C. and D.0.S.. who thought that A. Division shoud be built up,whereas D.E/A had dowgraded it to a Deputy Director. The secondpoin'twas that D.B. D.C and D.E/A all thought that the Overseas Division shoulldbe integrated, Whereas D.O.S. had placed it under an AsBistant Directorresponsible to both B and C Divisions. I't seemed to me that it mightequally be responsible to Ae and that, therefore, to al.l intents andpurposes it remained a Division, although it ceased to have a Director.The last point related to D.E/A'S splitting of B. Division under twoDirectons - one in charge of Investigation and the other in charge ofIntelligence. D.B. D.C and myself, and finally D.0.S and D.E./A,agreed that the future organisation should be based on three Directors:A. in charge of dministration, Organisation and Finance; B. in chargeof Intelligence and Investigation, and in charge of Protective Security.178.While there was some Slight difference of opinion about theintegration of the Overseas Division between D.B and D.O, - the pointbeing that there might be a "chaser" section to ensure that letter fromverseas were properly dealt with - agreement was reached on major issues.In discussing the D.G's staff, I said that I thought only theSecretariat should remain; S.L.B's functions in regard to Leakage ofinformation and arms traffic going to B. Division and his other functionsto C. Division. P.L.S. should go to B.1.A new draft chart is being prepared for further consideration.This IS A COPYORCGNAL DOCUMENT RFTAINEDINODEEPARITOIENGT UALIR3440) OFF time PUBLIC RECORESACH 19582009Horrocks came to show me a telegram from Kenya instrueting himto send out a competent Registry girl to reorganise the locall S.B.Registry. He is trying to find someone and has in mind that possiblyAilsa Russelll might go from the Middle East. The Job is likely to lasta few months.26th Novernber.The Foreign Office have suggested that we should send oversomeone with Miss Constant to the meeting with Trend on our budget forneut year, as Intelligence points may come under discussion. Our estimatesare up E68,000 566, 000 of which is salaries for new Registry staff, butI willl spealc to Reillly at the J.I.0. tO-morrow.I discussed vith D.0.8. a draft telegram he was proposing to sendto Nairobi regarding the telephone check on KOINANGE. On secondthoughtsfelt that the risks involved in sending records abroad were not reallyastifiable, unless we thought that information of real vallue affecting thesituation in Kenya was likely to be missed. Examination of the materialon KOINANGE shows that noghint Of any value has So far been received, andthere is little likellithood of the conversations in Kikuyu being of anyimportance at all. Unlless, therefore, contrary views are held in B.l,I think the H.0.W. should be cancellled.179;South Whittick Africa has rang invited up about. Sir Percy a P.4. Sillitoe to the Prime to proceed Minlater, to the asking Union. whoThere in seems to have been some rumour in the South Afnican Press, which resultedIn a telegram from the High Commissioner to the C.R.O.s deprecating the idea,As far as we know the D.U. had no intention of going to SouthAfrica.27th November.We had an off-the-record statement at the J.I.0. to-day on atomicenergy from Cormander Welsh.He said that most active members of the American Commission werestrongly in favour of a united Anglo-Anerican effort, involving a completeinterchange of information, but this seemed impossible as long as theMacmahon Act remained in force. The main purpose of our Operation HURRIOANEhad been a purely defensive one. It Was highly desirablle to cllear up certainanomalies which existed in relation to the detection of the three expllosionswhichhad taken place in Russia. This could only be done by the explosionof a streamlined boub, all details of the composition of which were known to us.In this comection, Operation HURRICANE had been highly successfull and weshould in future be in a far better position to deteet the precise na'ture ofRussian explosions.He then told us what he believed to be the ingredients of therecent American explosions at Enivetoic. There was no doubt that one of themwas thermo-nucllear and of a violence not hitherto experienced. He wouldnot wish to be quoted, bu't he would hazard a guess that it would cause completedevastation in an area of 50 square miles, on the equvalent of a raddus ofL miles in the centre of London.I went with Miss Constant to a meeting in Reiily's room, attendedby several of his minions and Trend of the Treasury.Reilly said that in view of the obvously large and increasingcommitments which We had,in regard to security, he was surprised at the modestdemand for an increase of E68.000. bringing, out total budget upI explained that out of $68,000, $66,000 was due to an increase ofRegistry staff necessitated by a vetting commitment which had now reached7,000 a weels. The remaining E2,000 was mostly due to increased alllowances forofficers serving abroad.Reilhy remarked that our expenditure on agents seemed to remain fairlyconstant at the figure of roughlyI said that this might be dueto two reasons; firstly, the recruitment of agents was to some extent governedby opportunity; it was not possible just to go out and get agents Wheneveranparticular task presented itself - there was always an ellement of luck andwaiting. if one was going to recruit anybody worth while. The second reasonmight be that we had succeeded in improving the quantity and quallity ofinformation which we received from the Police. T then expllained how this hedbeen done through the creation of Special Branches, the bringing of themtogether, lecturing to them, and the giving of Courses; not only to the S.B.officers, but to Superintendent and Inspectors.COPYORIGINAL eCuMet RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958u/e2O0118O.tolld the mneeting that, on the whole, we Celt we had a reasonabilesoverage of the Comuuist Pasty, and that ive had on several oacasions Deanabl to test this out We also had a reasonable coverage for syumpathisers.Xusslan problem Was mone difficuilt, but some progress was being madeThe meeting seemed thoroughly satisfied; in fact, I gained thempression that we were rather the "bilne-eyed boys" of the Intelligence world.!I attended Coolle's Port S: Travel Controll Group cocktail party.Head colleted the Hore Secretary, the D.M.1. e-D.M.1. Daviason, (Head o:fhe Intelligence Corps) : and some prominent female W.R.E.N. Or A.T. There wasso a prominent representative of P.L.A. As far as I know the party was auocess.28th November.The D.O. has sent a teleuram to Bay that whatever may be thought1I Lendon about Peter HOTNANGE, Jomo KENYATTA'S mna.ntle fell upon him whenhe tter was arested. We are a little inclined to think that there mayG somne confusion here with KOTIANGE'E brother or hi.s father, both of whome under arrest in Kenya. Meanvhile, however, we are continuing the cheokPeter KOINANGE and are endeavouning to get a Kikuyu translator who iseliable. So fan Pe'ter JOINANGE does hot appear to have done anything exceptttend propaganda meetings. He ls,of ooure, in touch with Fenner BROCKWAYnd HALHeI had lunch withHe Bald that he had thepeling that Ike would make a serious attempt to break the deadloek in Korea.b would not surprise him 1f Ike were to propose giving the Chinese anLtimatum, that if they did not make peace we should bomb thein MenchwianaseBeTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958Junethe7001181James Robertson talked to me about his O.E. problems While heTest that Some progress vas boing made, he was sti3.I of the opinion thatwe should increase the Watcher staff. He did not, however,seemuchprospect in getting this done as Tong as Stornier remnained.llst December.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOGUMENT RETAININ DEPARTMENT CIER SECTIOI3(4) OF THE PUBLIO RECORDSACT 19587009182.The D.G. asked uB to send out, rapidly by air, certain equipmentfor the Interrogation Centre in Kenya. Malcolm produced 9 cases,weighing some 869 pounds and handed them over to A. Branch for despatch.I now hear that these cannot go by air freight until 27th December'sthat the Air Force cannot carry them, and that they must go by ship,leaving to-morrow morning and reaching Mombasa on December 22nd.Hadwe nown about this earlier, we might possibly have got the ColonialOffice to intervene on a high level to get the cases on to B.O.A.0. whoare bunged up with mails for Christmas. I telephoned to Sir Thomas Lloydand, in his absence, spoke to Mr. Rogers, head of the East African Dept.He felt, as indeed I did, that intervention at a high level might wellfail and that we should then have missed the boat. He agreed that thecases should go by boat and accepted full responsibility.2nd December.I told Horrocks that I thought that,ha we acted a little earlierwe might have got the cases for Kenya flown out, but that in the presentcircumstances we had no alternative but to send them to Mombasa. Hesaid that as the D.G's telegram had intimated that the InterrogationCentre had to be constructed, he felt that our equipment would be in ampletime. That is as may be: I said that I was rather worried about therefusal of Kenya to accept an expert to set up the Interrogation Centre,as I had in mind the many mistakes that had been made in Mallaya.Isubsequently spoke to D.0.S. about this and allso to Malcolm, when itwas agreed that the latter would write a D.0. letter to Major, givinghim certain details about the lay-out of an Interrogation Centre which wehave here, and suggesting once more that, if required, we Wil send outa technical expert.I attended themeeting.McEwen asked me about the vettingof SIGINT personnel.He wan'ted to know Whether we covered the C.I.D.records. I sad that I thought that we did for certain categories, butthat I was by no means sure - I would find out and let him know.3rd December.At the J.I.C. to-day we had a discussion about defectors. Severalpeople from I.R.D. (MeDermotts Hopson), Miss Coates from the Home Office,and Hohler from the Northern Department attended. The I.R.D, paper thatwe discussed showed a steady decline in the number of defectons, in spiteof a good deal of work that had been put in on broadcasting, etc.The Services were asked to say whether they wished our present efforts tobe continued. They were unanimouslly of the opinion that we should goon, since, owing to the scarcity of ioformation from behind the IronCurtain, even an occasional Private soldier was better than oothing.THIS IS COPYORIGINAL DOGLIVEIN BETAINEDIN DEPARTMENTI UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958Junezooa183.We then cousidened Whethee there was any way of increasing the flow.I said that of allnl the defectors who had passed through ouP hanas, not onehad even heard of our propaganda, and that those Who had defected had doneSo for reasons of fear due to sone personal issue that they had had withthe Soviet authorities. It was represented that there had been a verysmall percentage perhaps 190 - of defeotors who had come over from1deological motives, bu't that possibly idedogy might just tip the balancein some cases.At the suggestion ofit was decided that the WorkingParty should look into the problem again and suggest other courses of actiondesigned to improve the flow of defectors.Mi'ss Coates suggested that we were inclined to put agricultural workerson to industrial jobs in a city. I said I did not know the precise answerto this, bu't on making enquiries I found that there was only one man whohad asked to go on the land and that his request had been granted. I soinformed the Secretary of the J.I.C. later by telephone. I went on to saythat a great deal had been done to meet the wishes of defectors, and thatin particular an enormous amount of trouble had been taken over the cases ofboth of whom had decided that they preferred life inGermany to the U.K.Lth December.At the J.1.0. to-day there was a long discussion on the J.I.C.paper regarding the likelihood of wars particularly the likelihood ofan unintentional wan and the lilcelihood of a preventive war.The D.N.I. had many fine points to argue, and ultimately expresseda minority view.We also discussed the paper on Korea, when I managed to get a paragraphintroduced about the possible deadlock being due to a desire by the Russiansand Chinese to see what came out of General Eisehower's Visit. It seemeeto me that it was just as good a case as any other to assumne that the warinKoreahadbeensteppedupinordertoaggravateitsunpopularityintheU.S. during the time of the Election, and in the hope that one party orother would commit itself. This is in fae't what happened, with the resulteither that Eisenhower has to make concessions or lose fact with the electoratMeanvhile, the Russians are opposing the Indian proposals 0n the UnitedNations.At the Appointments Board meeting to-day I repor ted that I had receivedfrom P.L.S. a request that:-a) Major Boddington should be allowed to come intothe office for the purpose of contacting civilTHIS IS A COPYPolice when we were holding Police Courses.ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENI UNDER SECTIONRepresentatives of the Admiralty Police should3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSbe alllowed to attend the forthcoming Course for civilACT 1958Police which we were holding.It was felt that we could not deny Major Boddington access to theo:ffice at about luncheon time or at the cocktaill parties, provided that this184.right was reasonably used. It was also agreed that we should acceptthe recommendation of P.L.S. that a separate course should be held forAdmiralty Police, W.D.0. and P.L.A. Police, and for any other kindredorganisations.It was agreed that there was no objection to women police fromLaneashire attending the courses, but I said I Would consider separatelya proposal that Railway Police should attend the ordinary civil Policecourses.Courses to Staff CollegesThere was some discussion on the advisability and nature of Lecturesgiven to Staff Colleges. It was agreed that this question would beinvestigated by D.0. who would discuss it with the Comnandants of StaffColleges if necessary, with a view to determining the form which thelectures should take.D.E/A mentioned the necessity for more space in Leconfield House andasked if P.LeS. could move to Hanover Square. I said T would investigatethis. A request was also made for the space at present occupied by 0.2Museum, but D.0. felt that the Museum should be maintained in its presentfor.D.E./A reported that he had been asked by the Ministry of Worksto attend the Munster Tribunal for the purpose of deciding whether we orthe Ministry of Health should have possession of Blenheim Palace in theevent of war.The Board agreed that the present Staff List and TelephoneDirectory should be maintained.D.C. mentioned that he had recei ed a request from the Home Officethat we Should house the obsolete Traffic Index which is maintained chieflyforour use. This would involve some 1,000 sa.ft. of space. The HomeOffice cllaim that ve are the only users of these records and D.B. undertookto ascertain whether or not We still wished to insist on its retention.D.C. raised the question or whether inforaation Which we have on filesthat Cuntain no direct security interest but are of signiificance inassessing personal charaeter should be given in response to vettingenquiries. The Board felt that generally this should be done particularlyin repllies to other Government Departments, but it was agreed tha't S.1.B.should be consulted.It was agreed that D.C. should inform 0.4 that it is considered thatany future Commandant of the Port and Travel Control Group should be aSecurity Service officer nominated by the Director General.D.0.S. asked for early consideration of the vacant post for an officerat Aden.5th December.D.D.M.I. (Johnstone) spent the whole day here. T asked him to letmne know precisely the kind of criticism that was being levelled at us inhigherServicecircles.Hesaidthatwhileweweregenerallyregardedasan efficient organisation with a good staff, he had heard suggestions that we185.were not progressive enough in our policy. Although he did no't thinkMalaya was in any way cotuparable with hesituation here, he did drawattention to the fact that General Templer had instituted some prettydrastic measures and got away with it.I said that we were always trying to think up new ideas here, butthat in a Democracy we had constantly to consider the importance ofkeeping our machine in being. If, for example, we used the O.S.A.,as aswe legally could, to force a journalist to disclose to us the name ofhis informant responsible for a leakage of information, we shouldalmost certainly find that the 0.8.A. woulld becorae the Subject fordebate in Parliament, with the result that many of our existing powerswould be whittled away. At the same time within this framework we toolmanycallculated risks. We had a very considerable coverage of CommunistParty activity and we were on the whole fairly well informed. Thisdid not mean that we were in any way coaplacent; Russian espionage, forexample, presented us with an extremely difficult problem. We had madeconsiderable progress, but Russian security was such that the targetwas an extrernely difficult one. On matters affecting the employmentof doubtful persons by the Government, or factories where secret workwas going on, we had achieved a good deal, although the ultimateresponsibility remained with the Department concerned. There were, ofcourse, from time to time, cases where it was considered that theinterests of security were overriden, but in spite of this we werein favour of the responsibility remaining with Ministries, otherwisewe Bhould eith have to become a Gestapo or Departments would sit backwith folded arms and do nothing about their own domestic securityproblems. It was essential, in our view, that they Should be made tofeel their responsibilities.Johnny then went on to see Dick, Marriott, Robertson and RogerHollis. He seemed to have enjoyed his visit,an on the whole I thinkhe was impressed.I told Holmes that I had decided to let Boddington come to thePolice cocktail parties, as I thought it was important that we shouldnot appear unfriendly or unhelpful in the eyes of the Admiralty.l0th December,Horrooks tolld me that he had arranged for someone to go out toKenya to reorganise the S.B. Registrylth December.I lunched with Colonel Hoare of the Economic League and AnthonyPollen,when we merely talked generalities. Hoare struck me as beingintelligent, although somewhat self-opinionated. On the whole I feltthat he had a fairly balanced view of Communist activity in thiscountry. He evidently gets about quite alot; he had recently been toItaly - I think under the auspices of I.R.D. - and had seen Somethingof the employers in Milan. He could not walk round the factory as hewas told that if he did there would immediately be a shop stewards meetingand demands to know who he was and all abou't hiB business. On the whole,however, he thought that the Comnnist situation in Italy was fairly well186.in hand. At home he thinks that under the Labour Government therank and ile of the Trade Unionists had lost faith in their leaders,and that to some extent things are better now that the issue is cllearcut.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958D.0.3. stated that the D.G. had asked him if possible tohave discussion with Mr. Holland, Prime Minister of New Zealand, andhe must warn the Board that if this conversation took place, it wasa possibility that Mir. Holland.woulld request the services. of an officerfrom this Service in New Zealland.There was considerablle discussion OD the responsibilitiesof the Security Service in relation 6o Colondall Special Branches andin pargicular on a letter received froin H/S.I.F.E. asking forobservations on a proposal that a Security Service officer should work at aDesk inside the Singapore Special Branch. This proposal resulted fromdiscussions between H/S. and the Commissioner of Police, Singapore.The Board agreed that D.O.S. should communieate with H/S.I.F.E.and ask hir to expllore further and develop this proposall, also to give anopinion as to the Possibility of loaning an officer from S. .I.F.E. or ofmerging such an appointment with S.1.0. Singpaore. D.0.S. Would alsoindicate that in general we do not favour the secondnent of an officerbut feel that we should retain his administration.16th December.Iwent to see Newsam about the case of onewho is coming up for promotion to AssistantSecretary and whose case we wanted to investigateI toldNewsarn that I had been a little disturbed by what he had said to mepreviously in the case ofCases Of this sort were extremelyimportant and, indeed, we had instructions to operate the P.M. purgetothe utmost of out ability. The case of a man iin Government employmentwas always difficult;I then gave Nevsam a rough idea of what we new aboutHe then changed his tune completelly, sayiing thatall he had wanted to ensurewas that we did not useon some individual merely because he read the"Daily Worker". I sadd that this vas not our practice and that we did notput forward such cases unless there were fairly strong grounds for thinking1187.that something might be going wrong Apart from this, it was in everyone'sinterest, possibly ioclluding the individual himself, to get such casescleared up.Wood of the Home Office telephoned to say that he hadinstructions to get into touch with the G.P.O. in order to enquire whatarrangements were made for vetting staff employed on our special duties.This enguiry had arisen from a request by the P.M.G. to the Home Officeto have certain members of their Btafe who were eraployed on handlingvaluable packages vetted by the Pollice. The Home Secretary, while readyto consider this, felt that in view of the fact that the complaint hadrecently been made about letters being pu't into the wrong envelopes, somevetting of the Post Office personnel employed on our duties should becarried out.I told Wood that we could, of course, let him know What wedid for the Post Office, but it was agreed that he had first bet'ter makehis enquiries and then consult useD.B. gave a lecture to the I.D.C., which seems to have been agreat success. It is, of course, difficult in an hour to cover all theground, but I Coulld not help feeling that C. Division had been ratherneglected, since it is only on protective security lines that thoseattending the course can be of any reall assistance to us. By contrastI gather that Drew's lecture was a fllop. There was a general feelingthat he was much too cagey!asked me to go to a cocktaill party at his house to meeta high operative in C.I.A., who had just been touring the Far Eastand Middle East. I did not get very much out of him, except that he boughtan extremely expensive 'cello at Hills for his wife!I talllced quite a lLlot to the D.M.I. who was there, and found thathis hobby was stamp collecting!17th December.Horrocks tells me that he has got a Kiluyu translator, a woman,thought to be reliablle. She is being vetted by the Kenya Government.Strong telephoned to say that he had a personal vetiting requestfrom General Bedell-Smith for some mnan in C.I.A. who has apparently beenin this country. He promised to let me have the name.18th December.At the J.I.O. to-day we once more discussed the proposal. to haveaJ.I.0.map room The only strong opponent was Kemneth Strong, with whoseTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIO3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECOIACT 1958une188.arguments I felt in substantial agreement. I said, however, thatIdid not think I vas really qualified to express a view, as I had verylitulle experience of map rooms from the Service point of view. I was,nevertheless, convinced at,from our own point of view, tnaps and documentswere often apt to be misleading, at any rate unless they were looked atsomeone with a full knowledge of the facts.It was eventuallly decided to put up proposals to the Ministry ofDefence. I said tha't we should like to be consulted and to advise onthe security angle.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958At the Appointments Board to-day D.0,8. again mentioned the vacancyat Aden and it was agreed that names should be considered at the nextmeeting.D.0.S. reported that he had had a conversation with Mr. Holland,Prime Ministor of New Zealand, and the latter had admitted inaction onthe D.G's report and undertook to look into the matter when he returned.D.E./A reported that no Kiluyu translator had yet been engaged, butthat we had the name of an exx-woman missionary and we were awaiting theresult of a vetting enquiry about her which had been addressed to Kenya.No approach had yet been made to her.Consideration was given to the steps to be talcen to ensure theetention of the Traffic Index in the Home Office for ten years.Theoard agreed that:i) D.C. would telephone the Home Office and inform them thatwe were hoping to arrange tha't they would retain the Index;ii) more details should be obtained from B.1 and B.2 about theuse to Which the Traffic Index is put;iii) when these details have been obtained, an approach should bemade to the Treasury and the Home Office asking for theirconcurrence in the holding of the Traffic Index by the HomeOffice for ten years.D.P/A reported that he had attended the Munster Tribunal for thehearing of the Ministry of Health claims to have Blenheim Palace in eventof war; and that the Tribunal had decided in Favour of the Ministry ofHealth against us. It was agreed that if the Ministry of Works were unableto provide suitable alternative accommodation,an approach would probablly haveto be made to the J.I.0. D.E/A Would read the relevant J.I.c. papers onwartime accommodation for intelligence organisations.19th December.I telephoned to the D.M.I. about the case of onewhich hehad disoussed with me at the J.I.0. yesterday.who has a goodrecord in the Army, is up for ra National Service Commission.Our records189.show that both his parents have Communist associations.D.M.I. wants to interview the Lad and tell him that he isunortunately unable to recommend him for a Commission, oving to thepolitical activities of his parents.I told the D.M.I that there were two serious snags in thisproposed course of action. Firstly, the War Office might well beaccused in the House of visiting the sins of the parents on thechilaren; secondly, that While it might be possible to say somethingon thses Tines in this particular case, there would be a seriousbjection in other cases where the information came from delicatesources. Moreoever', a precedent would be created which if notfollowed in aln cases would arouse criticism. In our recommendatto the War Office we had said that we thoughtwas anacceptable risk and we stil adhered to tha't view.I Was lleft with erimpression that the D.M.I. would either supportthe Commission or turn it down and say nothing.20th December.I showed Hill my note to Reilly on the subject of de COURCY,and he agreed to its terms. The only useful suggestion is that theyshould try to discover the sources from Which the Arehduke OTTO receiveshis inforation. If we could establish that it came from taintedWhite Russian sources, we might be some may towards reaching aconclusion that de COURCY and his Digest were tneonsciously servingSoviet ends by spreading an exaggerated view about the strength ofRussian armaments. If this were so, a suitable Question could beasked in the House.Cuming brought in for my inspection a brown paper bagcontaining 1OO 5 notes wrapped up in red paper at the bottorn andCovered with bits of orange and apple peelings.This only goes to show how difficult it is to detect Russianagents, since once the initial arrangements have been made all meetingsare cut down to a minimum. If we are going to break new ground, our onlchange is to solve the Watching problem. This means more and betterstaff and better direction, which we wil]. never get as long asremains. The only other hope is to improve technical aids. We havebeen urging the necessity For research in this field for a long tr ne:but So far Professorhas done very littlle; he has justprepared a memorandum for the Chiefs of Staff asking for wuue money andscientists to undertake the vork, but apart from this no realy progresshas been made.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT ENDER SECTION22nd December.3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORACT 1958Reports are beginning to triclle in from Nairobi, Which showthat the three recommendations made by the D.Ge were: the appointmentof a co-ondinator in the person of MacDonala, the improvement andenllarging of Special Branch, and. the setting up of an Interrogation Cent190.The probllet is still far fror being so.ven, even though thesituation seers to be rather more in hand then it was There has beenno difficulty in getting the necessary Tunds and authority.29th December.Mitche1ll tells me that the D.M.I. decided to recommend againstthe granting of a Commission toit had dropped the idea ofgiving the boy the reasonsI have had a somewhat belly-aching letter fron Walter Bell, whofeels somewhat frustrated in Delhi. He says he is unable to give Mullikwhat he wants, which, as far as I can see, is a previev of Kremlinintentions and capabilities. If Mullik only knew the extent to whichwe chrystal-gaze at the J.I.C. on this Bubject, he might not be BOinsistent in his demands!THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDM DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACI 1968. Julu 2.0099..According to the Daily Express tomday, the Bribisl Enbaasy inHoscow have been given three months to Ciod new accommodation.suggested to Dick that we chould EO very carefully into the Possibilitiesof breaking the Lease at Fensington Palace Gardens, on the grounds thatstruotural alterations have been carried out without permiseion of thelandlonds. T referred to the large steel rood beuilt in by a specialteam of Communist buildens and engineers. It is ditficult to low whyMoscow ane asliing us to leave, presumably they think the Embassy is toonean the Kremlin, and since they have thrown a beam at us, we may bethrowing one back: at there.I had a long tall with U'ren about his Visit to Palistan, Ceylonand India.Things went fairly well in Pakistsn Kazim Raza was co-operativeThere is apparently a feud going on betweenGhawas, the D.M.I., and Kazim Rasa about an enquiry into revolutionarymovements within the Army. Ghawas has just got authority to set up hisown onganisation, and even to make use of the Police When necessary.U'ren did hit best to sell OUP method of dealing with this problem, butwithout much success. There wil.l obviously be a good deal of duplicationand confusion.In Ceylon the general state of security is extremelly bad. U'renhas laid down a compllete reorganisation of the Special Branch, whichAluwihare, the I.G.P., has expressed his intention of putting into forceimmediately.I told U'ren that I was surprised to read a report from Wagstaffeto the effeet that he did not know the answers.. to the questionnaire onprotective security which was circullated a short time ago It seemed tome that as he had been there Tor 31 years he might have found out. Howdid he normally spend his day? U'ren said tha't he had quite a lot ofcorrespondence with S.I.F.E., and also with Australia, and that it oftentook three visits before he could get any answer to his letters within theCeylon Special Branch. He thought that Wagstaffe would have a fuol-timejob in getting U'ren's recounendations put into force. One of the mainproblems which has occupied the Ceylon Special Branch, and which is notreallly a security one, has been the illegal immigration from India.Therehave been so many famines in Southern-Indi that people have tried to getto Ceylon, where conditions are far better aud wages are higher; thishas created quite a problem.In Delhi U'ren found Mullik full of complaints. He did not like thecourse w/hich his oficers had attended in Singapore. When askedtobemorespecific, he said that they had only been given one day-d observation.renexplainedthatthetechniqueforobsenyationv/aS{onewhichIndiamust be fairily well versed, and that having expounded the theory it couldbe better practicedin India itself, rather than an Singapore here conditioswere different. Mullikc'e reply was that he did not intendt to send anymore officers to Singapore. He then asked renabout the Latestinformation from Hoscow about. the Economic Conference. When utren saidthat this was outaide his sphere, Mulllik said: "But you are an officerof M.I.5, shurely you know these things?" Mullik is obviously peluctentto believe that we have not got agente in the Kremlin. His finallcomplaint: arose froin at request to send one of his officers here Cor athree-months course on l.ong-term penetration.Uren said thet While we192.should be very pleased to give a general course in Which this item woulldbe included, he did not see how we coulld instruct an officer for threemonths on this one subject. Mulik concluded the argument by Bayingthat he would send no-one unless his whole time were devoted to thestudy of agent-running.Something has obviously got into Mullik'shair, but U'ren says that it may well be heat or that he is beingharrassed by his superiors. He is obviously getting very mistakeninformation about our capabilities, whereas most of what we achieveis through hard work and a certain arnount of luck.Hilton telephoned to say that the Foreign Secretary had heardthat John Foster Dullles was in close touch with De COURCY. He wantedto have our observations.I said that as far as I knew there was no very close personalcontact, This was, of course, possible, since De COURCY' Digestwa.s widely distributed in the United States where he had an Agency.On the other hand, we knew tha't De COURCY was in the habit of claimingthat he was a personal friend of al.l sorts of eminent people. He hadin fact done SO in the case of the Home Secretary, Who had only seenhimonce! The information had apparently reached Eden through theFrench Ambassador.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE, PUBLIC RECORDSACT 19582009