A The National Archives (c) crown copyright Catalogue Reference:kv/4/470 Image Reference:1 POL-F 53-24-90 SAV17 1O LIDDELI DIARTES FILE CLO8ED s Form 924 SEE ALSO LIST INSIDE COVER Forint No, ENAT Date Stnr Stnr etrination Sariat No. Date Sor al Na. Date Damgnntion Denonuition ARA 1/470 /O she S Form 960 POL F 53-24-90 EL/SAVI SAV17 PEN aupltin olfg Heat L. Jnsuary lat. Saw the New Year ins with Totiiy Hauris. Evelythin looked bright and rosy for the first few hours, but on later mefleotion - coupled with a slitht hnngover - it looks as if 1948 should reach an all-time low with one or to additional downward dents! The situation in Indta is extremely serious, 1e there is great danger that Nehru invade Dalcistan in onder tc cut ofr the bAses froto which the treois ame invadina Kashmir. Mountbatten has bean talcing every vosbible stem to disstade him from such a course, Wllich must inevitably lead to civil war'. He has therefore suggested to Nehri that he should arpeal to U:N.O. He vianted the P.H. tu fl out and sneak to Nahau personally, but thin, for various peaeons, Wd not considered desirable. From a military point of view, Nehru is in a very weak position: his forces have left the main road between the frontier and Spinagar and have no roads behind them. If the main road to Srinagar were cut, they wulld be in a hopelese position. IF he were to sufer a reverse, he Vtould almost certainly invade Palistan from the south and cut off the rebel bases. The fat would then be properly in the fire. Pallegtine a0o is in 3 shocking state, although attscks are mainlvby Jewe on Arabs, and vice versa. Unfortunately, however, both police and mipdten: got a12 mxed in these affrays. The Arabs ahe putting ur more 02 at show than goyone expected. It is dif'ficuit to see hov a showdown can he avoided after vie leave. In Creece the robols, under General MaT'COB, have forred & Governenit aind deolaea open var; they ale trying to capture Koniza. Italy is gti1l in a very uncertain state and 1oboyr knows what may hsmpen her. the elections come this month, On the other hand, Fraace, i: spite of may difmlcultiuB ahend, may have turned the corner. Schuar'a Govenent is acting vigorously. C.O.T. has been solit bu H wah-olit by TouhArx and the mnodeites. The Comminishs have lout Counideible punde the moment the Centre and the eft lat wait de Gablle and the Centre and de Guilee do hot want the Communisia. It ia to be hoped that Schunn will be allde to mhinitain Is position, Bi3oo the only altoaative would be die (amlle. who might take Rletatoiul poCAS whi ch wauld lose iin.t 90uzei ty. Guck suportel's hie had would then move over to the Loft. At tho moment the Counmuniste would Lot (ave to face Lie BOYdown. On the Frouue Parent the Gove nuat is coming DLL in strong tGIms gaiast the Ruhuuelis hevi.ng taken a lead from Morzan Phillipe, the Trade Umionist, Who wetdc may putspoken speech. It ooks as if the P.L.0. inteniied to waye wap against the Corrutists. by impressing upon their Right Hing supyorters the necessity for attending T.U. meetinf's and seeing that the active Comunis: minority do not pet into the controlling positions. At the moment they had control both of the Mines Union and the Engineering Union. Page rame to see he about I talked to Page about the icund of scentists required to nun the T.S.D.I.C. It Seeme to me that Professor Brunt (?) the famous meteorologist. was too old and Loo much ot a Specialist, and that what was wanted was a younger man th organising ability, who was on personni terms with most of the important people in the cientific word. I doubted whether the J.I.C. had quite made up their minds what they were looking for. D.M.I. rang me up about an S.I.S. report that 1,000 Communi'sts were on board the "Pan Crescent" and the "Pan Yorl' two, illegal immigrant ships from Roumanid? had been taken in to Cyprus. He thought these people ought to be segregated. I said that T was doubtful abbit the possibility of doing this, because the camps were already practically full: it might be for consideration whether we should tell the Agency and ask their assistance, but if ve do, this we right be anded with the bodies in Cyprus. 2nd January. Mns. Ashley came to see me about POPOV'S father, who wants to stay here. I said that I Weulld do. beat could with the Home office. 3rd Januarv. Roberts rang me up to teil me that the information about the Communists on board the illegal immigration ships had been received from Jewish Agency reports in Roumania I GO informed the D.G. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN IDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 5th Januany. (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 2o1 For the minutes of to-day's D.D.G. metrttinte see in D.D.G. Seo. tray. 6th January. Richmond Stopford same to s.e me at my request. 3. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED NDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 2o11 H asked sfvice abont 2 Germar, HOLLIB.Y, who borute she WOD had pasented a Geran Pirt: dsaline with uleotrical eoutment. KOLLIBAY had been a0ed and aubsewuently relaased and made a Titish aubyeet. He foined tie TLr, which StmFopa Ie dinectoe and /.echn heed spvtht Prom this usloiirin of Deny Poronelthy time fixn ap wich KOLLIBIY WatS a relresentnihive bsove the HONTTPAY resiened and had opmed 8 company on lis Own, aHS E mPesentint the Shnie GeJuer interests - in other words, hie fvemi lefeatea the Duatote of Enere Property. I Yeemmrended Stonford to LEO and ge the Home Office. aI tha D.G's mleetin. Vigkeny Rave an account of wacent developments in Irdid, ahtcb I have already recouated. I had EV mesti'ne with Dick, Kirby-Green, MeDonalat and Kellam on the Caribbean, WleYi we decided HoVi the aurea 6oL2d beat l3e FUUFT. I talei to Vickeny about "Georige" Jenkin. A pout his hetn oheathe if the C.R. DYthe the poation or all infoebion coming from India. Vicleny was Lthinking of recommendin HAO. I Said that I thought "George" Jenkin would do thglob well. Vickeny thowht that he cut to heva a leng rest first. I said that I doubted wethes he is the type who would profit from lying fallov in a luotel Daling: what he really wanted vas something to ocelloy his mind. Vickely Bid that l1e ould put his name with the. of WAOE. 7th Junuarv. S//Iy. Oh-Rhind, who is to be A mone or less permanent security Yepresentafive in ble Air Ministry came to soe 1IC. I gave him at short talk about our ongunisatdon. Ths .0. WAS called to see the P.M. and I took 1da olgne art the J,I.0. Clayton, the Chairman of F.I.0.1.E., was mresort to as0115s the totutre of B.1:0.M.E. The general V seemed LO Ke that time fiinobi ons of P.I.0.M.5. canciet in prt by the of'ice or B.1..n.o O. and an pliit by the J... (N... he mherermieite wag the etallish- ment of a permanent J.1.3. in the Middle Dast. During the discusion it emerged that t the Navy. in site of fionce resistance, have ben odered to establish their H.O. with those of the other tho Services. As this Means that they have to move D1oi Malta, whsue the have hean since before tho days of Nelsor, the stir il the Admiralty 1 dwnsiderable and the 01e1 of Navat Staf has mole L dieen pur2le. It is Foged toat G.H.. Mitaal EaSt wt Will 11 be in Cyrentics the alteunatives are Cvorus and Malta. Naimabi out, at pndiactng for the yolusn'it. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION ACT OF 1958 THE Oct PUBLIC RECORDS 5, lLett a note with the peetin. stressime Shir2bility o colllatorting with the Agency in sopting out Ccnuunist from the illegal iouigrents in Cyrrus. Tie P.M. told the D.c. that theme aE a 1209onel to appoint ProPesson BLACKETTT an beat a Higiily imortant scientific committee. The D.G. said he woud like to consult his peconis which he subsequently did. The P.M. tuned BLAOKET down. The aypointmert in mind wes presulably the one of Head of tre Atomic Resencli Committee. Cron! whicly Sr John Anderson is resigning. The danger about BLAOKETT e not that he 1s persnnaily RiRloyal, but that he inevitally surrounas HinEdln with people o1 lis was of thining wI.b are disloyei. Ougliton caamo to tell that; nie hac a letter Cro the soicitors of the Neaical ofriicer at Ban Nemdonf. asking hid.m t.o give certudll evidence. I to1d Dim:t tie had better BEe the solicitor. 8th January. I saw Sir John Stephenson to-day. He said that in so far as Top Secret information was concerned he thought that we need only be concerned with Canada, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa. As regards Hindustan and Pakistan, nothing was passed to those Dominions which the British Government did not expect to reach the Russians. As regards the method of approach, he thought that Canada, in view of their past experience, would be security-minded enough to vet their own personnel coming from Canada. As regards any personnel that they took on here, he thought that we should offer them assistance. I said that as we knew Norman Robertson 80 well, I felt that, with his approval, we could make the necessary approach. As regards Australia and New Zealand, he said that he would seek a suitable 5. occasion for us to ask the South Africans whether they Would like us to vet such of their staff taken on in this country who were handling secret documents. I minuted D.C. as above and suggested that Hollis might speak to Norman Robertson when he next sees him. I asked Sir John Stephenson what he thought Dev's reply would be if it were pointed out to him that the abolition of partition could not possibly relieve us of the obligation to occupy the northern ports in any future war, and that this would automatically throw him off his neutrality. Stephenson referred to the occasion when Macdonald visited Dev in 1940, with a suggestion that partition should be abolished on condition that we were allowed to use the Irish ports. Dev had replied that Ireland would have to remain neutral, and it was on this that the negotiations broke down. I had a talk wi th Perfect about his difficulties in Nairobi. Certainly the Colonial officials have been difficult, but I can't help feeling that someone else would have made his personality felt and got over the difficulties. Dick's solution, which I think is a sound one, is that Kenya, Uganda and Tangyanika should come under and thus conform to M.E.L.F., while fresh representation should be set up in the Rhodesias. This IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 9th January. ACT 1958 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS Oct 2o1 At the Deputies' meeting of the J.I.C. to-day, it was mentioned that the War Office had been told that their Military Attache should be situated in Damascus. They woulld prefer to see him in Beirut. Hayter said that, provided the M.A. and the A.M.A. between them covered Damascus and Beirut, it was a matter of indifference to the Foreign Office who went to which place. I said that before committing ourselves on this point, we would like to consult the Head of S.I.M.E. S. We would do this and then arrange the matter with the War Office. Quill gave an account of his visit to the Middle East, in cornection with BEACH reeonnaissance in Pallestine. He had beenur to Jerusalem and had seen the High Commissioner. He said that the ituation in Palestine was interesting; the Jews vere feeling extremely uneasy because the Arabs were more or less paralysing movement in the country- they had patrols out on the main roads, and the movement of Jews between Jerusalem and Haifa, and even Jernsallem and Lydda, was now extremely difficult. The effet of ourdeclaration about the termination of the Mandate had been somewhat similar to the effect in India when the decision was reached to hand over powen- hositility against the British being diverted to hostility between Moslem and Hindu and Arab and Jew. British subjects were being passed through Arab controls without difficulty, and were on occasion escorted for their own safety. Everybody was extremely apprehensive about our impending departure, and Quill thought that there might even be a request, on bended kne, from the Jews for us to remain. James Robertson same to tell me that Source BULLDOG had indicated that a man called Harry LEVINE had been seeing WEIZMANN. Harry LEVINE had confessed that he was behind the shipments of T.N.T. from the U.S. and that he had some kind of a warehouse in Paris. He had been warned that the Amnericans were hot on his trail and that the British might be asked to take action against him. He is now leaving for Frankfurt, but is returning to this country towards the end of the month. It seems that in America the Agency is trying to canvass support in the War Ministry, with the idea that that Department will reinforce the President against opposition to his Palestine policy, which he is receiving from the State Department. It seems that something of a similar kind is going on here through Samuel LANDMAN and. a man called STANLEY, who has been trying to get at Shinwell. Samuell LANDMAN is assisted by Cyril ROSS, the Managing Director of Seears & Wells. Oak-Rhind came to see me again. He was extremely pleased With his visit to our office, which he said had been most profitable and instructive. The D.G. held a meeting on East Africa, at which it was decided that Kenya, Uganda and Tanganyika should come under S.I.M.E. ; that Perfect, Clayton, and one other officer should remain in Nairobi, with possibly a military attachment to run a section of F.S.P., who now report direct to Cairo. In this vay our organisation would conform to the pattern of M.E.L.F. under which the East African Command operates. We should also consider opening an office at Lusaka in Northern Rhodesia - at any rate as a temporary measure - until we had thoroughly explored the ground and knew what the problems were: this office would be concerned with Northern and Southern Rhodesia and also with South Afrdca. Hollis was to explore this when he visited the area next month. loth January. Noell Wild came to see me about his proposal for anti- Communist propaganda. He has put in a memorandum on this subject. He thinks that if a smail P.W.E. committee were 7 formed that a good deal could be done. Things seen to be moving rather in this direction. 12th January. I took the list of Warrants, which had been imposed for more than a year, to Maxvell for his approval of their continuance. He expressed his agreement. The D.G. held a meeting with Dick, myself, Drew, Travis and Dunderdale. The P.M. wants the D.G. to go to Australia and see Chifley about a leakage of a Government document sent to Australia and subsequently picked up by L.S.I.C. on a chance break. Chifley cannot be told how the information was obtained; it is therefore necessary to pin the story on a defector. There are in fact two documents: as a cover story has to be prepared on the lines that it may ultimately get back to Russia, the quoting of both documents might therefore be dangerous. The proposal is to use "Excise" as the defector. Drew and. Dunderdalle are to draft the cover report. 13th January. I attended a meeting of the Working Party on the re-organisatio of the J.I.C. We ultimately agreed to their being two Deputies' committees, one for intelligence and the other for organisation and security. The second committee would have a number of working parties,wi fixed Chairmen, for dealing with such subjects as security, organisation exchange of technical information, pigeons, etc. A.D.N.I. is to be the permanent Chairman of the Security Committee and T.A.R. will take on pigeons. It will be open to the Secretary to pass papers direct to a working party. other than the @hairmen there will be no permanent representatives. J.I.C. w1ll in future only be concerned with the preparation of operational intelligence surrmaries, but the Deputies and the Working Parties will have an extra Secretary. L told the Working Party that in my view there was a danger in splitting up these subjects to a great extent: I had reasons for saying this. as T spent a great deal of my time in trying to k p-all these subjects together in our own ffice; the reason being that one invariably impinged upon the other. I thought the Committee would find considerable difficulty in deciding what was purely organisational, what was security, and what was intelligence -- there were many things Whic ch were all three. Whille note was taken of this, it was apparentothat the three Services are all. organised on the basis of intelligence on the one hand and organisation and security on the other. The system to which we finally agreed, therefore, suits them. . Lhth January. Edward Thornton, late of the L.R.C., came in to ask me about a notice which he had received from the War Office requesting him to go through a language test. I got Hill down, as a result of which we told Thornton to reply that his services were already retained by M.I.5. Thornton has been travelling about all over Europe selling Wo0l. He Said that Norway was getting back on her feet and that we were extremely popular in the country. Sweden, on the other hand, was severely handicapped by her trade treaty with Russia, which was on a fifteen years credit basis; she was pledge to export most of her goods to Russia and therefore had nothing to exchange with other countries but commodities which she urgently needed. People in Sweden are terrified of the Russian bogey. I telephoned Gleadell about a passage in the J.I.C. charter for the Middle East and Far East, which on its lteral wording seemed to imply that the only channe] for security intelligence to the Commanders-in-Chief was through the J.I.C. We agreed on an alternative on another papa, which will, I. think, make the position clear. I also took exception to a para. which indicated that no intelligence operations were to take place in any foreign or coloniall territory without the permission of the Minister or the Governor. Gleadell said he thought this para, was meant to be elastic, but doubted if the Foreign Office would change it, Bearing in mind that ve allso were in trouble in regard to an incident in Greece, which Gerhold had not reported to the Minister, I felt it was better to let the para. go and not join issue with the Foreign Office. I said good-bye to who is leaving to join S.I.F.E. We had anot er meeting with Drew, Dunderdale, Travis and 'c' to discuss the draft cover story, which was finally agreed although I am not too happy about the inclusion in it of another document. There is no evidence that this second document did in fact reach the Russians; it has been included in order to give cover to the first document and to help Travis in getting the agreement of the Americans. to the proposal to warn Chifley. Hollis and I both objected, first that it would mislead the Australlians in their enquiries, ana secondly that if it reached the RuSsians it might cause them to think that the whole cover story was phoney. It was felt, however, that e should have to take a chance on this. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 201 7. 15th January. I lunched with Colonel Tarver and asked him about Ahmed. He said that although Ahmed was kceen about liaison with us, he felt that the moment was not very opportune for re-opening the question with Jinnah. I told Tarver that a more favourable opportunity of taking up the question had now occurred, since if Pakistan still wanted to have visas for their country vetted, this could only be done as it is being done in Hindustan: through Liaison Officer. I thought that if we reopened the question on these grounds, it might make things easier. He agreed. We also discussed a request from Pakistan for assistance in counter-intelligence matters. It seemed to me that tha nilitary and civil organisations had not really sorted this question out amongst themselves, and that untilithey did So there was nothing very much to be done. He said that there was no necessity to reply to the D.D.M.I. Pakistan; we should wait until they reopened the question. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT BETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. Oaf 2o1 Skardon came to talk to me about WEISS. After an unsuccessfull interview at the War Office, WEISS had telephoned to say that he had had rather a bad night and would like to make a statement. A reference to WEISS was obtained from certain captured documents in the case of TREPPER and ROBINSON of the Rotekappelle. We had, therefore, thought that it might be useful to have a talk with WEISS and ascertain what he knew about ROBINSON. He was obviously very shaken when ROBINSON 's photograph was thrown on the table; he said that he had known ROBINSON, who was a casual acquaintance at the Allbert Hall. This was interesting, as captured documents showed that WEISS had had meetings with ROBINSON at the Albert Hall, and that for the purposes of identification he had on the first occasion carried a copy of "Esquire"'; the meeting, therefore, was hardly casuall. He has MOW given us in brief outline 10. the story of his recruitment and subsequent activities. These have linked up with the SV/ITZ case, which took place some time in the thirties in Panis: I actually went over and had a talk with the Juge i'Instruction. The most important link is a woman called Ilse STEINFELD, who was an associate of FRANKI in the SWITZ case and was allso known to WEISS. In pre-war years she was acting as secretary first to STUTTERHEIM of the Berlin Tageblatt in this country, and then to Paul SCHEFFER, at one time Moscow correspondent for the Berlin Tageblatt. She used to give copies of everything that STUTTERHEIM and SCHEFFER wrote to the Russians. This woman iB now the wife of one SAMUEL, who nuns a leather business and is also concerned with the manufacture of orthopaedic appliances. This again links up with certain correspondence of Henry ROBINSON, found in the captured documents. It ds possible that we have a "live" link in SAMUEL. Other matters of interest are the identity of HARRY I and HARRY II, who were WEISS'E props at various times, and the fact that VERNON and MEREDITH of R.A.E. Farnborough were both suppllying WEISS with information which he was passing on to the Russinns. VERNON, of course, was prosecuted or dismissed from R.A.E. Parnborough a gooclmany yeans ago for having taken the confidential documents out of the office: this had come to light through a radd carried out by the Fascists. The introduction of VERHON to HARRY II had been carried out by Dorothy WOODMAN. The enauiries that we made at the time into the SWITZ case and our back records are proving invaluabile. Kirkman looked in to see me. He is B.G.S.I. in Palestine. He seemed thoroughly satisfied with our organisation. l6th Januany. This IS A COPY Sir Herbert Creeay called. ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DERARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS - ACT 1958. Oct 2ou I then told him about the Stephens case and aksed him if he was in a position to give any eviderce about punishments at 020. He said that his recollection was more or less the same as mine, that there were no punishments except solitary confinement and the withdrawal of privileges. He would clearly be no use as a witmess, as he had no first-hand information; he thought, however, that Swinton ought to be approached. 17th January. Airy came to see me. He had heard about our opening an ofrice in Australia; he said that he had started up various offices for the Department, and that he would be quite willing to do the same in Australlia, if he were thought to be the right person. He did not, hovever, wish to stay /there I1. as he had commitments in this country. I said that I thought that whoever vent out would probably have to stay there for a period of two years or more, but that I woulld mention the matter to the D.G., who might Dike to see his report on the setting up of an Australian Security Service. 19th Januany. For minutes of D.D.G. Meeting held to-day, see folder in D.D.G's sec's tray. Anthony BIuntca to see me about a story which had reached him from Garronvay Rees, via Guy Burgess. It had lost nothing in the telling! It was said that a singularly inept officer of M.I.5., who first of all said that he was from the War Office and then from the C.I.D., had been to the firm of Bennett & Shears and asked them all sorts of funny questions about industrial mobillisation in Russia. I got hold of Skardon, who was the officer concerned; he gave me an account of his interview with a director of the firm. He had gone to see him, (a) to establish whether certain Russians had been to his firm, and (b) to ask what kind of chemical plant they were purchasing. He had been in a slight difficulty in the beginning in roving his identity, as unfortunately he had not got his credentials with him; this led him. ultimately to suggest that the director of the firm should ring up an olld friend of his, Superintendent ??. The meeting had been sticky, but polite. Skandon had said that he wanted the information and that the simplest way was to come direct and ask for it. If it could not be given, he had nothing to do but to go away with regrets. Anthony asked me to meet Garronway Rees at his club that evening, which T did, and explained to him the circumstances. He said he thought the whole story had got considerably distorted, and that his fellow director had misunderstood our purpose. He told ige there and then that the Russians were buying penicillin plant, and that his firm had received an order from Tito for a liquid oxygen plant. He thought, however, that it might be usefull for us to be in touch with Neville, the Chairman - or Secretary - of the Chemical Plant Manufacturers Association. T told him that provided Nevillle had not already been approached by someone else, I should be quite interested to meet him. Rees promised to arrange this. 20th January. I had a meeting with the D.G. and Courtenay Young, when we discussed the Malayan Security Service, prior to the D.G's visit to .R7Ot, where he was seeing Maedonald, the idea was that he should present the case as we saw it and ask for a mandate to look into things when he was in the Far East, which he subsequently obtained. He told me, hovever, 2 that Maedonaild thought Dalley was a well-informed person, although he realised that he vas a bitsofan Empira Builder! He had no idea that the relations between Dalley and S.I.F.E. were in any way strained; He was told that ou main complaints were, (i) Dalley's inclination to build up contacts outside Malaya, and (ii) his failure to pass us information which concerned us. It was agreed that Governors should be informed of the D.G's visit and its purpose, and ask them te him their assistance. COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED VDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 218t January. (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. Oct 2oll I spent the whole morning trying to sort out troublesome vetting case. concerning a man called who was to take up an editorial job in the Information Deoaetment of the High Commissioner's office in There was some doubtful information on the file, but nothing conolusive: a recommendation had been made that he should not be employed, but meanwhile the C.R.O. had gone ahead and appointed him: they now had cold feet and were holding up his departure. On talking to Bill Younger I discovered that the three reports in the file were all from the same source, and that in the last one the source was merely repeating information which he had gained a considerable time ago. It has very considerablly weakened the whole case. I then got hold of Geoffrey Wethered and asked him to have a talk with someone in the Foreign Office with whom this individual had worked. 22nd January. Victor came to see Aleg Kellar and myself. We discussed the Pallestine situation. Victor had been seeing WEIZMANN, who now finds it impossible to make any contact the Government; he had been thinking of going to see Winston. Victor had advised him against doing this, as he could not see that it would lead anywhere. Kellar and I said that in the present atmosphere we doubted whether it was any good WEIZMANN attempting to make an approach to Bevin or the Prime Minister, since it was abundantly cllear from the Press and other sources that the Government were far more interested in fixing up agreements with the Arabs: we had just had the Iragth delegation, and one from Transjordan was due to arrive shortly. Victor agreed that it was no good trying to do anything. I have seen the Defence Committee document which gives the Chiefs of Staff requirements for the defence of the Middle East. It is of considerable importance to us, Since it affects the future of S.I.M.E. Firstly, we are to do all we can to obtai the trusteeship of Cyrenaica: if we are successful, we should develop there the Naval, Military and Air base with forces ready 1B to operate. An attempt is to be made to renew the treaty negotiations with Egypt. Our aims are: (a) the retention of the 1,000 technical personnel not in uniform, (b) rapid re-entry into Egypt and the Canal Zone on a threat of war. We are to be the judges when such a threat exxists: (c) the establishment of/Anglo-Egyptiar Defence Board. to work out plans for adr fields, eto. in defence; (d) transit rights for aircraft, etc; (e) controbb of pipe lines now in British civilian hands. The Lehanon and Syria must form part of our defence area in war; some facilities now would, therefore, be advantageous, e.g. the maintenance of air fields. It will also be necessary to re-enter Transjordan, and oUP rights under the existing treaty Which facilitate maintenance and training should therefore, be retained. We must also have rights in the port of Aqaba. In Irag ve want the right to station forces in time of war and to maintain in peace our existing air bases with operational aircraft. In Saudi Arabia we want the right of entry in the event of war, and in peace we want the right to develop and maintain alr fields, roads and, if possible, rail communications. along the west coast of the Persian Gullf. We also want port facilitiesand the development of water supplies and 0il supplies. In the Sudan we want facilities for air and land communication. Nothing can be done in Palestine until the situation settles down; later, however, we might attempt to get bases in Arab territories, particularly if any of them became amalgamated with adjacent countries. Bases in Jewish Palestine is a difficult question, since even if we could acquire them we might give offence to the Arabs. Cyprus is to be he ld at all costs. If all these. territories are to be reoccupied in the event of war, it is clear that S.I.M.E. should keep its links going wherever possible, and that Middle East Command should have a proper security organisatior at its back. 23rd January. Geofrrey Wethered came in to see me about the case of the man, He had seen Fitzgerald, the Foreign Office official with whom had worked. Fitzgerald knew personally and, although he believed him to have Left Wing views, he vas certain that he was not a Communist and that he was perfectly loyal. I saw Viekery and Hollis about the case of George It was decided that we should communicate our views, which would be to the effect that should retain the appointment offered to him in and that the question of nforming the High Commissioner should be left to the C,R.O. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1968 Oct 2o11 14 James Robertson and Hill talked to me about the case of the leakage of a document on Palestine finance from the Treasury. Drew had made a certain amount of progress he had identified the document and got a list of the personnel who handled it. It appears to have been done in the Treasury pool and not in the Cabinet Secretariat. Courtenay Young, Kellar and I discussed the M,S.S. situation with the D.G. We thought he should concentrate on getting the organisational set-up changed, namely, the division of M.S.S. into two Special Branches, one for the Singapore Police and the other for the Malayan Police. We should take over the more secret activitie of M.S.S., namely, censorship, and also liaison with foreign missions. our complaints were: (i) that Dalley vias inclined to Eo outside his charter, and (i1) that he did not pass us material which we required. 2661 January. T attended a meeting of the J.I.C. Deputies to discuss the varios suggested amendments to the paper on Protocol M. (see 634a in F.411/Germany). We have ignored Protocol M. regarding the authenticity of which we had grave doubts. The S.I.8. representative produced a good deal of additional internal evidence, Which seemed to indicate that the document was not authentic. S.I.S. is, moreover, sending a reasoned statement to the Foreign Office, a copy of which we shoulld receive. Nobody at the meeting had any clear idea as to how Protocol M. came into our possession. 27th January. The D.G. held a meeting to-day with D.N.I,, A.D.N.I. Harry Allen, Hollis, Furnival Jones, Boddington and myself. It followed a disoussion T had had with Phillips in November last on the setting up of some organisation which could keep the Admiralty informed about moralle in the Navy. The Admiralty had argued that this was a jnb for MI.5., because in keeping our finger on the pulse of morale we should be better acquainted with any attempts by the Communist Party to itgrievances. Other reasons put forward were: (a) that the Navy had no funds D? organisation for this type of worl, and (b) that they did not wish to run the risk of being accused of snooping on their own kind. We said that none of these reason seemed really valid. M.1.5. had a charter to deal with subversive movements, but not with the moralle of the Navy, which woulld appear to be a matter Of administration and discipline, with which the navall authorities themselves could deal. The Security Service, which is in touch with all the Chief Constables, and has its own sources of information, was making a close study of Communist activities, and, shold there be any serious attempt to interfere with the loyalty of any of the Services, it was extremely likely that we should get to head about it. The Security Service did not feel, however, that it was its business 15 28th Januarv. I saw H11l and gave him the documents about arms deals which I received from 'C'. I told him that ic''s inrormant was COTTON. COTTON is a man who flew all over Germany, as a private enterprise, photographing everything before the war and then handed his photographs over to the Air Ministry. Government Subsequently, about he had payment, a very which disreputable contained fight an element with the of blackmail. British He is altogether an unpleasant character. I told Hill to look our for any conversations between him and RICKETT, particularly if there were any reference to 'o'. At the J.I.C. the whole morning was occupied in discussing various papers about the probable date for a major war. There are so many papers on this subject now that the situation is becoming extremely confused! Most of them are; of course, purely crystal gazing. Strong made a statement about the discovery of uraniurn on the Rand and the Gold Coast. He said that the Rand and Gold Coast combined could produce 2,000 tons a year for thirty years. The quality was such that it would make the proposition economically worth whille. By contrast, the Congo is producing two to three thousand tons a year for a period of five years. The Rand will take two years to t'going, and the Gold Coast five years. As the uranium comes from deep gold mining deposits, there is no reason for thinking that the Russian gold mines are likely to be productive of uranium, since their mining is largely of a surface variety, the gold coming from entirely different deposits. Strong also made a tatement about 0il. He said that America must import 21 million tons from the Middle East if she was going t6 fulfill her obligations under the Marshalll Plan. Lastly, Strong drew attention to an article in the Press which alleged that the Russians were fortifying the Oder-Neisse line. He said that according to reports from our observers, there were no signs of any such fortifications. II lunched with "George" Jenkin. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 2011 ds I discussed his future and told him about the possibility of a job in C.R.O. He seemed interested, but had heard nothing. He then told me that he had heard that we wanted somebody for Ceylon. He might be interested. He might also be interested in going to East Africa. I mentioned this matter to Dick. He thought that Jenkin might possibly go to Australia. I have mentioned this to the D.G., who is giving me a free hand to negotiate. Miss Russell-King came to talk to me about a questionnaire on security which the War Office had received from the French Milita Attache. She said that Le Man had already been consulted about 16 to repor't on the effec of Admiralty order's and administration on the Petty Officens and ratings. While it is true that the Admiralty has no machinery to carny out this task, it is clear that -- at least in certain cases - they could obtain the information if they tightened up their own procedure of reporting. The grievances in the case of the 'Vanguara" had, in fact, been freely aired in Portsmouth before the ship sailed, and were known to the officers. N.I.D. heand nothing about this until the ship waa in Malta. The whole troublle was due to administrative causes. It was finally agreed that the D.G. wou.ld appraoch the Chief Constables and ask them to make arrangements to report any grievances of disaffection which came to their notice. For this purpose they should have a specially selected officer, and the Security Service would be willing to give a slightly increased.subsidy. If as a result of these reports if were felt that some subversive organisation was exploiting these greivances, Major Boddington would be available to look into the matter. At the D.G's meeting to-day Kellar stated thet we coulld only evacuate from Jerusaller by armed convoy. Out top secret records were being flown to Fayid with fighter esoort. Robertson talked about the SCHULZ case. The Ozech military attache who vas suppoeed to be the agent's link does not appear te be very enthusiastic - we are, therefore, complaining to Prague. After the meeting we discussed staff matters. Three possibles wene put up for Australia - MacDonald, Hamblen and A.N. other. Although T felt that MacDonalld would be ideal for the job, I felt that we should be making a mistake in taking him away from S.IF.E., which needs all the pep that we can give it. MedDonald has proved himself a useful second-in-command, and I am sure that Hugh would more than deprecate his departure. The B.G. is to discuss the matter when in Singapore. I saw 'c'. He handed me certain documents that he had received from a source in the City. They related to attempts to export arms to Pakistan. The deal is at the moment held up because C.R.O. have insisted on the real going through official channels. C.R.O. have referred the matter to the Pakistan Government, but have had no reply. I told 'ct that we were aware of these facts. He then told me that part of the arms for Pakistan are apparently to be passed on to Hyderabad. This is, I think, a new one as far as we ane concerned. His informant has apparently heand of another interesting trensaction. The Niwam of Hyderabad, who feels confident that his reign is likely to come to an end before very long, is anxious to get hiig wealth out of the country. This amounts to the small sum of 1400,000,000 in bullion and jewels. He is trying to think out ways and means. one suggestion, of which I diid not entirely see the point, is that he should buy up the port of Goa from the Portuguese and ship from there. If he were to attempt to get his stuff out by adr, he might be in trouble when he had to come down to refuel. Needlessto says RICKETT is highly interested in the whole proposition! I gather that this was one of the main reasons rehy iyderabad wanted aircraft. A few of these were supplied by RICKETT through HUYS: a8 they were obviously tied together with bits of stiing think they were hialifaxes - they crashed on the way. (7 this and that it woula clearly Be a nistake for Is in bur reply to take cover behind the Intet--Depantmentel Security Committee. The D.G. hEs received clearance from America to 89 ahead with hia visit to Chifley. Hollis lleavee to-moprow and the D.0. on Tuesday. 29th Janualy. 'o' rang to tell me what he had heard from COTTON about de MURAULT. We already had this information and T was able to point out to 1ct that RICHTT bad a suspicion that de MURAUIT was a "planti and that COTTON was auoting Tor to RICKETT. tot took note of this and seid that he would see a suitable occasion to give COTTON a guanded varning. Deny pang me about the Trersuny leakage on Palestine finance. Bridges had passed on the information which the D.G. had Eiven him to NTorman Brook, and Normman Brool had told Drew 1o vet BHawith it. He had een-making enduiries, BS a result of Which he thought he had the document. He hau discavened that it had been reproduced in the typing pool, instead of in the Cabinet offices. He WaG gotting the hames of those concerned for to check against cut reeopie. Lowarned Drew that the whole matter was extremely delicate, owing to the source, and fixed u a meeti.ng between him and James Rebertson. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETTAINED NDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4)OF 3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 201 19 THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Out 201/ I saw Sir Alexander Maxwell to-day. He did not think that we could eancel BELLA'S and HOMESKY'B return visas. It woulla, of course, be entirely against norma practice to do this. T asked him about goading the police to keep observation on BEILA, pointing Dut that if they did SD we should probably not be quite 80 well informed. He said he thought on the whole it would be better to leave the police alone and let things take their course. I made it quite cllear that ve could give no guarantee that things might not happen in the presen't cincumstances. I showed the paper on the handlingof certain foreign nationals ariving in this country to Sir Alexander Maxewell He said that, subject to anything that Paice mightthave to say, his feeling vaR thet we shoiild not in any circumstances eotend the R.L.L. period longer than two mDliths; he thought that even this might be stretching it a bit. T said that T thought this outht to give UE time to assess the 19 bona fides of any particular individual and, if necessary, to send him back to the British zone before the period expired. I made it clear that we should be using .Fs in our various establishments. with which he coneurred. I have asked B.4. to ask Hinchlley Cooke to take this 1i with Paice. 3oth January. At the JII.C. to-day we had a long discussion about recriprocal treatment for Soviet Attaches in London. Apparently our Attaches are only alllowed to travel to Leningrad by train after obtaining permission, and by car as far as a fill-up of petrol will carry them. They cannot obtain any petroloutside Moscow. Nobody at the meeting appeared to be very clear about the object of the exercise. In the end it seemed to be three- fole: (1) to give the Soviet authorities a slap in the face for their treatment of General Hilton, (ii) to get better treatment for our Attaches, by imposing similar restrictions on Soviet Attaches in London, and (1i) to curtail as far as possible the subversive activities of Soviet representatives here. The Army and the Navy wanted to reduce the number of Soviet Attaches here to parity with our Attabhes in Moscow. It was pointed out to them that this might lead to the removal of all Attached on both sides. Were they prepared to accept the Yisk? They seemed doubtful, and the Air Ministry was emphatic. An added difficulty was that General Hilton was desperately anxious to leave Moseow - he appears to have "had iti! The final tentative decision was to await Molotov' reply to the last signal that he hEs had from the Foreign Office. If it were unsatisractory, as it almost certainly will be, General Hdlton should be withdrawn and the Soviet authorities should be told to withdraw General GORCIKOV (?). It vas pointed out that General CORCHKOV(T) was only Acting M.A., and, moreover, that he represented Air interests as well. The request for his withdrawal might, therefore, lead to an additional request from the Soviet authorities for the withdrawal of our Air Attache in Moscow. However, this risk is apparently to be taken. Independently it is proposed that Colonel KLESHKAMTOV (?) who has dragged on here in conneetin! with the repatriation of Soviet citizens, should be told 1o EO by the Home Office. He apparently has Do dipllomatic privilege and nobody lenowa what he is doing. If this i.s done, it is considered that honour will have been satisfded! I confined myself to pointing put that if there Was a complete itharawal of Attaches on both sides, Moscow would winbecause they would have the Trade Delegation, with all their Attaches disguised in civilian clothes! If ve tried to prosecute them, we should be told by the Boand of Trade that we were jeopardising Russian wheat supplies. Vickery has rung up to say that ppoor old Gandhi has been assasainated. We do not now whethee he vas Shot by a Hindu or a Moslem. If the latter there is likely to be pretty serious trouble. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDE ACT 1958 Oct 2011 20 THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED DEPARTMENT DER SECTION (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 2o1 We had an Appointments Bound to discuss the posting of an officer to Ceylon and to Alstratia. The D.G., II think rightiy, felt that he ought to consider first whether we could not possibly fill these appointments from our existing staff. If we bring in somebody like George" Jenkin, ve ane narrowing still further our already napow field for promotion. If we bring anyone in, it must be on the striet understanding that they accept the basic salary, and it may be desirable to make the appointment on a purely ad hoc contract basis. Each Division is to consider what candidates they have and to bring their names forward on Monday. 1ot Yang up to say that he had had a letter from CORTON, which he begins: "I gatlior from C1 conversati oIS that the two deals vihicl I contemplate have the approval of the authorities concerned". T pointed out to tc: that this letter, which COTTOM will probabl, Wave around implying that he had got authority from a Government source which Would probably coveD him in the event of any trouble I thought 1et shouia make it clear (a) that he did not wish to receive lsbters of this kind, and (B) that if he wanted authorit he must obtain it fI the proper department, He Baid that he would so inform CODDON When he saw him next weeic. 2nd Februany. Dick, Hill, Derbyshire and I had a meoting about HSHARKEYI there wert two points. First, his relations with GANO and GANO's indisoretions, and Beconily OLI' attitude towards "SHRRKEYI. As regama the first podnt, we decided that Dunderdale shoud be given the facts. As regopan the second point, it did 0Ot sem that "SHARKEY'S informatdbr an ELTI amIs deal +- allegedly for Pakistan, but probably for the Middle East - through was likely to be of any great importance, since UD to the present there WA8 no sign of money In vie.r of rrevinus diseusaions alotit DU elations with "SHARREY", it was decided tnt if he rarg un Derb. cold see him if 2] At the Appointments Boand to-dny it was decided that, Bubject to local approval, Courtenay Young should go. to Australias He is apparently very keen to do this. It was also decided that Vickers shoua Eo either to Ceylon or to Pakistan. Lastly we considered wether we could fill the third vacanoy from somebody in the office This woud mean reoruiting new people to 1131 the bottom rung in the vacancleb. The general fealing waa that "George" Jenkin was of too high a calibre to bring into the organisation, even in ar ad hoc basis and on the basic salary. Hornoeks also raised the gueation of the Honours Liat: I suggested that: a note should be cireulated to Directors, and that they should be asked to male their submissions. 3rd February. Mns Bagot talked to me about our aisomwith the French. She said that frc her point of view the situation was not really satisfsotory. She said that although there were some good people dn R.5., the seetion as a whole did not seem to capny much weight with other sections in the. office. The result waa that counter- Intelligence HB we understood it was rather a poor relation. She thought it possible that we might be able to do better through Le Man, Lth Februany. At the J.1.0. today w discussed a long paper from the J.S-P.1.0. on B.il. The paper showed the paucity of information on this subject and endedwith a peguea for personnel to conduct further research. Tt was, however, quite clenr that, in B0 far as Russia Was concerned, the taak Df obtaining information ivas almost an inauperable one. I dnew attention to the fact that in the paper there was no mention of exploiting sources in this country; for example, if we knew the names of firms which supplied the plant and materials for our owII efforts an this direction, it would be poaslble to make contact with those firms and to ask them to report on any foredgn visitors or strange enguiries. Somebady could then Ascertain. exactly what had Dasaed between the prospeetive purchaser and the member of the firm by whom he waB interviewed. By piecing aal these together, we might bet some idea a B to the: Boope of Russian activities. This had been rather forcibly. brought to my notice hy the recent CaSE of BORODIN, who 1s oatensiibly purchasing penicillin plent. Kenneth Strong immediately pricked up his ears, as it Ls of course the kind of thing that he ought to be doing. On the other hand, We have a very considerable interest in a man like HORODIN. If BORODIN 16 in fact purchasing chemical plant consciously for B.W. purposes, he may also be Beeving information about our own efforts, and for add we know he may have got into touch indireotlye with somebody importarit. f we could satisfy ourselves about his intention and knowledge, we might connider him as a potential defeetor and take steps accordingly. hite apart from the eapionage OP the defector aspect of the case, it seems to mne that we are the only department which can exploit the whole field to the full extent. J.I.B. can talk to the firns, but it may be necassary Coue hee paes 23 Uodla the matter seemed important, but that we should not Solicit any information It was hoped that in this way the connection would gradually die out. ReeB of M.L.L rang me i2p about the case of KOLLIBAY. The D.M.I. wants tD answer the letter from Generall Lindseil. I told Rees that inmy view the matter was really no concerne of ouTS Dr the War Office. We had already put a member of the firm in touch with the Home Office, and I personally had spoken to the Home office,wl should properly lenow that man they hed naturalised was in a sense evading the decision of the Enetny Trading Dept. Rees agreed and said that it was, of course, difricuilit when an ex-General wrote in to the D.M.I. Burt rang me up to Bay that the bomblin the cane of dates had turned out to be a piece of Typhoon ammunition which had got left in the hold of the ship. The ship haB previously been used for transporting armaments. The incident, therefore, had no Bignificance. At my meeting to-day we dsoussed a letter which has been received from the Treasury with the Minutes of a meeting held by BridgeB and the Permanen't U.SS of S. at which the D.G. Was present, on the bubjeot of Communist in Governent Departments. The P.U.Se are taking the line that we shotd vet a1l employees in the Service Miniatries, Ministry of Supply and the Foreign Office. They say that it i8 impossible for them to arrange their departments in Buch a manner as to ensure that seeret and top secret documents are only handled by certain sections. We propose to reply that they will get greater security if they vet an individual when it is proposed to erploy hime on Secret work. There is not much Security in vetting him only when he joins the Department. If, however, at 16 impossible to rearrange their forcen-in the manner suggested by the Prime Minister, they must understand that they will be accepting a lower standard Df security, if indeed the proposition is practical one from Dur point of View. We can only say if it is when we now what the figures are. We see no point in their suggesting that Civil Servants nnder 21 should only be vetted when they are employed on secret work: indeed, this is something Df a contradiction, since they claim that they cannot organdse their departments in such a manner as to let us lenow what Beotions deal with the secret or top Becreit nateriall. If we are to vet alll members of certain deparitments, we should i nolude the 218 at bhe outset in order that they can be poated to some innocupus department. The Minutes of the meeting also raised the question of a tatement by the Government that it vaB not their intention to employ members of subversive organisations on secret work. We saw no objeotion to this, but we felt that the Government would inevitablyy be drawn into tating what B subversive organisation wag. We thought the dangers were two-foldi: (i) the organisation which intended to. overthrow the Constitution by viplent means, and (11) the movement whic oDllected information and pasred it on to a foreign power. As regards (i) it would anily be possible to gite the Communist Party, and in the present crcumstances the same would apply in (ii). This might not suit the Government as it would not include Fascists, theB.M. having given an order that both Fascists and Commtnists thouid be excluded from secret worl. Coue o RR. uLole for us ta amply all O02 resources to diseover where BORODINIgOe and whom he visits. Hayter asked about BORODIN'E potentialities as a defeetor. I said that we were looking into his case, but we were far from being able to say that he was a likely bet. Apart from the many difficulties in making an approach in a case of this sort. it waa finst of alll essential to now whether he had near relatives in Russia. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIO 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 2o\ 11 Kenneth Strong said that the Rusaians had torn up some of the single lines running back into Russia from the Eastern 2one: he thought this was perhaps significant and might indicate a defensive rather than an offensive move. In any cage it was a situation worth watching, since ir this was only a temporary mea'sure to relbeve the trans- portation system in Russia, it woulld be significant if the Russians began to rebuild the railways in Western Germanyvi. D.M.I. said that it was calculated that, irrespective of these measures, the Russians could in their own peculiar way maintain some seventy-five divisions of the line without additional rail communication. Strong also thought it sienifican that, according to Russian published statistics, there was a decrease of some 6 percent in the Army and a positive incresse fof manpower in industry. This might indicate that the Russians wer planning on a longrterm rather than a short-terr basis. (c' mentioned that Winston was endeavouring to include SIGINT material in his war book: he was being extremely naughty about this, as he more than anybody should know how important it was to keep the whole thing secret. 5th February. I tallke to Hill about the Geneva Convention of the subject of internees during a war. The Foreign Office wants to introduce a clause stating that the decision has been made after due consideragi of the grounds for suspicion. Hinl fears that this can only open the door to discussion between the neutrall or protecting power and the (overnment on the reasons. This, 0f cour'se, is the one point that ve have been trying to avoid. IP the phrase means no more than stating that the Government, as distinct from the Police, is accepting responsibility for internient, this is 811. right, but it, must be Clear that the decision of the Home Secretary is unfettered (?. and that he cannot be called upon, either by the protecting power or by Parliament, on by any other authority, to state his reasons. We know from experience in the last war that disclosure of these facts Woulld virtually have made our Work impossible, particularly in connection with the running of double agents. 71 Hanry alLun snn Went over to see ifreth of the Presauny to digeusi with of 1e1103 iita PEEFTO to suvansive clements in the Goverrert sevica. The F.U.S3, wth Brldes in the cltir, met the D.O. this subject before ie let for Ausitiralia. They bic thet they aotad nut divide their departments Lnito secret and non-seerat ontocoriea, and that they wanted cemale vet of oveiysody 107 btloyod and of a1l intake over the ave of 231. In aditd 12T tol this the wanted a specisl vet for those entering See2e lJuent. Beimei Way to be contindiction. It ddntount For 115 to Say how Pif 17E 0otii uindentake the work 021 last staf Ne sholln reuine untill We could get figures. afreth aientool: to produoc these. I thoughit, too, that it would be EB we2a here: conoenid undenstinon that a incnesed vetting nonadtar wareuit did 1ut Jet ITBEn going out into the stpaet and getting six people would. be able to to a purely routine icb oP the there war A1D trace. bit they would not be qualified t assess the value of a trace until they had been in the office for several years this maesn't bhat the decision. which WaB nllwaye a vital une to the o7Pi0e. anla indaed to the jabyr concerted, had to be wiate L. those oh the inveatigatio side who were already extremely heedmregsed anat verei 1a Fact, the yeople prpaucing the neconds OIL Sich the vetiting is made. Ti28tn wes yeny Byoputhretic end clearly thought that the 1.U.85 were fairly wide of the ask and imbued with a false Sense of security. They vere inenined to think that once their department had bees vattea they Coilla ait back complacently with folded ars. HIe ss44 thet toaidly tlie ir Mnistec and the War lidntiater had refused to aceut E 13I2 Nete the lor't the Amipalty, the Ministry of Simply End the Foreign Office. We then discussed the suggestion that goe tatement shwnld be made. I said that after careful consideration I felt that it was important that nothing should be sald alout political peetiss oP subvensive movenents, since this would laevitably dosan the Goverrtent into position whepa they wonlld have to define Whet they meant by a Blbvelsive movement: they could say that it Vuin A tevement whiol advocated the oventhrow of the existing Constitution violence and/er movement whdoh owed allegiance to foreign yoVeP. If the did this, the Faseiat Panty would be exeludeu BAL3 it would centalnly not be easy at the moment to nrave 083i neaAnat the Cortunist Party. They must, themifore, stand on thcire hicat LO 560103h the reawildty of the dndimiduai. Zanid tha kind 02 Oulpliyveiit. B8Y 3.0 lay thoushit sudtable. Above all, they must 1va1d any oblimiticn to give yCsonas Minifreth said he WaB Palievd to hor: this bear TITEE he hd ist been Upafting a reply to the Natiorel (7) Stanr side, will hal seproached Bridzes on the subject of dismissal of 01yal Bspyants, and 1n particular give memberg of the Comurist Farty. They wanted the (Treasury to state that the member- of a moldlcal by in taslr aid hut constitute ground SoY dismissal, refusal of establishment, D.TA any specia deartmental lcoting, and tlmit consileratiols beyond menherahit Df a political phziity which dr: being truken into amount t/ith adverse results to tzny offinen, Suula be revaflled to the officer concerned. The Treagew 1s rtlyrdng thuut certain duties of the Civil Service are so coafdentiai that the Stabe is TNL dsclnrging ita obligation to foggtumrd the nullie intereat is 1t erloys ge3s0115 Ghouit close dlscrsiin reebility theme is any doubt whatevens Mimiaters, 25 therefore, thnl it eesritial that the State shaud main the over in pruotice to rerpain fPps! eploving such bensons work DI thut character. Tu Letter 0oes to 3i3 that Wllile there Try B cases in 716n the rotis for dount of at individualie relia- bility dom0.d be cormdunida dateri to him, usually this woulld FTOL be Looiule, be to do SD mint involve disclosing the steps taken and the tests awpied to safeguard the Sbate's most vital interests. They also wetunad t Live 3 aamuranee about membership of a pliticpl Debts, because it is kmnditea that such membership by itself Vi0l be wreatad grotlid for action, but because again the bests euplied to etfteglatil blie Stala's most vital interests oanbot he dinelosed. The pouper, giving an nocount of the meeting of the Tomanent Unden Becretaries, is going forward from the Tensury witil the pecouendntiong: (a) that 1o public statement shall br+ made, amni (b) that denetments shall bre given the option of saying whether they datnit a total vet on only vet of those going into secret employment THISI IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 2oll bth Februany. Genera] Gubbins called on m1e at request in order that I could te1l hin about SEVILLA. Gerald Templer had asked me to do this. TI showed him a cony of oy letter to Gerald. GLibbins vaB not surprised at the man's record; he thootht, however, that SEVILIA war a interesting Glrlnaotar he pbviousilly hnd a 1ot of maney and Btremad to be able to Bravel about on the Contireut,e ever to Poland, i.n a large car wion much difeipnity. Gubbins said that le would let Ls lC:ow tamy furtliep ixprsatior that migiit cone his way. I long talk with Mitchell mbotit Communisi 1n the B.B.C. He and Simkins have haa eonversatone vilth General Jacob. Three Of te people working undon him in the Estoun uropean Department had very clone Communis't connections, an it looked from their telephone convernuitilons thnt they vene trying to et their point of vievt acnose by ypapping it LP wif other information. Jacob said he truster FRASER thehend of thir iepaptuent, bat vaa open to convcbion that he WaE being double erDaed if we could tive hiiin the evicence. Mereovey', The wotild not hesitate to act. The line that FRASER tool with him WEG that in ordedy to E.et, across the noint of view of the Brdtish Goverrment, it neeeseapy to show some understanding for the point of view of the Eastern. Duropean gounthies. T agreed with Mttchell that we alonlld show General Jacob the evidence the steicteat confllence, buts thint VE shouia urge him te do nothing until we hed aatiaiigd wESeIVS tint FRASOR gnd h1is associates wore working ngadnst the intteste o the colintay. 26 Ve haa a meeting about MOOSAN and SALOMAN - Dick, Miss Chenhall Challes Butler and myself. Both these iindividbals were 020 prisoners, and by some mistake MOCSAN was given SALOMANIE money and SALOMAN MOOSAN'S. MOOSAN is down by some 8 500 and has registered a complaint. They are both, I think, now in Hungary. I thought it was useless to try and get any money back from SATOMAN, and tha't we should have to foot the binh. The difficulty is that MOCSAN will want his money in dollars. Charles is going to approach his contact at the Bank of England. Mra. Quin came to tell me that on the instfuetions of Superintendent Thompson, Johnson of S.B. who deals with Dutoh affairs, has been told that he isY not to come over here, except with his, Thompson's, special instructions. I do not know what 1B at the back of this, but I shall be speaking to Burt about it. 9th Februany. For Minutes of D.D.G. meeting see folder in D.D.G's Secretary'e tray. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct To1l This IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION ACT 8 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS 1958, Oct 2o0 loth February. I attended a Working Party on the future onstitution of the J.I.C. It became more and more apparent how difficult it is to divide the ubjects of Intelligence, organisation and Security; they are, of course, interdependent - one invariably has a bearing on the other. I said that we knew this from our own experience in our own office: it was for that reason that I thought it desirable to keep the Chairmanship of the J.I.C. and the Deputhes' Committees in one hand, namely, that of the Foreign Office, instead of leaving the Chairmanship to the senior Service representative I do not think that the Services altogether liked this idea; there was a tendency to think that the olldest member should always take the Chair. In the end we compromised by saying that the Chairman or his Deputy would take the Chair, and that in the absence of either the Chair would be taken by the senior Service representative. As regards the Chairmanship of the Sub-Committee on Security I said that security was 8 subject in which we specialised and one which above all needed continuity - it might, therefore, be for consideration when the present A.D.N.I. vacated his .weushoulld take over the Chair. This view was accepted and the position was deemed to be covered by a sentence in the draft, stating that the allocation of Chairmanships to various departments should be reviewed periodically. I had a talk with Mann, He said the Chief Constables in Scotland seemed quite happy and were looking forward to talks from Oughton and James Robertspn. He was anxious that I should give a talk at a Chief Constables meeting later on in the year. I said that I would be very pleased to do this. Hinchley came and taoked to me about the case of Mrs. the OGRADY. Isle She of Wight. got She had done seven years and the Home Office were anxious to ten or fourteen years imprisonment for espionage in 298 release her. Hinchley had obviously been against this, but had evidently modified his views as a resul't of conversations with the Home Office and the D.P.P. I do not think that Mrs. O'GRADY communicated anything to the enemy, but she certairlly would have done So if she could have found an opportunity. My view of the case was that she was slightly crackers! I am certain that she could be released without harming anybody. She may become a spy again, but she will always be a bad spy. l1th Februany. Perrins. of atomig research attended the I.C.to-day, primarily for the purpose of discussing whether estimates of our strength, ican strength and Russian strength in atomic bombs should be published in the J.I.C's world review. The final conclusion was to omit any reference to numbers. It was thought, however, that ultimately we could state whether by 1957 we were likely to be in a stronger position than the Russians. The Americans are extremely cagey on the whole subject, even with their own people, in fact the Macmahon Law prohibits the passi ing of any information about their production igures to any but a sellected few in the U.S.A. In fact, we know their figures, with their knowledge and consent, but it would never do to make this fact public in any way. Portal has recently set up a Committee which is to relate to requirements in production. This will be a difficult job, since to state requirements needs a far greater knowledge than we have at present of vital targets in Russian and a proper assumption of what will be the range of our aircraft in the future. Meanwhile, Tizard has set up a Committee, which is engaged on getting out a pamphlet which will show what an atomdc bomb can do: apparently the blast effect at 1500 to 2,000 feet is far greater than at ground level, but at ground level the area covered by radio-active particles is far greater. There is some doubt whethe the Americans have ever given serious consideration to the effect of atomic warfare on Russia or to the selection of suitable targets. There is a possibility of a super (?) atomic bomb, but on present showing it is unlikely that this will be available during the next ten years. It is a sound proposition on paper, but we are no nearer its manufacture than Sir James Rutherford was to the manufacture of the present bomb when he first splitt the atom. A discussion followed about recent discoveries of uranhum in the Rand gold mines. Welsh said that the deposits here were geologically unique. This seemed to be a rather sanguine tatement: they may be unique now, but unless world geological survey is coroplete, which it ertainly is not, similar deposite may be found at any moment, and indeed may have already been found in Russia. The Rand mines are about 8,000 feet deep and the gold is extraoted by some chemical process through the use of cyanide. All that is necessary to extract the uranium is to apply another chemical process to the. deposits after the gold has been removed; this makes the proposition an economic one. The known gold deposits in Russia are of an entirely different nature to those found on the Rand. In the Bellgian Congo there is an exceptional concentration of uranium, but it is not likely to last s0 long as the deposit on the Rand. Uranium is to be found in shalle deposits, and a considerable area of these exists north of Leningrad. With unlimited manpower uranium can be extracted, but the proposition would be wholly uneconomic. An enormous plant would be needed and it would be almost impossible to keep the project secret. There is a small but rich deposit of uranium in Mozambique, but the previous information about the Gold Coast seems to be erroneous; there are deposits there similar to those on the Rand but they do not contain uranium. We also discussed the question of the attaches in Moscow. The Air Force were very anxious to retain their representatiion; they said that far the best information that they had got on the Russian Air Force was at the May Day party, and that they reromaking special preparations for this year. The Navy said they got no Intelligence, and the Army still felt that there was something to be gained by keeping representation in Moscow, both on a short term and a long term basis. our previous recommendation abou't wi thdrawing Hilton and asking for the ithdrawal of GORCHKOV (?) and KLESHKANOV (?) was agreed to. Hunter brought Long to seo me. Long, after twenty years service as one of our Watchers is retiring. He has done splendid Work. Norman Brook told me that Jack TANNER. was now the T.U.C. representative on the Economic Planning Committee. He thought that responsible Ministers ought to know just where TANNER stood. T said my impression was that TANNER had moved very considerably to the Right, although of course he had a bad past. In the twenties there was evidence to show that he was operating in close touch with the Soviet agent Jacob KIRSCHENSTEIN. I told Brook that I would look up the papers and come to see him. Dick Butler came to talk about the Stephens. case, which has now been posponed until May. He appears to have had some wordy passages with Shapcott, the J.A.G. Miss Russell-King came to talk to me about passing nformation concerning a Communist employed on one of the French Missions. I said that it all depended on the source, but that if we coulld do so I should like to let Le Man know. 12th February. The D.G's telegraplelabout his first meeting with Chifley. It was a little bit sticky at the start; Chifley appeared to think that there was some personal accusation and stated at once that neither he nor any of his Cabinet colleagues had seen the telegrams referred to. This, of course, was true as he was not in office at the time. The D..G. hastened to explain that he was merely there to tell the Prime Minister that a leak had occurred and to stress that enquiries should be made. Chifley accepted the heak of the first document, but was doubtfull about the secondeone, which he said was a matter of cormon knowledge through Australia at the time. It was with some difficulty that the D..G. got him to concentrate on the first document. The D.G. 8s far as I can see, has not disclosed the source of his information, but ha's put over cover story As namely, that our knowledge of the leakage came from a defector. Chifley 30 agreed to the investigation and asked the D.G. and Hollis to meet Sheddon in Melbourne, and to meet in Canberra at a later state. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 13th February. 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 2011 Wind came to see me about the last meeting of the Hotilis Committee, and also about a letter received from Thistle, who had benn asked to give a lecture to the equivalent of the I.D.C. in America on the subject of deception. I told wvild that in my view this gave him the opportunity of going out with Jack Easton. It seemed the more desirable, since Easton was now to take out some concrete plan for discussion with the Americans. Wild said that he would put forward the suggestion. Graham Harrison telephoned to say that he was passing our letter about etainees in the event of War to the Foreign Office, who had suggested an ambiguous amendment in the brief for our delegates to the Geneva Convention. He thought that before the matter was put to the P.M. the Foreign Office should sate exactly what they meant. At the. Appointments Board to-day it was decided that should be told that he could not be established, We subsequently examined the nominations for the June Honours List, and went through the list of officers who it waf thought desirahle to put on our resenve in case of emergency. Burt called. I talked to him about Johnson, his Dutch expert who had been told by Superintendent Thompson that he must in future ask permission before visiting Mrs. Quin. I said that I hoped this did not imply any desire that there should not be as free an exchange of information as possible between S.B. officers and the section officers in out department. Burt hastened to say that this was not his intention. I gathered that Johnsoh was not altogether an easy character, although there was no suggestion about his integrity, Burt thought it was right and indeed necessary to have some general order that S.B. officers should report their visits: he thought anything else might be dangerous from cur point of view. He had all sorts of people wished on him about whom he frankly knew very little. It might be dangerous if they all thought they could come over here and collect information of a confidential kind. Under the date October loth, 1947, the British Emaassy in Moscow tried to analyse Russian intentions. They point out how easy it is to be misled by statements made periodicailly by Stalin to leading Press representatives or important visitors. These statements are invariably made with some short-term purpose in view; they are often in direct contradiction of statements made at important meetings of Russian Communist Party representative it is these that really show the state of mind of the Soviet leaders and their long-term intentions. Stalin is eternined the Soviet Russia should be strong enough to prevail in the decisive strugsle which should result from the next and inevitablle crisis 31 of monopoly capitalism (7). The clash ds not, however, necessarily imminent and in the meantime the Soviet Union is prepared to rub along with the rest of the world, provided of course that this entails no veakening of her position for the ultimate struggle. The Soviet leaders favour the centralisation of power in Germany, but only on condition that the Soviet Union has a controlling influence on the exercies of that power. Russia is not yet directly aisputing Britain's position in the Middle East, but at the same time she iw weakening it and would like to see herself established as a Mediterranean power. The above analysis suggests two conclusions. The first is that nothing the Western world can do at present will remove from the Soviet mind in the foreseeable future the fatalistic conviction that a collisio between east and west is inevitable,ar and with the consequent determina- tion to push through the preparations deemed necessary to face the cllash successfully when it arrives. The most that we can hope for is that the passage of time without a collision will of itself induce greater elasticity in the Soviet mind and censequent recognition of the mutual advantages that le in the conception of one world as opposed to two. The second is that although Soviet policy is conceived as strategically defensive, its execution involves the same military preparations, the same striving after self sufficiency, the same propaganda campaigns and the same tactios of stalling intervention and attempts at disruptior as would a policy planned for agression. It therefore carries with it the same dangers and fordes upon us preparedness and vigilance. l6th February. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 (204 I saw 'e', with who I discussed a telegram to the D.G, telling him about information received from S.I.S. about LIVANOV, the Soviet Ambassador to Australia, who is at the moment here in tranbit. LIVANOV had boasted that he had a number of informants in Australia, that he knew all' the secrets of the Australian Govefnment, and Was master of the situation. We agreed to the terms of a telegram 32 indicating that this information had been picked up during LIVANOV'E stay in London, and that it sould be transmitted to ehifley and Sheddon. We also pointed out that it might provide suitable cover for information about individuals which ve hoped to get from L. L,S.I.C. sources. I also discussed a telegram which we had received from Australia, indicating that Polden, the SIGINT man, had in January last told Chilton that there was a leakage of information from Australia. sot was extremely annoyed about this; he had no means of communicating with Polden by telegram, except through the Australians i- he thought, therefore, that the best way was for Hollis to get into touch with him in Melbourne and find out exactly what he said. The whole incident was unfortunate since the mere fact of the information coming from Polden might suggest that it was from a SIGINT source. D.D.G. Meeting minutes in folder in D.D.G. Secretary's tray. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. Act 2o11 T was asked to attend a meeting at the Home Office with Maxwell, Newsam, Scott, Howe and Baker. The Home Secretary was apparently worried about the increase of crime,a a suggestio was made that possibly a highly qualified officer might be turned over to deal exclusively with important receigers. The police did not think that this was likely to solve their problem; they said that So far as they knevi there was no master mind behind the crools, and that in any case receivers and crpoks were so mixed up together tha't there was no particular advantage in concentrating on one or the other. Crooks did not usually work in gangs; two or three of them might join up for a particular job, but they would then disperse and not work together again, at any rate for some considerable time. The police rely for their information on differences of opinion between the crooks and the receivers, and of course on old lags. They did a certain amoun't of observation, but this was not easy; they also Pan telephone checks, but these produced very little informatio of value as those Who spole were always extremely guarded in whet they said. What the police really anted was an increase in manpower; there were only about sixty officers in the Flying Squad with an enomous field to cover. There was also a shortage of car's. They Could not denude their outstations more than they had already, since local crime was considerable. In 23 addition to an increase of staff in the C.I.D., there was a serious need for an increase in the uniformed branch; the number of policemen on the beat was very small. Another difficulty was that the cars that they received were all of the same type and easily recognisable. Maxwell said that he had always been very impressed by the cases which had been brought to him by M.I.5., particularly by the careful research work that had been done. He vondered whether the Yard might not economise in manpower by employing women in their Registry and for the purposes of research. Howe said that this had been considered with Baker, but that it had been agreed that there was considerable advantage in police officers doing a period in the registry, as it was useful to them to know exactly how documents were classified and the extent to which they could rely on their records. The main argument of the police against using M.I.5. methods was that M.I.5. were dealing wi th organisations, whereas in the crook world there was no organisation or master mind behind the whole business. A suggestion was made by Baker that possibly the police might make use of our Watchers. I said that out staff were already heavily overburdened and that this would be quite impossible. Maxwell, and Nevisam Were not wholly persuaded by the police arguments and urged them to consider whether they could not make better use of their existing manpower by concentrating on what they felt were the more important cases. I was somewhat embarrassed by Maxwell's praise of M.I.5. methods, and was amused to think that the Home Office called in M.I.5. to assist in solving the Yardie problems! I think if Sir Norman Kendal had been Assistant Commissioner he would have bllown up completely! I had a private tallk wit Maxwell after the meeting. I reminded him of the work that we had done during the war on Black Market cases, and of the fact that we had acheved very considerable results with our great difficulty, however, had always been to get proper action taken without jeopardising the source. Unfortunately we had had some very serious set-backs owing to the information we obtained having gone straight back via the police to the crooks. The D.G. has telegraphed that he has had a satisfactory meeting with Sheddon and Brigadier Chilton. The latter is concerned with Australian SIGINT. The D.G. is anxious if possible to use the second document. 'C', however, does not like the idea, of this, owing to the risks invollved and t the fact that another pprorett would have to be made to the Americans. ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 17th February. 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. Ock 20o1 T lunched with Van Moyland. He told me that there had SLIII been no solution of the iifferences between Einthoven and Van Angeren, although he expected something to happen before very long. He seemed satisfied that things were moving in the right direetion I saw Norman Brook about Jack TANNER. He asked me to let him know about TAMNER'E general background, since he had recently been appointed as T.U.C. representative on the Economic Planning Committee. This would give him access not only to Home affairs, but also to information about our dollar position, I told Brook that we had not 34 turned the heat on to TANNER for a very long time as we regarded him as respectable. While he had a considerable past and was even at one time concerned with espionage, we had heard nothing that would indicate that he was now working for the O.P. This did not mean that he was not fairly intimate with people like Harry POLLITT. On the other hand, if there had been anything really serious I thought that we were almost bound to have had a sniff of it. Brook said that he would say a word confidentially to those in authority concerned, and that meanwhile he did not want us to do anything. He then asked me about a reference in Tangye's report to Diana LYTTLETON, the Press representative at the Pallace. From his own observation he thought she might be a little tiresome and. he intended to sound a warning not to Tormy Lascelles. 18th February. At the J.I.C. this week we discussed the reorganisation plan of the WorkingParty. It was agreed that in the absence of the Chairman, his permanent Foreign Office Deputy should take the Chair at the Deputies' meeting. Kenneth Strong was the only dissenter. He told me afterwards that he was worried about the Foreign Office becoming too powerful he thought that it would have been a good makeweight if the senior Service representative had taken the Chair from time to time. Personally I think the decision is a good one and it keeps the Committee of the J.I.C. together and co-ordinates in the office of the Chairman Intellligence, Organisation and Security The Committee also decided that the Security Sub-Committes should be chaired by M.1I.5. when the present A.DIN.I. left in April or May. While the Ds. of. I. were with the Chiefs of Saaff, I had a long talk with Kenneth Strong and Lamb of the J.S.T.I.0. about the implicatione of the BORODIN case and the extent to which I thought we ought to be ablle to assist J.I.B. in the future. Kenneth Strong agreed with all iny suggestions: he thought that overt intelligence and SIGINT could supply between 80 to 90;6 of what was required, and evidantly felt that, except for a limited field, S.I.S. was a waste of time and money. He told me that O.I.A. information was nearly 90,6 overt. Dick, Horrocks, Charles and I had a discussion about our ith- drawall from Palestine and also about administration of B.C.I.S. in Greece. 19th February. THIS IS A COPY IN ORIGINAL NDEPARTMENT DOCUMENT RETAINED ACT 1958 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS SECTION UNDER Oct 2oll 35. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 2o1 26 I told 'cr about my ideas for the co-ordination of the work of J. J.I.B. C.P.R. J.S.T.I.C. and ourselves. He seemed quite satisfied. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 ct 2O1 20th February. Dick, Charles, Joe Spencer and I examined the plans for Leconfield House. We decided in principle that the Heads of B.I., B.2. and B.3. should be with their sections, and that Directors should be with the D.G, and myself. I lunched with Guy Burgess. He asked me again about Andrew REVAI. He tola me that he had made it clear to REVAI that he could not discuss politics with him as he had given an undertaking to Hector MeNeal not to do so. He thought REVAI was Worth looking into. Colonel Ford of J.I.B. came to see me at Kenneth Strong' request. I really covered with him the same ground as I covered with McEwen. seemed entirely in favour with all the suggestions made and welcomed th idea of a meeting. 32 23rd February. Dick, Harry Allen, Mitchell, Simkins and Furnivall Jones and I had a meeting about who is in the middle of our B.W. planning. There is no doubt that is a Marxist of long standing, and that up till 1943 he was a member of the C.P. Since 1943 he has not come to notice and will be taking part in Operation HARNESS in the Spring. We have had him under close observation by H.0.W. and B.6. for a period of two months, without any result. Even assuning that he has left the Party, he probably remains fundamentally a Marxist, whose loyalties in the event of war with Russia might conceivably be doubtful. C. Division seemed to think that he ought to be removed to some other sphere. What seemed to me to be lacking was any first-hand evidence of the kind of person he is. I thought that we ought to tell the Ministry of Supply what we know and see whether we could not get a better picture before making any recommendation. For minutes of D.D.G. meeting heldo to-day see folder in .D.G.Sec's tray. We have sent a telegram to Bill Magan, telling him that the Foreign office have agreed to two of our officers staying on in Palestine, and Ffoulkes to go with the G.0.0. to Haifa. 'We have told Magan we think that he should arrange to evacuate all of the female staff from Palestine as soon as possible, if this is practicable U'ren is fussing about our getting Patel's approval to his appointment before he goes to Delhi. We do not think that this is either necessary or desirable. It is really crossing a bridge before we get to it. 2lth Februany. I discussed with Dick our Charter for Burma. We are having difficulty with the Foreign Office about running agents. All we want to do is to collaborate with the Burmese Police in any projects which may come to our notice or theirs. Gleadell rang me up about a visit by Sir Ben LOCKSPEISER to Australia, where he is intending to give off the Works on our recent technical develorments. In the present state of Australian security nobody is thinking that this is a very good idea. I said I thought he ought to go siok! If he goes he must rely on Sheddon to arrange that he only speals to thoroughly reliable people. In view of the case of leakage now being investigated, Sheddon will have the risks very present in his mind. This IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN 3(4 IDEPARTMENT OF THE PUBLIC UNDER RECORDS SECTION ACT 1958 Oc 2o11 38 25th February. The following "off the record" points came up at the J.I.C. to-day. The discussion on SIGINT priorities has been postponed until Travis has had an oP: ortunity of explaining certain technical difficulties. The Foreign Office was dissatisfied with the Working Party' report, which they felt seriously neglected their interests. In deference to the wishes of the D.N.I., the J.I.C. is in future to meet on Fridays. On the firat Wednesday in avery month they will meet before going to the Chiefs of Staff, and will see the Planners afterwands. The Deputy Directors' meeting will in future be held on Wednesdays. When the reorganisation comes into force, the Deputy Direetors ( O. &: S. will meet on Thursdays. Warner, who is nov controlling the erbryo P.W.E., vice Kirkpatrick, is to meet the J.I.C. as soon as he has seen the Chiers of Staff. He is to be in charge of our "cold" war. D.N.I. is worried at the extent to which the Air Force is collaborating with the French. It had now been suggested, in a paper to the Chiefs of Staff, that they should extend their collaboration to research and development. D.N.I. was the more worried because he understood that the French Air Ministry and aircraft industry were both notoriously penetrated by the Communists. A.C.S. replied that the Chief of the Air Staff had considered this matter veny carefully and felt that the risks had to be taken. The view was that unless we colllaborate with the French nov, their Air Force will die. D.N.I. stated that on instructions from the Foreign Office, N.I.D. have been turning down any requests for information, hovever small, from the Spanish Naval Attache. He vondered whether this was wise: Spain was strategically important to us, and we could do quite a lot to build up her small navy if we were allowed to help. The Spaniards appeared to be particularly anxious to obtain our assistance. Hayter said that the objection was, of counse, a political one, but that he would ook into the matter. There was a discussion on security in our Dominions. D.M.I. said he was being constantly frustrated in his efforts to pass them information, owing to their laok of security. Could not something be done at a higher level? It was explained to him that efforts were being made in this direction, particularly in Australia, but that we could not go further than to tender advice. Canada, we thought, was reasonably secure, but we could not say the same for any of the other Dominions. We hoped that when we had an officer in Australia, we might be able to excert a certain amount of influence towards improving the situation. There followed a discussion on Sir Ben Lockspeiser's visit to Australia, where he is to speak on out technical developments to the C.S.I.R.. and also to Service Chiefs. These discussions might go even wider than this. It waa agreed that he should be warned in general terms of the lack of securit in Australia, and that he should see Sir Frederick Sheddon, who was fully conseious of the present state of affairs, and rely on him for advice as to what he could say and to whom he could say it. A.C.S.I. said that the aerial survey of Turkey had been held up as Turkish maps had no triangulation to which photographs could be related. This meanit that RADAR methods would have to be used. our 39 Geoffrey Wethered called He had just returned from Prague, where he had been looking into one or two crude attempts by the Ozechs to penetrate our Embassy. An approach had apparently been made to a woman in the Information Department; she had been asked. to report on the Ambassador's views. to which of course she would not normally have any access. The approach was made by a Czech, who did not disclose his identity or office. She was toad that if she collaborated she and her parents would be given visas for Italy, for which they applied some time ago, as the woman herself is half Italian. I told Wethered that it might be useful if he could keep us informed of any incidents of this kind, however trivial they might appear. We should always be interested to knowthe kind of questions that the Czechs were asking. T told him, too, very confidentaally, that there might be openings in cases such as these for deception. I therefore propose to mention the matter to Wild. T do not suppose that S.I.S. have informed either ourselves or L.C.S. about this case. H arry, F.J. Dick and I considered a paper by F.J. on the employment of aliens in industry and research establishments. This paper, when its final form has been agreed, will be passed to the J.I.0. It draws attention to all aspects of this problem, both short and long term, and makes certain recommendations. The whole question has been forcibly brought to our notice through the return of certain Polles to their native country and attempts by one, KUHN, to recruit others who are still here. 'c' tells me that the detailed texts of deciphered telegrams have just arrived from Washington. We shall nov be ablle to give Hollis some further data to work on. Meanwhile, I am trying to get from S.I.S. the dates on which the two basic telegrams were transmitte to Moscow. This information is required by Hollis, who has established that they went first to Australian J.I.C. and subsequently to External Affairs, where they were till February, 1946. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct Roll 40 26th Februsry. I had a meeting with Dick, Derby and Harry Lee to discuss what is known as the KOLBY case. Through BRIT and other sources we have lerrer of the presence here of 9 man callled KOLBY, accompanier by an American jew callled, SCHMAL and another one called MINZER. KOLBY, who incidentally is an ex-F.B.I. officer, is pretending to represent certain big business in America, who are anxioue to finance Fascism and in particular, MOSLEY. In fact they represent the World Jewish Congress movement and are in touch with the representative body over here, and in particular with a rather influential jew in London called Their idea is to wor their way into MOSLEY'g confidence, find out as much as they can about Fascism here and elsewhere, and in particular whether MOSLEY is already in touch with influential business sources in America, from whom they believe he is receiving money. This is, as far as we can ascertain, the true purpose of KOLBY'E mission, but they are all S0 tricky that there might be all sorts of other wheels within vheels. They have gone SO far as to set up a bogus office over here in order to build themselves up, and there is some question of a combined Anglo-American publication of a Fascist kind. The position has been complicated by the fact that KOLBY, as soon as he arrived, approached S.B. and told them what he was doing. Not only that, ne got Thompson to fix him up at a hotel and to register him in a false name - his real name is TRAOY. We felt, therefore,t that it was time that we had cards on the table with the Yard, since we saw a possibility that as they had been drawn into the swim there might be awlward revelations at a later date - it might even be said that they were facilitating these Jewish agents to carry out espionage on MOSLEY in this country. On the other hand it might further be said that they were participating in what might amount to direct provocation. There was an added complication, in that Burt had heard through KOLBY that MOSLDY suspected that BRIT was an M.I.5. agent, and that Thompson' conversations with SALOMAN had been shown from our sources to be singularly inept. From our point of view it was obviously desirable to get BRIT out of his present entanglement. I therefore got Burt to come over', when we discussed the whole case. He saw the implications and clearly had he known would never have allowed Thompson to register TRACY in the false name of KODBY. He had only just been in time to stop Thompson dining wi th KOLBY and SALOMAN and a whole lot of other Jews. We told Burt that BRIT vaS our agent, and agreed that it was absolutely necessary that he should inform Thompson, on the understanding that the matter went no further and that Thompson was disereet in his conversations with BALOMAN. I arn not very happy about this, but it was unavoidable. We then agreed that we voulld inform BRIT that we doubted the bona fides of KOLBY and Co. and that he should, therefore, extract himself from the panty and ultimately tell MOSLEY thet he believes these people to be worling a "plant" on the B.U.F. possibly in Jewish interests. In addition to getting us out of the mess, this should allay MOSLEY'E Suspicions about BRIT. I saw Sir Robent Knox about our recommendatio or the ret Honoura List. He did not think it likely that weshpuld get more than two and seemed satisfied with the recommendations RETAINED SECTION (4) THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. Oct 2011 Ill Johnstone and I attended a meeting of the B.I. Committee. to discuss the nenicillin problem. Sir Paul Fildes, who I believe is the last word in B.W., said that if the Russians tried to cultivate B. agents witl a penicillin plant, those concerned Would probably die of a foul disease, since any plant of the kind would be much too leaky, but when challenged by Professor Wilkins, he agreed that the technical "know-how" of the penicillin plant might give the Russians valuable clues. This, however was a matter to be explored with the fin of Glaxo, who are apparently the principal suppliers of the best penicillin. It was agreed that Willins and Sir Paul F1ldes would see Glaxo to-morrow and report immediately on their views. Meanwhile, it was felt that we shoulaclear up the position vis a vis America, who had sold us the manufacturing rights. If it was their policy to refuse penicillin plant and technical "knov-how" we should have to keep in step. I sa 'c', who showed me the latest telegrams from Washington on the leakage case. It is now clear that the document we showed to the Australians was "found in Sir Frederick Sheddon'e office. It seems, too, that there is a possibility of leakage in Evatt's office. The texxts are, however, So obscure through missing groups that it is very diffi ficult to get at the facts. I have taken away the documents to study and have suggested to 'c' that we should put up to him a draft telegram to send to Hollis, for his personal information, We would also consider whether it was possible for hi.m to pass on any of the facts to the Australians under suitable cover, since only in this way was there much chance Of our laying the culprit by the heels. 27th February. At the J.I.C. to-day we discussed the question as to whether India and Pakistan should remain in category A. for the pasaing of information, or be downgraded to category B. There were various other alteraatives, and a note is to be prepared by the J.I.S. on all the pros and cons. The matter is considered to be particularly important, since the Indians are likely to be very sensitive. We do not wish to alienate either party, the more SO since India seems to be veering back towards remaining i.n the Empire. This, at any rate, is Mountbatten's view. The decision on Palistan is eually important., since it is invaluable from the point 6f view of defence against Russia. Coupled with all this is the question of supplying arms. If elther party does not get them, they will undoubtedly seek help from Russia. On the other hand, if we give adequate supplies to both sides there will undoubtedly be a blood bath, out of which the Rusaians may profit. A number of other subjeets were discussed, including penicillin. A report is to be made to the Chief of Staff on the results of the interview ith Glaxo. Meanwhile a wire is to be sent to J.S.M. Washington to clear up the position with the Amnericans. I took the opportunity of raising the wider question about our policy with regard to building up Russia and the satellite states, and for this I got the warm support of Watson of J.I.B. He agreed that there was at the moment no policy and nd co-operation. It seemed to be merely accidental that incidents such as the penicillin one came to notice. It seemed that the first thing was to have a policy, and secondlysom somebody should ace that it was carried out. stated that General ULEPIC, Chief of Staff of the Yugo-Slav Air Force, had approached the local authorities with a view to defection withinthe next few months. The Swiss want to know whether we should be prepared to receive the General in this country. Nobody seemed very clear as to whether General ULEPIC' information is likely to be of any vallue. Brodie had some suggestion that, in view of the recent happenings in Czechoslovakia, we might broadcast encouragement to Czech technicians urging them to defect and offering them jobs in this country, presumably in our var industry. I said that we were at this moment preparing a paper on the whole question of the employmen; of aliens in our war industry, and that this matter had been forcibly brought to our attention by several cases of Poles who had been employe on highly confidential work and subsequently elected to return to their own country. One of them had since returned and was trying to suborn his colleagues. I thought Brodie might do well before pursuing this matter to see a copy of our memorandum pointing out the various snags. I lunched with Mitchell, one of J.C's candidates for the office. He seemed a nice boy and intelligent. I brought him back to have a talk wit Dick. I saw Air Marshal Sir William Dicksoh, who is replacing Charles Medhurst in the Middle East. I gave him a brief outline of the work of our organisation here and abroad, and went into the position of S.I.M.E. in Some detail. I told him that Bill Magan would be calling upon him, and that I hoped he Woulld make full use of our organisation. I said that we attached particular importance to the work being done by Jack Morton in Irag, where he had Air Force cover, and that I hoped everything woulld be done to render this cover as nominal as possible in order that Morton could devote his whole time to his intelligence work and liaison with the Iraa police. T said that he had had certain difficulties in this respect, and in particular with regard to accommodation, but that things had now improved. I hoped that the Air Marshal would give him every support. Dickson thanked me very much for having come to see him and expressed his willingness to do anything he could to help us; he would certainly bet into touch with Bill Magan on his arrival. I had a talk with Horrocks, who is leaving for Singapore to-morrow. I asked him to tell Bill Magan about Air Marshal Dickson. I saw Herbert Morrison, in order to tell him about the P.M. .M. query in connection with a broadcast to Canada made by YILLIACUS on foreign policy. I told Morrison that these broadcasts had been arranged in the Spring of 1947 with the Canadian Broadcasting Corporatio The idea was to have a Conservative, a Labour and a Left Wing Labour Speaker on either side. Two nates had been suggested by the Canadians for the Lest Wing Labour speaker,name] Michael FOOTE and ZILLIACUS. An approach had been made to FOOTE, who said that ZILLIACUS would do it much better. "What a fool" said Morrispr. Morrison then talked about the D.G. of. thEHBHO\ COHe said the he was very good in many ways, but that he ermed so18e gueer IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC LICRECORDS ACT 1958. Oct 2o0 streaks of consedence. Morvison thought he had some idea in the back of his mind that the Government wanted to take over the B.B.O. - nothing was further from their intentions. Morrison then told me about a man called BECKETT WIILIAMS, whose address he gave as 54 Blenheim Terrace, N.W. He said that this man was. he gathered, employed by 'c''s organisation and had talked rather indiscreetly during the war about what was going on at Peenemunde. Furthermore, he had apparently been saying some rather unkind things about the Labour Party and about Mr. Morvison in particular! Morndson hastened to say that of course every man was entitled to his own opinions and that he did not hold that up against him: at the same time, he felt that it was undesirable for a mar! to say that he was in the Secret Service and to talk indisereetly. I said that quite a number of rather queer people had drifted into the Service during the war, but that the habit of claiming association with the Secret Service was well known to us as a form of exhibitionism practiced by numbers of people who had never had any connection with the Service at all. They seemed to think that it enhanced their importance, particularly if they were talking to women. Moryison said he thought that this was very probably. but he would like me to make some enquiries. whi ah I promised to do. He then staruea taking aDDut Czechoslovakia. I said that the damage Was done the moment you had a Communist Prime Minister with power to appoint Ministers to control the Police. and the armed forces; once that happened the pass was sold. Morpison entirely agreed. ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED - 28th February. IDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 314)05 THERUBLCRECORDS AOT 198 Oot 2011 Jopson ooked in to see me. His siser is of job. He wanted to know whether there was anything against her. I said there was nothing as far as I knew, except that I gather that she rather fell out with the British Council in Turkey during the war: this, however, would not be held against her. Dick Butler callled and said he could not decide until after he had been to Germany whether his Counsel woulld be in favour of holding the whole or only part of the preoeedings in camera. lst March. Graham Harrison rang up to ask whether we were satisfied with the position regarding the case to be presented to the Geneva Convention. I said that as the Foreign Office had climbed down, I thought the position was satisfactory, provided no fresh heresies were introduced in the re-drafting. For Minutes of D.D.G. Keeting held today, aee folder in D.D.G's sec's tray. Dick, Alec and I had a talk with Bill Hright, who has returned from Palestine on leave. We were particularly concerned about our representation in Jerusalem, to which the Foreign Office have now agreed. There was at finat some divergence of views an to whether 4a We could world both the Jewe and the Arabs from Jerusalem. We finally agreed that While it would be valuable for Hackett-Pain to be official, hitched on to Jerusalem, it would not be necessary for him to have his office in the Consulate, at any rate until after May l5th, when we might decide that he could more profitably go to Amman. The whole position was SO fluid and uncertain that it was impossible to reach any hard and fast decision at the moment; we should have to be guided by events. Wright seemed to think that it might be advisable to get the femalle staff away fairly soon as things had hotted up considerably during the last few weeks. 2nd March. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. Oct 200 I saw 'et about a draft telegram to Hollis which he agreed. On looking up our file aftervards I find that in July, 1935, Olifford Norton wrote to Harker stating that WILLIAMS had visited the "News Chronicle" and had asked for a of E11OO a month in return for information which he was in a position to supply; the implication being that he was in some Government intelligence job. Norton gather that when some months previously the "News Chroniclle" were investigating a stony that all cables, eto. vere inspected by a Government Department, this same man called and warned them against publication. When further. 48 enquiries were made about WILLIAMS, owing to his association with the Fascist Leigh VAUGHAN-HENRY in 1941, it was stated by S.B. that he had good connections with the "News Chronicle" whose Editor, Mr. Barry, seemed to know more about him that he was prepared to tell. The copy which WILLIAMS supplied was said to be fairly good material of a confidential character. For several months WILLIAMS obtained supplementary petrol coupons on the grounds that he was a free-lance special news agent, a position corresponding in journalism to the Intelligence Serviee of a Government. He said that about twice a week he had to go some distance out of London, viz St. Albans; the job was naturally a delicate and confidential one and he coulld not put full details on paper. I went to see Bridges to-day, when I showed him Morton's letter on his interview with Busk. He read the letter very carefully and said: "This is quite the best letter that I have een for a very long time - the writer must be a damned good fellow" Iorepllied that he was. We then discussed the implications of the. letter. Bridges took the view that obviously Morton was rendering extremely valuablle services, which could not be performed by anyonere else, or at any rate could be performed better by a Security Service liaison officer in touch with the local Police than by anyone else. When the moratorium comes to an end, he is anxious to angue the case on these Tines, rather than on the lines that S.L.Os on foreign territory are a necessity for the preparation of the counter-intelligence brief in anticipation of our having to occupy the countries concerned. He thinks this should be a subsidiary argument, but not the main one. Bridges was anxious to know how things were going. I told him that although the Foreign Office had not felt able to .assist us in the case of Morton, they had on the whole been reasonable in their assistance. I said that I was quit certain that if they were free to speak, the S.I.S. representatives on the ground would, generally spealing, agree that our presence alongside them had very positive advantages. It seemed too that it vas only when these matters had ito be discussed in London that Charters were brought out and difficulties raised. ORIGINAL THIS IS RETAINED OF SEOTION ACT PUBLIC 3rd March. 1958 RECORDS 201 Van Moyland dined with me at the Travellers. Lith March. Ve considered to-day the draft statement to be given in the House by the P.M on the subject of Cpmmunists in the Civil Service. No provision seems to. have been made for a supplementary questior about with th Treasury official who is to review the cases. We. discussed this Drew and made certain minor amendments, but on the whole ve thought the 46 statement van extremely good. It is as followsi- "In answers to questions on the subjeet of the transfer on dismissal of certain Government servants, I have said that there are certain duties of suci secrecy that the State is not justified in employing on them anyone whose reliability is in doubt. Experience, both in this country and elsewhere, has shown that membership OR, and other forms of active association with, the Communist Party may involve the acceptance by the individual of a loyalty, which in certain cincunstanees can be inimical to the State. IT is not suggested that in matters affecting the security of the State all those who adhere to the Communist Pality would alow themselves thus to forget their primary loyalty to the State. But there is no way of distinguishing such people from those who, if opportunity offered, would be preparred to endanger the security of the State in the interests of another power. The Goverment, has, therefore, neached the conclusion that the only prudent couse to adopt is to ensure that no one who is known to be a member of the Communist Party, or to be associated with it in such a way as to raise legitimate doubts about his or her reliability, is employed on work, the secreey of which is vital to the security of the State. The same rule will govern the employment of those who are known to be actively associated with Fascist organisations. I shoud emphasise that this action is being taken solely on security grounds. The State is not concerned with the political vievis, as such, of its servants, and as far as possible alternative employment on the wide range o1 non-secret Government world will be found for those who are deemed for this reason indicated to be unsuitable for secret work. t may, hovever, happen from time to time that it is impossible to find suitable employment elsewhere in the Civil Service for individusis with specialist qualifications and there may be no alternative to refusall of employment. or aismDssan ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED INDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 5th March. 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958, Oct 2o1 at the J.I.0. to-day we discussed the innumerable papers about the prospects of war. They are allmost all based on the assumption that war Build not broad out until 1957. Thee iB only one paper on short-term intentions. There is. I think, a certain danger in thinking too far alead. I discussed with D.B.. D.C and C.2. our paper on the employ ment of aliens on defence work. We decided to shorten it as far as possible and to make certain amendments. II rad a meeting with J.I.B. (Metuen & Sword) Sichel (C.P.R) and Fuirnival-Jones. It vas agreed alter lenthy discussion: (i) S.I.S. representative of the J.8.0.1.0. Harry Allen, Dick, that we would press the Home ofice for early registration of Soviet citizens, 47 (ii) that we Would urge the Foreign Office to obtain full particulars, with photograph, before visas were granted. They should also ascertain what firms the man wanted to visit. Other data about contacts by Russians with firms was obtainable from Mr. Whitchouse of the Ministry of Supply, who had an arrangement with the F.B.I. and with Trade Associations, and also from the Board of Trade through the machinery of Export Licences Guarantee Department, and the department granting Bxport Licences. It was agreed that Mr. hitehouse should be asked by J.I.B. to extend his arrangements to cover Russian satellite countries. Having acquired this data, it would be for J.I.B. and C.P.R. to call the attention of the Security Service to special cases, such as that of. BORODIN. other arrangements made to ensure. tha't before any approach was made to a factory, the central index, held by the Security Service, should be consulted. We also discussed the importance of their being inter-departmental machinery for reviewing proposals for the sale of war potential material. It was subsequently ascertained that a Working Party has been set up under the Chairmanship of Mr. R.R. Powell to cover sales to aal countries. 6th March. Troubles always start on Saturday! Creasey, the Governor of the Gold Coast, is wiring frantically "for an officer of M.I.5., or preferabiyM to come out and investigate his troubles with the negroes. He evidently suspects a Communist plot. Cohen of the Coloniall Office asked me to go over and see him about this. I told him that the Governor could disabuse his mind about the Communist plot. While it was true that West African students were worked, upon by the C.P. and in fact one, NKRUIA, of the West African Convention had been in close association with the Colonial Department of the C.P. while here a short time ago, it was in our view out of the question that the recent distnrbances, which had resulted in a number of natives being fired on by the Police, had been planeed.ir London, Moscow or Belgrade. From what Cohen said, the main trouble was due to inflated ideas resulting from service.i the Armed Forces: this had gaven the natives an enhanced social status and they were not keen about going back to their former Somewhat primitive existence. Added to this, there had been economic troubles. I told Chhen that I hoped he would make it plain to the Governor that by sending an M.I.5. officer to the Gold Coast, we could not immediately provide an answer to his troubles. I had the impression that the Governor thinks that immediately our officer arrives there he will set in motion a vast network of agenta! What in fact he would do would be to study alll the papers and discuss them with those concerned, as a result of which he might find that there were certain gaps in the Governor's information and that he was not properly forewarned of what was going to happen. He might well then find that the Special Branch of the Police was inadequate, or indeed that there was no Special Branch all. I explalined to Cohen that the D.S.0. coulld not perform any useful service unless he had the working tools of a good Police force and a good Immigration Service. It was precisely owing to the deficienciesof these services 48 in the est Indies that We had withdrawn our D.6.0. It was essential that the Police should do their own grourd v/ork, in order that they could inform us if there were any signs of outside influences o2 connections. I think Cohen appreciated our point of view, but he was obviously anxious to satisfy (a) his master, and (b) the Governor, by getting someone out $o Mest Africa as soon as possible. T said tha I would try and send Kellar, and it was agresd that while there he should visit; the other Collonies and theh report to us on the desirabili or otherwise of setting up representatior for the Whole of West Africa. 8th March. Hooton, formerly of the Gold Coast Police and during the van with an S.C.I. Unit in Italy, came to see me. He had been doing a law course here but had been summoned back by the Governor. He more or less gave me the low-down, subject to a reservatiion that he had not been in the country for the last si or eight montha. Clearly the police were inaduate: they had no S.B. at all, and being ill- informed probably lost their heads. H ooton said that i the Commissioner wanted him to do s0, he would be quite prepared to build up a 3.B. This, I think, Would be a good idea, since Hooton will certainly have a far better idea of how to tackle the job than anybody to be found in the Gold Coast. He has the legal knowledge and he has the war experience of running double-agents. For Minutes of D.D.G. meeting held. to-day see folder in D.D.C.Secle tray. Ve had an Appointments Board meeting. Our staff is beginning to run down, notice having been given to not being able to make the grade. C. Division is particularly short of staff and may be losing Vickers if he goes to Ceylon. I asked Joe Spencer to have a look through the filles for suitable candidates. It was alsomSuEgeStree. that we might consullt J.C. COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED DEPARTMENT UNDEB SECTION 9th March. ACT OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS 1958 Oat 2011 SANWITH, of the Kenya Police, came to see me. told that he Was a bit sceptical about our position in East Africa. He did not, in fact, mention Perfeatis name during our conversation, except to say that he had a fine selection of cars! I found him by no means unfriendly, and I think I explained to him to is.satisfaction why we were there. Unfortunately SANDWITH is not going back to .B. work; he would, however, bke to attend the course which we are proposing to give to East African police officers in mid-June. SANDWITH thought it would be quitea good idea to get them. all here together. lOth March. I went over to see '0' about further L.S.I.0. information on the Australlian leakage case. T had had a telegram from Australia saying 49 that in the D.G's view the cover story would not carry any further information, and that he thought of suggesting to Chifley that he should set up a Working Party of foun DP five carefully selected people to whom the information should be given without disclosing the source. He felt that only in this way would the Australians be able to get to the bottom of the matter. My reaobion to this waB that dif the informaitior was given to the Working Party they Were bound to lenow the source, the more So since Brigedier Chiltor was a SIGINT man who had already been told by POLDEN, the S.I.S. SIQINT representative, last Becember that we had reliable information about lealages in Anstralia. Lastly T doubted whether it would ever be posBible to get the necessary authority from the Americans. Without any prompting from me 'ot sharedth same views. At that moment a call came through from the D.G. from Canberra and was transferred to me in 'cite room. I told him in as guarded language as T could that while we fully undenstood a11 his difficulties, it would not be possible, owing to internationall complications, to go further than we had already. We were, however, considering the matter at the moment: I promised to ning the D.G. bacls later. T went to see Gohen again at the Collondal Office about our sending a representative to the Gold Coast. He was extremely grateful that be had arranged f'or Kear to Eo out, on the under- standing that he would look into thingaslocallly, visit other Colonies, and then advise u1s about the desirability of setting up a D.8.0. in West Africa. More telegrams have meanwhile come in from the Governor, who is obviously in something of a panic. T telephoned to the D.G. at 10 D.m. to confirm what I had said to him before. I lunched with Hayter at the St. Jamesis Club. I gave him an account of the origina of the XX Cormittee, with particular reference to the position of the Services Intellligence Branches. I Badid that originally they had orly been coropted in order that we might impressupon them: the value of the work we were doing and the necessity for keeping our agents allive with 'chicken foodtii. It SD happened that ontague of N.I.D. made valuable contributions, but thia was in no sense dues to his position in N.I.D. The only other radson detre of Service Intelligence in matter of deception lay in the fact that theymight from time to time aBaist their Service Attaches in putting over a story. l1th March. Qudlll brought. his sucoessore Captain Baker-Creaswell, to see me. T lunched wit th Anthony Blut and Goronway Rees, when we had a diseussipr about penicillin. I told Rees that a point which caused anxiety was that if the Rusaians had the technical know-how of making a penicillin plant, it might advance them some two yeans in the production of B.W. agents. Nobody Was satisfied that the plant itself coulld be used for this purpose, in faat the experts were quite emphatic that if it were, those concerned would come to a ouicl and sticky finish. 50. 12th March. attended the J.1.0. The Foreign Secretery has had disousalo with the Norvegian Defence Minister and w12l be seelngi the Norviegian Foreign Minister in Pards over the weekend, The Norwegians are worrded about rumours that they may be asked to sign S part with Russian in the same way that Finland has been Asked. The Norwesans have but forward a nunber of questions which are being answered by the Planners, about Russian intention and capabilities. Meanwhdle, the Nonwegians ane Being advised to give a firm''no", since the Russians are not in EL position to overthrov the Government through the Local Communis Party. The Norwegians, therefore, have nothing to fear. Hayter said that Warner had talcen over the activities of Kirkpatrick in prosecuting the" colld war't. The control of policy would be wath the Foreign Secretary, but for the purposes of Cor ordination of "blacloit propaganda and other operations, there would be a special committee consisting of Generall Hollisl; General Brooks (late of P.7.E.) Harner and Hayter. It was Btated later at the meeting that Bevin haa sent rather a panicky teleg.ram to Washington About the Norwegian Situation, suggesting a paot under Article I of the Charter to prevent the Russians from having Bocean to the Atlantic. This would be known as the tlantic Security Part. I BaW the P.M. to-day. I told him about the D.G's move- ments and I expladined to him DUR difil foulties in getting to the bottom of the leakage. The .M. was glad to hear that Chifley had been cooperative, We then dscussed the panetration of the Trades Union. I gave him something of the facts and figures; I also told him approximately how things were in regard to C.P. penatration of the Civil Service. I asked him when he was going to make his statement. He said on Monday next. said that II hoped it might be possible to refer to the body of ex-high-ranking Civil Servants, who would be arbitrating in these matters, since this might to some extent relieve the pressure upon our department. At. the moment there was considerable misrepresentatdon by the Press and elsewhere about the povers we exercised and the manner in which we condueted our work. He promised to Look into this matter. 15th March. We had a meeting about the brdef for the Geneva Convention on Ps of W. There is a difficulty in that it lays down: that if man carries a document showing that he 1s a member of the Forces, he cannot be treated as at spy. This clanse is oleariy intended to cover evaders. Itedoesu however, provide a serious loophole in 01 schemes for the detentionof suspects at 020. We are going to take the matter up with the Var office, who ae not liicely to be particularly sympathetic. 51 Kenneth Page telploned to mne to ask me it T had seen a question in the House about moral pressure om prisoners at Bad Nenndorf. Some M.P. is asking for assurances that orders will be given to discontinue this practice. The answer is to be that no such orders are now necessary. I told Page that there never had been any orders on this subject, since it was clearly impossible to run a camp like 020 without exercising moral pressure. It is extremely undesirable that the techinaue of moral pressure should have been allowed to be diivulged in open Court. Page thinks that Campbell, the Prosecuting Counsel, is just out to make a name for himself by attacling Int. Div. For Minutes of D.D.G. meeting held to-day sae Molder in D.D.G Bec' tray. iinnifrith has sent over draft instructions to Departments which are to be based o the statement about Cornmunists in the Civil Service to be made by today We have suggested certain amendments. COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDERISECTION 16th March. (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958, Oct 201\ T saw Hunter to-day. He seems happier about Storrier, although of course he knows nothing about ou type of work. He thought Storrier would be loyal to the Department and discreet. His only doubts were whether he would have sufficient energy for the job. Kenneth Strong tellephoned to say that he waslnot happy about his own security and would like to send his Security officer over to see us. Colonel Phillips rane to ask What he war to do about the P.M'S statement. I bold nir he would be receiving instructions frorn the Treasury in two oP three days time. Harry Allen i.s worried about the shortage of staff in O. Division. TI raised the question with hi.m of the type of orfLcer required for C. Division work. The D.G's policy was to recruit young people and put ther in at the bottom, bu't such people Would clearly be of no value in C. Division, which required maturity and some general knowledge of intelligence work and the worl of this office. I thought we should have to face it that the type of officer we were trying to. get in B. Division would not: Worl happily in C. Division, except perhaps in its higley ranks. Hariry was inclined to agree with thig and thought we might get in some short-term eX-Service people who would not impede promotion and whose contract could be terminated whenever it was thought desirable. T lunched with Corin. Het had recently seen Roscher Lund, who was 01 his way to Palestiine D1 a epeciall mission Tor the Security Council of U.N.0. He told Corin that he would shortly 52 talk the of DE of tat honve 1an Inteliyense Sauvice am that let nas partjeuaily anzibus that his old conneetion with ourselves should be revived. II understood from Corin that. there was some kind of Bemi-official link who Was resident in this country, but that iiin fact there was a very small how of information. It would be interesting to know if this is borne out: by the faete. Have we had anything from Norway of any importance through olIY o7n channel, about (a) the R.I.S (n) espiorage cases, andi (c) Cormnunist activitics? This IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 OP THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. Oct 2011 Simkins has been innifrith about the cas of John DOWNIE, atn applicant for an estallisied yost in the Civil Service, who is desighated for the Cabinet office. Both Herbert and Stewart Hampshine, the know lim veny vell, consider him to be an intellectual Markist and quite probably a member: of the Party. So strong do they feel about this that Herbert approached Dick. Observation on DOUNIE for a period of two months disclosed no Communist activity. Me felt it OL? duty to inform Winnifrith about this. He took the view that the matter should be referred Norman Frool. Graham Mitchell is nezvous about doine DOUNIE 91 injustice. DOWNTE has just taken a brilliant first at Oxfonrd. This is an extremely difficult case: these is n'o real positive evidece to bring it under the Prime Ministei't ruling. On the other hand, it does not seer a good idea that he should 5o into the Cabinet Office. 18th March. Burt came to ask me about the case of Ms. ARNHEIM. He had been approached by her husband, COOKE, Secrtta to the Stock Exchange, who, I gathered renders Burt certain services. His wife vants to recover certain property of her former husband, sho committee suicide om was executed by the French for esplonage. I told Bunt that we knew next to nothing about ARNHEIM, since at the time we could get nothing out of the French. I doubted, moreovel, whether there would be anybody in Foence who could say what hsa become of him property. Burt gaid he would speak to COOKE accordingly. We then discussed the KCOTBY case. He sadd tha't FREDERICK was, of courses the Mnister (7) of the ewiisl Committee, was behind tlie Wholle scheme. He also told me that Gerald HAMILTON was hie agent and would be going te the U,S. He would Let us have a full repunt due Comase. Lastly Du' Piony Bit mentdemed the faot that the Heaa of the Soutli Aflcan S.B., pu, woE coming OVGI here before 1ong; he would bring his along e see me. 53 I lunched will Le Man. T save him a coppy of our note for 1947 on General Trenas in Communism and Fascism, which he seemed to appreciate. I said that I was in considerable difficulty about our llaison. While there Was logic In this, it was not particularly satisfaotory from ouP point of view as we perferred to talk direct to our opposite numbers. Le han said that Foureaud had just been over and that he had made a proposalit him that semething in the nature of a War Room should be set up, either here or in Paris. He, Le Man, thought perferably in London for security reasons. He had in mind that beth DE.C. and S.T. should represent ed on the French side, and M.I.6. ana ourselves on the Britiah side. I said that T Shonid like to think this over and that I would let him know in due course. Le Man then told me that D.E.C. had bust been asked by the Minister of Defence to take oVO' security for the three Service Departments. This meant not only security in the strict sense of the term, but also counte-espionage - in fact everything that comprised the work of the Security Service here. I gave a talk to the Registry, moe or less on the lines of my I.D.C. lecture. I also gave a short talk on Russian pplicy. Viciceny came to see me about BAIILIE, who is in trouble with D.I.B. They are taking exception to him 8B an ex-member of the Bureau. BAILLIE and Vickery thinlt that the trouble is due to an approach made by BAIILIE to a Sikh officer, from whom he sought information about the organisation behind the murder of Gandhi. The Indian Government have made it clear that in their request for PAILLIE'I Withdrawal they in no way take the appointment of Uren. This is satisfactory from our BAGiNAL ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 19th March. (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 2011 T asked Hary and Mitchell to go ever and see Tintfrith about the various questions on the subject of the dismissal of Civil Servants. There seemed to me the danger that we might become involved in having to table. our evidence either to the acoused or to some body on the lines of the Birkett Comnittee. With the agreement of the Chicis of Staff, General HolIis hag pat forward a paper on future strategy to the Defence Minister, in Which it is stated that if the U.S.A. underwrite the Benelux agreement, a deinite datim line should be fixed, (a) for the defence of Europe as far to the east as possible, and (b) for the derenge of the Middle Eaat, and that consideration should then be Even to our strategical dispositions in the event of war having broke out, (i) between now and 1950, (11) between 1950 and 1956, and (111) when the Russians ane equipped with the atomie bomb and bacteriological bombs. Firstly, the defence resources of the Allies are to be assessed. Secondly, the timing is to be agreed and the likelly scale of attack and Forees needed to meet it are to be estimated. Thirdly., the defence contribution of the individual Allies haB to be decided upon. 54 The Foreign Secretary 1o te maulort a nenesl alrout spouni when the Denelux Treaty 13 singed. This, it is thought, will pure the yay to subsequent talks OI ar working level, wh ch will be arranged or diplomatic channels. D.N.I. felt that in putting forward papers about the possibility of wan, etc. some attempt should be made to assess the relative efficiency of Russian and British forces. It was felt that this could only be done in relation to particular operations and that a general ratio would be at to be misleading. An offensive by the Greek rebels is expected before Arril lst. It is thought that they intend to capture a large town somewhere near the frontier and, if successful, tse this as a base.. Their operations will probably be combined with the bombing of Salontea. The M.A. at Athens is seriously Worried about the ineericiency of the Greelt forces and any preparatinne to deni with the Bittatdon in the Spring. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS Dat 2011 We had an Appointments Board meuting to-day. O. Diviston are desperately short of staff. ie agreed that for tha't kind of work. it was essential tD have shortterm people of mature age. I had on name from Vickery, who had promised to give us others. Meanwhile, Spencer will Bee if we Have any suitable candidates between bhe ages of 40 02 50, OIr even over 50. My feeling is that you cannot put young officers into C. Division until they have done at least to yeans in B. Division, and that if you get offices of the standard reanined for B. Division work they will never be content to Ho back to the routine job of C. Division. I saw Sir Eaward Bridges today. He was to see the Prime Ministe: at 6.30 on the question of Comunists and Fascists in the Civil Servic I told him that it was of paramount importance to us that none 01 our information should be disellosed to the Civil Servant concerned or used as a basis for interrogation. We would prefer that the individuall should be told simply that he came under the Prime Minister ruling aa regards Communisi or Faseism as the case might be. Bridges said he thought that it would be necessary to tell the ma that he wa's accused of being a member of the Party, or associated with the party. I explained to Bridges the delicacy of our sources, and said that if there was any question of an independent tribunal, on the lines of the Birkett Committee, they would inevitably be "blown'. Ye did supplly certain details to the establishment branch of Hinistrie in which our sources vere suitably disguised, This disguise, however woulld not stand scrutiny by the individual concerned. I told Bridges that during the war the proceedings before the Birkett Committee had been disastrous, and that the identities of our agents had been disclosed. He said that he fully Bopreciated alll the poin that T had made, and that he woula do his bestto maintain a fire fro 55. I then discussed the guestion of the Treasury arbitrator. Bridge said that he had Findlater Stewart in mind, since not only vas he suitable but he was a person grata with the Prime Minister. He said he would probably appoint one other Civiii Servant as welll. T Said that we should not have the slghtest objeetion to disclosing the detailed faots of a case to these officers. I asked whether the appointment of these officers was going to be made public. Bridges said that he was anxious that this should not be done. He thought that if their existence was known it would be impossible to prevent civil Servants from seeking an interview. He wanted to avoid this at all costs. I said tha't presumably a Civil Servant had the right of appeal to his Minister, and I hoped that nothing would be said by Ministers on the basis of the information which we supplied to their Establishment Officers. Bridges thought this would have to be watched. The Ozech case is developing very nicely. There are now four characters involved, the Latest addition is a man called LUSTIG who may be of Some mportance. 20th Maroh 1948 I lunched with van Moylana, T discussed with him Benelux security and suggested to him that there might be advantage in having talks before any international meetings. There are two points for consideration. Firstly, the security of documents during the conference and secondly their security after the conference when mernbers got home and started taking action on the papers. He said he would certainly take this up. 22nd March I saw Gol. MulLer, the Commissioner of Pollice designate to Tanganyika. He was formerly Commissioner of police in Trinidad, where he had been for Some nine years. While he obviously had a respect for Sir John Shaw, he thought that he had made a certain number of mistakes. Contrary to Muller' advice he had placed confidence in his Colonial Secretary, a half-caste who obvioulsy had other interests outside his Or job, and secondly he had got rid of a number of people from whom he might have got valuable advice. He apparently took the line that everybody had been in Trinidad too long. He has since found it necessary to get rid of his Colonial secretary. Meanwhile until new people got experience Sir John Shaw was running a kind of one man show. T told Muller abour our work, of which, of coursey he knew a certain amount already. While there were probably no anovements in Tanganyika subject to outside influences We liked to feel that the gound was covered and that the moment anything started someone would get to hear about it. Muller seems a good chap. attended a meeting with BridgeB called by hom of the P.U.S.S. I managed to get certain points in the procedure laid down, which, if finally approved by the P.M. should minimise the risks as far as possible. Wherever a prima facie case exists, the individual, on the authority of the Minister, will simply be told that he comes within 56 the rulling in respect of Comuniins or Fascism, as the case may be. He will, hovever, be informed that he has the right to appeal to an Advisory Board of three igh-ranking ex-Civil Servants, of whom I think Sir Pindlater Stewart will be one. If the individual decides to appeal, he must submit his case in writing to the Advisory Board within fourteen days and will subsequently be ablle to appear in person if he so desires. f the Board decide against him, he will still have the right to see his Minister - which cannot in faet be refused. At no stage will he be given our evidence or be cross-examined on It. He could, of course, always be interrogated on his own Btatementi. For minutes of D.D.G. meeting see folder in D.D.0 Secretary's tray. Wimnifrith rang up and came round with a draft for the P.M. 's statement. We none of uB like it as it created the impression that be had been bungling for years and that the Labour Government were now going to see our activities were supervised. We suggested a variety of alterations which rendered the statement acceptable from our point of view. It was agreed that the Buepeet should only be told that he came within the P.M'E ruling with no details; that he could then make a Statement in writing and ther have the right to go before the Board. It was specifically stated that he Should not be accompanied. 23rd harch I saw Sir Norman Brook about the case of Jaok DOWNIE. I Showed him Minute 12 in the file and also the entry at 10a (PF.72,994) I said that on the evidence available DOWNIE was not within the P.M.'5 ruling; at the same time, we did not should signal him N.R.A. without first referring to himself. As regards 10a, T pointed out that there had been nothing in the correspondence examined to indicate that DOWNTE was a Communist, and that if there had been anything in the suggestion this might well have been indicated by the kind of jargon which Commnists use and with which we are so familiar. Brook said that the Economic Section, to which DOWNIE evidently wanted to be posted, was the same section in which BODDINGTON had been working. It received a great deal of Top secret maberial on our economic policy both at home ana abroad, and it would be impossible to Begregate-anyor within that department. He Viewed the possibility of DONNIE going there with considerable apprehension, but before making up his mind he would like to consult with Hall of Trinity College, Oxford, who has been doing a good deal of the recruiting. A large number of officers in this section are on temporary contracts up to five years, the idea being that the department shouild continually be getting fresh ideas from the outside. Brookts action vill, I think, to some extent depend upon how far Hall has already gone in promising a Job to DOWNIE in this department. Brook agreed that it would be wrong to exclude DOWNIE from the Civil Service altogether. He w1ll let me know the result of his enquiries as soon as possible. Meanwhile, the reply to the vetting enquiry should be held up. 52 24th March I vent over to see Wimnifrith: in order to check his revisedd draft. I suggested one or two alterations which were accepted. Gainsford, late of the Indian Police, came to see me on the recommendation of George Jenkin. He seemed an extremely nice person and clearly had very considerable experience. le was quite prepared to take on a vetting Job on a short-term basis. I said that I should have to get authority from the D.G. as he had laid down a policy of taking on younger men. I would let him know the result as soon as possible. T saw Mornison today about the case of Christopher Beckett MILLIAMS. I told him that as far as E could ascertain WILLIAMS had never tad any connection with any of the Intelligence Services. We had a record of him, however, since although there was no evidence that he himself was a Communist he had associated in the early days of the war With Leigh Vaughan Henry who, Morrison would doubtless remember as an 183 internee case. His record showed that he had done a certain amount of journalistic work, and that he was in the habit of poBing aB an Intelligence Officer. Morrison subsequently have me an opening by saying: HI hope you chaps will be very careful in all these Civil Servant cases. I said that T shoulld like him to know that all these cases are handled with sorupulous care and impartiality, and that so far from being a set of irreBponsiblle autoorats in these matters, it was our Department which was exercising a restraining hand not only on the Working Party Bet up by the Cabinet, but also on all Government Departments. It seemed to me that in the Press, Parliament and in the public mind generally a totally false impression was being allowed to grow up about the work of our Debaritment. This could not be otherwise than extremely damaging to our work in the future, particularly to the co-operation we get from the Police, Governent Departments and various administrations overseas. It seemed to me that there was a Serious risk of our being used as a whipping boy intoday'e debate. Morrison said that during the war he had come across one or two cases where he had had to use a restraining influence I asked him when this occurred. He said that It was in 1940. I replied that almost anything might have happened in 1940 when we were unergoing an enourmous expansion with a totally inexperienced staff, but I assured him that things were very different not. He said he was very glad to hear it; that he thought it extremely important that the morale of our Department should not be undermined by derogatory statements, and that he would write a note to the Prime Minister making certain suggestions For the debate. This he did there and then. One of the points he made was that the Prime Minister might State that the Security Authorities welcomed the suggestion of a board of ABsessors. 25th March I Bsked Winnifrith what had happened about the debate on the 58. P.M."E statement. He said that Bridges had taken him the two statements but that he had deciided to accept neither. He had made some notes of his owl as he did not think it proper that he should read a statement when winding up the Debate. Bridges had ramed hone our point as far as he was able and had told the P.M. that I was available to enlarge upon them if he required me. Later I rang up Graham Harrison, the P.M.' Private secretary. He said that the P.M. had got no statement but that he had seen some of the notes, and he thought that the P.M. was going to say something about r position in the matter. He did not think it would be of any use my seeking personal interview at this stage, Since the P.I. would almost certainly temperrh speech to the general tone of the House. I listened to the account of the speech on the B.B.C. at 6.00 pum, It seemed to me to be singularly unsatisfactony, and as T rather anticipated, not only have we been used as the whipping boys, but we are now committed to disclosure to the suspect of the evidence on which he is being dismissed or transferred. The whole tone of the speech gives the impression that appalling stupiditys have been comnitted by the security authorities in the past, but that the Labour Government are now going to see that we are properly supervised. 3ist Maneh Admiral Woodhouse, Commander in Chief, East IndieB, whose areal seers to cover parts of SIFE and parts of SIME, came to see mes His H.0. will be in Colombo. I told him about the nature of our work and the general set-up of STFE and STME. T told him too that with the approval of the Prime Minister in ceylon, we should be having a representative there attached to the High Commissioner's staff. We woulld instruct this officer to get into touch with the Admiral. I liked Admiral Noodhouse, who vas friendly. Hayter telephoned to ask whether we could say anything about Dominions Security as the Foreign Secretary was worred ab he had reached the point In his negotiations in Buxope where he wanted to bring in the Dominions. Ictold Hayter that the D.G. would not be back until the end of the month as he had Just had an operation for an appendecitis in Kuala Lumpur. Holli8 T hoped Will be back earlier, but neither of them would be able to give a very reassuring account. AS we were precluded from passing over full details of the 1.S.I.c. information, there waB little chance of the Australians discovering the culprits. The most that we should be able to say would be that the Austrlians would be looling into the whole of their security and tightening things up as far as they could. This, however, would provide no sure guarantee in regard to other leakages, since, at least one of the Russian agents Seemed to be clearly highly pllacedy he might even be the P.A. to the Minister of External Affairs. Kenneth Younger came over and had a talk with Dick and myself. We disoussed a number of 6ur dfficulties in regard to Communists in 54 the Civil service, with which he sympathised. He thought that there might be something in trying to get a fairly high ranking Civil Servant in Bridges Department to learn something more about our Work. AS things were there was no permanentGovernment official of any standing who had any knowledge of the type of person who work here, or of the work they do. Kenneth thought that an arrangement of this kind would improve oun relations with Government Departments and With the public. There is, I think, something in this. on the other hand, we do not wish to get to tied up with the Civil Service heirarchy. otherwise we shall never be able to move hand or foot. I had a meeting with D.C. and D.B. on a paper which is coming before the J.I.0. tomorrow on the security aspeet of staff talks with the Benelux countries. It is clear that we want a good deal more information about when whether and how these talks are going to talse glaqecpefore we can really get down to brass talks. ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 1st April (4) OF PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Ock 201 Nir. Blligh of the Treasury, who is to be Secretary the Boand.( Assessors, came to see me. The assessons are to be Gardiner, late of the Post Office, Holmes, late of the Board of Education, and Leggett, late of the Ministry of Labour. Gardiner will be in the Chair. This is a good thing as he has full knowledge of H.O.W. and I gather from Bligh that he is anxious to see me personally. He probably has on his mind. I suggested to Bligh that we might provide a stenographer for the proceedings of the Board when the suspect wa S present It would probably be preferable that records of discussions between member of the Board should not be recorded. I thought, too, that when the suspect was told about the evidence against him he should be requested to put in his refutation in writing; This could then be considered by us and we would then appear before the Board to give thern our observations and answer any questions on the evidence. They coulld then see the suspect but should only in exceptional cases, and by agreement with ourselves, ask any questions on our evidence. They could Cross- examine on the suspeet' statement as long as they liked. Bligh did not say much but seemed a nice fellow. "ou asked me about security in the Dominions. I told him that I had already had this enquiry from Hayter and that we did not feel that we should be able to give a very reassuring statement on the position. Dick Butler calte to in to say that as a result of Langham having been declared "not guilty" there was some possibility that the case of STEPHENS might be Withdrawn. on the whole his advice to STEPHENS in such an eventuality would be to accept the position and not press for action against the military authorities or for a trial. Butler would, however, like to know as soon as possible what STEPHENS' prospects woulld be if the case against him were witharavn, or if he got an acquittal. I said that it was difficult to say and that, in fact, J. could give no assurance until I had seen the D.G. Meanwhile, 60 we would think over the position amongst ourselves. I saV Maxwell today. I got his approval to inform an Italian and a Rumanian diplomat that if they got into difficultie they could remain here. I also handed him a list of the break- down of our warrants. "e then discussed last Thursday' S debate and I told Maxwell exactly what I thought about it all. He was very sympathetic and said that Governments would always do that kind of thing. He took a serious view of the possibility of our having to disclose information which might lead back to the source. He agreed with me that in certain instances it would be impossible to put the information forward at all. He thought that we should be Jjustified in telling the Assessors about our sources of information 2nd April THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 Oct 2011 Professor Brunt is to take over the J.S.T.1.0. J. S. T. and is to be a full member of the J.I.C. He will retain his present brofessorshi and allso his position in the Royal Society. Hilton, our Military Attache in Moseov is leaving in May and his post will be left vacant for the time being. Heanwhile the Russians have asl-ed for twe Assistant Military Attaches in London on replaceent, but they refuse to say whom they are to replace. Meanwhile, they are holding un the appointment of our Assistant Air Attache in MOsCOV. Bevin does not apparently wish to do battle on small matters. Heanwhile N.I.D. are suggesting the refusal of the replacement of a Russian Assistant Naval Attache oving to the presente here of another who could do the york. Hayter expressed anxiety about the League for Democracy which is doing propaganda here on behalf of the Greek guerillas. He asked whether we could discover where ite funds come from. Viv's deputy came to see me about instructions to S.I.S. representatives abroad to ascertain whiit security department will be in charge of Benelux security and to suggest that a suitable representative should come over here for discussions. I said that it was important to get the right person on the right level and that there were two problems (i) to safeguard the security of the conference and (ii) to arrive at some ides of the distribution of documents when the delegates tot home and the security of the departments to which these documents would be sent. Baskervyle Glegg and Simkins came to see me about the case of who is dealling with B.. in the Ministry of supply. record goes up to May 1943 when he was clearly active. He was also using a party alias and had instructions to continue under cover; since then we have heard nothing further. Could this case go forward? It is clearly matter for the Ministry of supply. our advice to them, however, should be that the case as it stands is a Weak one and that if it is turned down by the Board they will have their midst with no prospect of moving him. ORIGINAL DOCUMENT BETAINED 3rd April DEPARTMMENT UNDER SECTION THE PUBLIC RECORDS I saw Sir Thomnas Gardinen, Cheirman of the Board of Assessors, and the Secretary, Hr. Bligh today. See note in envelope attached. I went to see Hayter. He wanted mne to meet Denning, head of the Far Eastern Dept. of the Foreign Office, who in the instruetions of the P.M. and Bevin is to go to Australia to discuss Far Eastern policy. These discussions will involve not only ourselves, but all the Dominions and the U.8.A. 5th April. I telephoned to Blinnifrith to say that I was wornded about the possibility that Government Departments might start dismissing Civil Servants before ve had an opportunity of revieving the case. The Ministry Of Supply wene already gressing us on one case and said that having received instructions from the Treasury they proposed to go ahead. Ye had not seen these instructions. Wimifrith said that he thought that Ministries vere cear on this point. I explained 62 to him, however, that the statements which Establishment offices had could not be presented to the suspect without considerable risk to the sources. The P.M. had said on the one hand that we would give chapter and verse and on the other hand that sources could not be diselosad. In Some cases the giving of chapter and verse would automatically disclose sources. This was evidently a point which Winnifrith had not grasped, though why I cannot imagine as it had previously been discussed ad nauseam. He agreed to issue instruetion immediately. Capt. Evans, hief of the Intelligence staff, British Pacific Fleet, came to call on me. I explained to him our functions and also those of SIFE with which organisation he would find himself in close contact in Singapore. He is visiting other sections here. Bourne came to see me. He had just returned froin Delhi. Everything there seems thoroughly satisfactory, U'ren being more than acceotable to D.I.B. and also to Symon. Bourne agrees with us that the less u'ren sees of Patel the better, at any rate until his position is firmly established. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN VDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 2o1 Bourne is leaving for Canada and I have undertaken to write to l/ood to see if there is any way in which he can hep the R.C.M.P. For minutes of D.D.G. meeting see folder in D.D.G. Secretary's tray. Briscoe came to see me about Hedger'e organisation. There is a vacancy for another chemist owing to the resigation of Tugh. This has existed for some time and Hedger is heavily overworked. He think that if we had offered Tugh a better salary he might have stayea. Wo in Hedger'e department is increasing and not only should a replacement for Tugh be found, but an additional assistant may be necessary. The question arises as to whether we shoulld pay or get S.I.S. to make a contribution. Personally I should prefer to keep things in our own hands. I tola Briscoe to put me up a reasoned note and pointed out that it might be advisablle toproceed in two stages. The first thing was to get a successor for Tugh and possiblly to pay him a rather better salary. 7th April 1948 Mann came to see me. He said that the C.0. Glasgow was quite happy about my reply on the question of the unity Theatre. I took 63 the opportunity of explaining to ltann the procedure with regsid to Civil servants so that he could have this Rs general background when discussing it with 0.0.8 in Scotland. Burgess, the Establishments Officer of the Cabinet offices, came to see mew I explained to him our difficullties With regard to civil servants and the Somewhat conflicting passages in the P.l.'s stateitent. He said that Norman Brook had decided that the Cabinet Offices must be regarded as a whole as a secret department. He was a little uneasy and would be glad if we could revet some 90 indivicuals. I explained that we were very hard pressed at the mement, but if he woulld let me have the names we would certainly do this as soon as ve Were able. Van Moyland came to see me. He had heard about the Benelux security talls and had spoken to his minister. He is preparing a note on the subject Which will go through the Dutch Foreign Affairs Dept., to the Prime Minister. 8th April I attended the J.1.0. A Wire has come in from Rogeb saying that he is proposing to leave Canberra for Singapore on 10th April and to return here on the 19th. 1 have sent him 8 wire tellling him not to move until he gets my following telegram which permits him to disolose certain facts derived froin the L.S.I.C. information to Longfield Lloyd on a personal basis. I have got "ou's approval for this not without some difficult. The risks are (i) that the source may be disclosed (ii) that the information may be used at some future aste either in interrogating the subject or in open court (iii) that Lloyd willl telll Evatt who will want to know why the facts were not disclosed at the outset. "ou is prepared to accept the risk of (1) and (iii) provided we can get a positive assurance on (ii). Hollis will say that he has just received the information from Londor and that he does not know the source. AS regards (i) "on is prepared to acceot the risk and as regards (iii) the reply will be that owing to Australian insacurity we had to proceed with caution. 9th April At the J.I.C. today we discussed L.C.S. deception proposals. There was one suggestion that we shoulld intimate to the Russians that we intended to use the A.B. at the outset of any conflict. I said that this seemed to Ine out of tine with other J.0.0. papers which made it clear that as a matter of policy no decision had been reached. If we intimated to the RuGsians that we were going to initiate the use of the A.B. we might be encouraging them to do the sare, even though our bombs may be more numerous, better and bigger. I also said that the build up of am order of battle in the present cireumstances was veny different from building up an order of battle for the Germans during the last war when security was as tight as it coulld be made ind this country was cleaned of energy agents. This was far from the case no, since the whole of the Cortmunist Party 64 was working against us. The case of was discussed. It was agreed that other departments, particularly N.I.D. and J.I.B., should submit their questionnaires through the J.S.T.I.C. who would assess priorities. So far neither of these departments had had any opportunity of talking to apparently has made rather wild claims about S.0. activity in Russia. He will be encouraged to spin webs of this kind in onder to keep him quiet, but nothing can be done as there is a Cabinet ruling against such activities in Russia. Pendred said that the Americans in Germany were getting a large number of ozech defectors, both service and civilian personnel. A good many had served with our Air Force during the war. The Americar were arxious for some common policy and particularly wanted to know whether such defeetions should be encouraged. There were considerabl aoubts about this from the J.I.C. and Pendred was asked to put the matter up to the 1.O. It emerged during the discussin that the R.A. are apparently recruiting some ,000 Poles whom I imagine will be put into a special unit. They evidently have similar ideas about the Ozechs. From the security point of view I am not sure that either of these projects is vise. I attended a meeting with Winnifrith today. See note of meeting in envelope attached. Viv, came over to discuss Benelux security. Fock head of the Dutch Intelligence and P.A. to the DutCr P.M. is coming over here on Monday for meliminary talks. We agreed an agenda for the discussions. Giant is coming a few days later from Belgium for similar talks. AS regards France it was suggested that an M.I.5. and 14.I.6. representative should go to Paris to hold disoussions with whatever individuals the French thought were concerne Meanwhile Boursicot, head of the surete, wants to come over bare to discuss a general. exchange of information about Communists. This is thought to be a move to undermine S.D.E.C. and is being stalled. I told Viv that in my view it would be the nevi security department to S.D.E.C. that would be concerned and that Le Man, our liaison officer here, would normallbe the person to consult. They are apprehensive abou any War Room of Benelux countries in London, althoust they envisage that this may be forced upon them. While I realise that contribution to such a pool would have to be very tentative at the outset, it would enable us to get to grips With our opposite numbers. I have, however, agreed that somebody should go on April 19th. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMIENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUELIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 2011 ON ON HIS MAJESTY'S SERVICE sco Note of meeting with IIT. Tinnifrith and Establishment officers on 9.4.48 Diary D.0. D.B. T attended a meeting in Winnifrithie room on 9.4.48 Bt which Wilkinson, Cherry, Barelay and one other Establishont officer ware present, The Following point were agreed: (1) subjeot to Ministerial confirmation, no terms of reference would be issued to the Board of AsseBsorB. They would, of course, receive instructions on a confidontial basis, but thone would not be published. TE any queation arises in tho House it will probably be Said that the terms of reference were implicit in the Prime Minister Statement in the louse of Commons. (11) It wWES agreed thet the Board should not have any responsibility for saying whethor a suspect did or did not come within the Prime MiniBter'E statement From the point of view of the nature of his employment. (111) It wat felt that there would have to be some compromise between Gardiner' B point of view that nothing should be Said by the Board to the Minister except guilty or nonproven OP not gullty. The Board Bhoula certainly be given tho right to rofuse to say anything which wha.ld dsclose Bources, ant. to confine ther comments to the evidence on which the prima acie caBe wa based. It was felt that there would be n0 harm in the Chairman of the Board telling the Minister that he and his colleaguesatay points 1, 2 and 3 of the Drima facie onse had, in their opinion, been firmly established. (iv) It WaB agreed that the Board should maice no recomendations whatever on how the cure should be disposed of, 1.0. by transfer O2 diBnissal. That would be entirely a matter for the Minister. (v) it was agreed that Establishment officers should not embark on any interrogation of the suspect, who l1P8omunicated with in writing and be told to send in hin statement in rofutation of the charges. (vi) t waB agreed that there 1aB no objection to the Seourity Service antedating in a case of membership of the party, 101 in the Security service making acousation of membership where the ciroumstantiel evidence waG strong. The instructions to P.8.8. from the Treasury are to be amended, ab alBo the instructions to the Board. We are to receive copies in draft for recomnendation After the meeting Winnifritt told me that the Canndian High Commissioner in London had asked for particulars of the procedure being ndopted in the case of Corrminist and Pasoists in the Civil Service, and had been Eiven a copy of the draft instructions to P.0.8.8. I think, thorefore that in communicating with Thistlathwito he should n1so receive /a copy EL Copy for his personal informtion in case he is questioned about it by the Candalans. T told Hinnitrith that we ghoud be comunicating with our represontative in HTashington Since not only the cannaians were interested, but also the Americans. No did not, however, intend to tranemit copies of documents to the Americana, but merely to ncquaint our opposite number's verba.lly with the Tuots on a confidential basis. The points that would interest them moat would he the nnture of the Board of Aaseseors and the prpauction of evidence and sourcea. I asked Wimnifrith wat waB being done by 0.R.0. and the Colonial Office to conform with the P.1. 's ruling. He Daid thnt iIn the cuae- of C.R.0. the Advisory Board here ould operate, i.e. if there vtere a Comraunist on the Btare of the British High ommissioner in Australia, he would have the right to appeal to the AdviBory Board in London. In the case of the Colomial office there was Cabinet approval which more Dr less gave Colonial Governor the right to tale what Btepe they pleased in whatevor manner Beemed most suitable to 100a1 conditions. In such cases the machinery of the Aaviory Board here would not operate. I think, therefore, that before issuing DuP note to D.9.0.8 S we ought to find out exactly what the Colonial ofrice are proposing to do. D.D.G. 12.44.18 65. 12th April I saw the Advisory Board today when I was asked a certain number of general questions about Comaunism. cardiner said that he would like to have for the information of the Boardre as much information of a general kind a8 we could give them, particularly in regard to the Civil Service Olerical ABsoCiation and satellite bodies of the Comnunist Party like the Association of Scientific Workers, the Society for Visiting Sclentigts eto. ete. This would be the more necessary Since Gardiner did not think it advisable to have any stenographic minutes of the proceedings. he felt there was a danger in this since if Bueh minutes exlated it would be difficult to resist a request by the suspect to receive a copy. I obtained the Boand's approval to antedate membership of the C.P., and also to make a positive allegation of Party membership where the circumnstantial evidence Beemed to warrant it. Holmes raised the question of Fasoists and the generall opinion of the Board was that they had been thrown in for political reasons, since at the moment at any rate, there were no grounds for thinking that they had a divided loyalty. They would, however, consider any suci cases ir they came up. I said that to the best of my recollection we had no cases at the moment; also mention vas made of Trotskyisto, They had international comnections and had been concerned in preaching sedition among the armed forces. It would, however, be impossible to say that they owed alllegiance to any particular foreign pover. They probably considered that they owed no allegiance to anybody. The Board felt that they would not attempt to cross this bridge at the moment. Horrocksha just reurned. i am having a tallk with him tomorrow. van Noyland rang mne up. I felt bound to tell him that Fock and Eindhover were over here for the purpose of Benelux discussion and that we should be meeting them. 13th April Horrocks came to see mne and left with me papers on the disoussions that have taken place in Singapore regarding 1.S.S. There had been preliminary talks with Shone and also with Gimson and Gent. It seemed fairly clear that although Shone distrusted Dalley Gimson and Gent felt that 14.8.8. as at present constituted should continue. There had also been disoussionswith the Commiasionex of Police who appeared more or Less dis-interested in what M.S.S. were doing and content to Leave things as they are, Subsequently there was a general meeting With Gimson in the: chair at which Mckerran, the Colonial Secretary who had been mainly reeponsiblle for putting Dalley in as head of M.S.8., Dalley, the D.G., Winterborn and MeDonala were present. The meeting started on a somewhat acrimonious note. The D.G. stated that he had heard from his D.S.0. that Daley had Bad that the D.G. waB only a policemsn from Glasgow without any security experience, he regarded this remark as grosaly offensive, 66. particularly as it was made to one of his subordinates and asked for an explanation omDalley. Dallley apologised and deeply regretted the incident. He said that he WES only repeating what Someone in England had told him. He realised that he should never have done that and hoped that Sir Percy would accent his apology. The D.G. accepted the apology and regarded the incident as closed. He hoped that. Dailey would not harbour any resentment against D.9.0. Leighton who had reported the incident 8B he was only doing hia duty. Gimson said that in the cireumstances no course WES open to Col. Dalley but to apologise and he much regretted the incident. Winterborn was then asked to Give his views as to why Cor operation between SIFE and MSS was lackine. Minterborn cited a number of incidents of a fairly convincing kind, qualifying his remarks that he did not know whether Bome of the incidents might not have been due to administrative difficulties. he drew attention te insccuracies in many of Dalley' reports which could have been corrected if they had beer subinitted to SIFE. Dalley's only excuse was that pressure of work and shortage of time add not permit of full ernsultations if he waB to get his reports published and ready in time. He thought there were bound to be inaccuracies oocasionally ab he mainly sat down and dictated his weekly reports from information readily available because he felt 1t was desirable for the Government to have weekly information as punctually ab possible. Nobody made it, but the obvious answer seemed to be that it waB better that the Government Should have no information than inaccurate information. There was then an accusatid that MeDonald stoutly denied, that he, MoDonald, had said to the wife of one of Dalley's subordinates, that he would get Dally out of the coumtry within a month. The meeting ended with mutual professions of cooperation in the future and a suggestion that there should be a monthly meeting with Gimson in the chair between Dalley and WAnterborn. This seems to me in some ways to have down-graded SIFE Bince proper contact is with the Governor-General through the J.I.0. There was a complaint that Dalley did not send enough to the Governors. He had only seen Gimson once and Gent twice Or three times. I am afraid that nothing can resullt from all this except a general stink. Horrocks, in talking to me, gave me to understand that every thing was going splendidly until the D.G. Eot an appendicitis as Gent who had not been present at the other meeting was rather taking to the idea of M.S.S. being divided up into two Speeiall Branches. It may be, therefore that in subsequent conversation the D.0. may be able to make Bome progress, but I rather doubt it. Winterborn I gather is rather in despair. K.L. has been closed down with Gent' agreament. This, I think, ia sound as there was really nothing for D.8.0. K.L. to do except to extract a certain amount of additional information from the local branch of M.S.S. I diseussed with Horrocks various staff matter. The D.G. had suggested that we might reeruit some ex-police officers for 0. Division. I told Horrocks that I had seen Gainsford from the Indian Police who seeined to be entirely suitable because he had had the right sort of experience in aBsessing political information. 67 Horrocks entirely agreed and would therefore be writing to Gainsford. Miagan is to clear uD the position in Malta. I told Horrocks that I thought he ought to inform tha't he would be visiting him and take with him a letter from ourselves which he would present to on arrival, stating that he was authorised by the D.G. to make an enquiry. He should then show Harrow's letter and ask him for his observations. I also discussed the question of female staff which is nov 20 under strength. I thought some reall drive in recruiting vas necessary, particularly if we have to send more poeple to West Africa. I mentioned the possibility of sending a competent person to train a staff for the S.B. of the Gold Coast police. Horrock thought possibly Lawson might do this if Bill Magan could spare him. T said I thought it vas important that the Registry should be laid dorm on our lines. T was by no means certain that the Palestine Police systein was the right one. I mentioned too that we may have to do a certain amoung of vetting for personnel of ground nuts since if we were to establish an office in the Gold Coast it as desirable to obviate as much trouble as we could. I had lunch with Sanavith. Die told me that he was not going back to S.B.a but that he woulld like to attend the course in order that he could pass on the information to his successor. Halford wants me to go to a discussion with orme sargent, Denning and Heyter on Australlian security. told him I did not think I could telll Denning much more than What T had dHolA himerlyready, He could if he liked see the D.C. in ngapiAlopogeteup DOEeEuP bo date information from the British High Cambenne who was thoroughly in the picture. (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct I dined with Van Moyland. T him Roek and Col. Eindhover were over here on the instructions of the Dutch P.M., but that it was not altogether clear whether eyrepresented a centralised Intelligence service or not. Van Moyland said that he too was not clear on this point, but that he hoped to know more When de Jaage, Legal Advisor to the Embassy, returned from The Hague in a few days time. I said that We had confined ourselves to defining the problem to these gentlemen and that they had gone away to consider the matter. 1 then asked him who exactly was responsible for producing information about the activities of the C.P. as B whole in Hollland, the extent of their tenetration of the Trade Unions or the Civil Service. He had no hesitation in saying that the primary responsibility woulld be that of the Department of Justice and that the report would be prepared by the political research section of the Reichspolitsie. He said that the Reiclspolitsie were repponsible for major crime throughout Hoilland and also for the study of politicall movements. They work in close co-operation with the Baupolitsie who allso had responsibilities in the big tovns. In cases of serious crime the Reichapolitsie who had allll the equipment such as laboratories finger-printing etc. such as provided by Scotland yard took charge. he mentioned a case where somebody in the Navall Attache's Office here was believed to have Comnunibt tendencies. The minister had 68 instituted enquiries and the Dutch F,0. had in error passed the request over to Eindhoven. In reply they had had four lines about the person's antecedents. Van Moyland had then mnade enquiries throug the Department of Justice who, in co-operation with the Baupolitsie, Produced a long report giving aln the information that vas required. 1 asled him whene Eindhover would have got his four lines. He said that he Would not know, but it might be that he had an agent in the locality or poBsibly that he had gone to the Baupolitsie who had not been very forthcoming. Lth April At the J.I.C. today ve discussed the question of placing under export license heertain commodities which would be useful in the setting up of atomie plant. Welsh argued tha't it was extremely difficult to obtain any leads for intelligence of what Russia or other satellite powers might be doing in the atomic energy field, and that this might make his task even more difficult. he meeting aid not seem to feel that this was a very valid argument. The probability was that the Russians and others woulld still apply for these comoditi and that, in any case, there as little more to be got out of it than that they were expressing interest. The actual supply of a commodity Woulld not lead to anybody getting it to instal a plant nor to any information about the particular line being followed. The Committee decided to support the recommendation tha't 81ll these comodities should come under export license. It was stated at the meeting that the Americans had decided to put all these commodities under export license and it was felt that we should Conform. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 2011 I saw the P.M. this evening. T told him about the 's ilnes and movements and that meanwhile Hollis had been carrying on. He had had meetings with Chifley, Evatt, Dedman the Minister of Defence, and Sir Frederick Sheddon. An enquiry in Sheddon's office indicated that the precautions there were reasonably good. The two documents had circulated together in Australia and normally reposed in Sheddon's safe. They had, bovever, been applied for by one MILNEE the representative Of External Affairs on the J.I.C. and had been sent to Canberra. liilne is understood to have a Communist background and is now in Korea. It was not clear whether the leak took place in Sheddon's office or in External Affairs, but evidence rather pointed to the latter. I then told the P.M. he Woulld be receiving a reply about security precautions from Chifley through the British High Commissioner in Canberra, and that although under- takings had been given to tighten things up I doubted whether they really amounted to very much. Chifley bad said in the House of Commons that he would not employ measures similar to those in force here and does not intend to say that Communists were not to be employed in secret departments. We also knew unofficially that he would not even sanotion the vetting of Civil Servants before they were employed on secret jobs. Evatt had given similar undertakings and had agreed with Chifley's decision that U.K. Top Secret documents shoulld in future go to the Ministry of Defence. This also had little reality since there were many documents which Evatt would be receiving in External Affairs which were Top Secret and apart from this he had representa- tive on the J.1.0. in Melbourne whene U.K. documents vrere discussed. said that Hollis had asked for instruction about making any threats, implied or otherwise, that if security in Australia was not tightened uD it woulla no longer be DOSsible for us to communicate Top Secret documents. I had replied that he should make no threats, but confine himself to eliciting a staterrent of the precautions which the Australians proposed to put into force. It would then be for the P.M. here to decide on what aetlon should be taken. I told him that, in my view, it was extremely unlikely that any satisfactory guarantee would be given against leakages in the future. I then told Attlee there was a generall atmosphere of depression in the Communist Party. in view of recent happenings. They felt that they had lost the initiative. They feared that the party might be surpressed; they vere destroying indexes, issuing warnings about talking on the telephone and taking other precautions. Attlee said that he had heard that in future there was to be little discussion in the party, but that merely rigid obedience to orders. He did not think that the British Communists would take this very easily and that it might well lead to divisions in the Party. I said that I had no information on this point except that the Party seemed to be going on on a rather narrow seetarian basis and to be realising that the united front was rather blown on them. I then referred to the P.1.18 rulling which presented Us with a certain number of difficullties. It Bnot possible in every case to give chapter and verse as we did to the Minister as, to an informed person, this might well disclose the source. The statement to the Civil Servant had therefore to be modified accordingly. He seemed to accept this. T then pointed out that ve were coming in for a good deal of abuse since there was clearly a general feeling ve were a bunch of autocrats who had been pushing Civil Servanst around without any authority. He said that he was afraid that this vas inevitable, but he had done his best to convince Parliament and the publlic that this was not the case. He said 'I doubt whether you would ever get it out of peoples minds that your Department has over-riding powers and is not subject to Ministerial control. I told him that an tmmence amount of time was spent on the preparation of these cases and the information was often difficult to assess. I should like him to know that the work was done with the greatest possible care and that both on the Working Party and in our relations with Ministrie we had always been a restraining influence. He accepted this. He then asked me about the Pascists. I told him that there was really little to report. Mosley was surrounded by entirely insignificant people, although he himself still had certain powers as an orator. He asked me about Pirot' visit. I said that I had had no report so far, but I thought that we vould undoubtedly know what had happened T then told thim about the attempt by the Jews in Anlerica to Drovoke Moslley into some financial arrangement with American big business. The P.i. was quite amused at this. Generally speaking he was bis mComunicative and unresponsive, but quite pleasant. ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 15th April 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 2011 The J.I.C. are to discuss urgently the effectoi proposals to hand back Italian colonys. The intention is, I think, to hold on to a trusteeship for Cyrenaica and Tripoli, but possibly to return Eritrea and Somaliland. The Commanders-in-chief, Middle East, view any suggestion of returning the Italian colony with grave concern as they feel that it will have a serious effect upon the Arab world and our defence plans generally in the wiadle East. They point out, amongst other things, that if Italy ulltimately goes Communist, it will give the Bussians a strong foothold both in the eastern and western lediterranean. Horrocks carne to see me. He is arranging to get hold of Gainsford and will be sending to the Gold Coast if the is willing to go, for a period of a months or Bix weeks to Dut the police Registry on its feet. A letter has been anafted to Magan authorising him to make enquiries in Malta. He has also been given a copy of Harrows letter to me. I discussed with Courtenay a letter we have had from Winterborn. He says that a8 a result of discussions betteen the D.G. and Gent he was informed that Gent had agreed to the abolition of the D.5.0. in K.L. It vas understood that the High Commissioner had said that he would like to have fortnightlly visits from the Head of SIFE, but that he was not particularly anxious to see Leightor who would no' cover Malaya as DSO as well as Singapore. Winterborn had therefore seen Gent in company with Battersby on 6th April. He had been somewhat disconcerted when the High Commissioner had said that he had never agreed to the abollition of the DSO in K.L., but had merely discussed the possibility of it with the D.G. He agreed, however, to et matters stand, but asked who was to be his DSO. He was told that Leighton would be covering K.L. as well as Singapore, He asked whether Leighton had a good knowlege of Malay 71 and Wlrether he knew any of the locall comnunists or political personallities. It was explained that Leighton had only arrived in August, but that with his new responsibilities he would be visiting Mallaya. Gent again stressed the point that he would require his D.8.0. to be fully informed about affairs in Malaya, particullariy on the frontier and to visit him fregnently. Winterborn remarks that it is perhaps general commentary on the consistency of Gents views that he at no time asked for Winterborn to come and see him and had asked for Leighton to see him, when he had given the D.G. exactly contrary views hardly a week previously. Gent then discussed Communist activities in Halaya. Winterborn took the opportunity of saying that our great lack was high grade intelligence from the C.P. Executive Headguarters. Gent remarked "I suppose SIFE has nothing. MSS has a considerable amount, Winterborn then told Gent that Dalley had, in fact, at a Planning Committee the previous day admitted that his sources on the internal workings of the M.C.P. were virtually non-existent, though he had several long term pllans in view. Winterborn is doubtful whether the nev arrangement will be veny satisfactory and thinks that we may before long be faced with a demand for the re-establishment of a DSO in K.L. on his return to Singapore Winterborn vas told by Dalley that at a meeting with the D.G. the D.G. had agreed that it was desirable for Dalley to open up direct communications with all surrounding Special Branches on matters of security interest as "it vas impossible to have too many lines". Minterborn is worried about this in relation to D.I.B. India. When he next sees Dalley he is going to say that he assumes that the latter will have no objection to Leighton running as many agents as he sees fit in Malaya provided Dalley i8 kept informed. This Would be in confirmity with Dalley's views that there cannot be too many lines. 16th Abril At the J,I.0. today we discussed a note from the Foreign Office expressing anxiety by the Foreign Secretary about mental ressure being used during interrogation of detainees in the British 2one. This all arose from a stupid statement by Short at the Bad Nenndorf trials about the use of mental pressure even to the extent of telling a man that if he did not speak the truth his wife and child woud be done away with. Page circullated a note of instructions to CSDIC camps which seeined perfectly in order. They did not, however, contain anything about the exercise of mental pressure. I drew the attention of the meeting to the discussions on the British brief for the Geneva Convention for the Treatment of Civilian Detainees in time of war. his brief had been agreed by the Prime Minister, the Foreign Secretary and the Home Secretary and only authorised our delegation t.o go ES far as to say that we woulld'not practise violence, cruellty or threats thereby It seemed, therefore, that we coulld not go beyond this unless we were forced to change out attitude to the Geneva Convention. I then read out to the meeting an extraet of our minute to the Rrime Minister on the wholle question which he had approved. e stated "in this country physical violence was not 72 a weapon that an interrogator would ever wish or be permitted to use. Not only is the idea abhorrent to the national conscien but it is a wellknown fact that such methods as often as not defeat their own ends by providing information which is wholly unrelliable. But it would be idle to pretent. that an interrogating officer does not, in a large percentage of cases which he handles, but pressure - and often severeand continuous pressure - upon his subject before he can achieve or hope to achieve any result. The form of pressure will vary enormously with different cases, but basically it will, more often than not, be founded on fear - fear for himself, fear for Someone else." I made it quite clear to the meeting that if mentall pressure was to be prohibited there would be no point in running OSDEOS at all. Neither would it be easy in any future war to obtain interrogators if they thought they were going to be liablle to prosecution when the war was over. I had the feeling that this view was generally accepted by the meeting. tou in particular said that he wished to endorse every word that T had said. Malcolm McDonald visited the Committee on the question Of whether the J.I.0. should report to the Chiefs of Staff as had been ruled by the Chiefs of Staff here or to the Defence Co-Ordina- tion Committee which covered both civillian and military aspeets. McDonald said that as priority No.1 for the J.I.C. was the growth of Communism in S.E. Asia and that other problems discussed by the J.1.0. had a strong civilian aspeet, he thought it was preferable that the J.I.C. should report to the Defence Co-Ordination Comittee on which, of course., all three Commanders in Chief sat, including himself. He felt that for the Chiefs of Staff alone to discuss Communism could coulld not contribute very much. This ruling, however, did not mean that the large number of subjects which the J.I.C. discussed and which were purely service matters would not go direct to the Chiefs of Staff, and may never come to the Defence Committee at all. McDonald felt that although this might look a little untidy here circumstances in Singapore were very different. He would like an opportunity of explaining his point of view to the Chiefs of Staff. I had a word with McDonalld after the meeting. I told him the D.G. would be returning about the 2th and I was sure that he woulld like to have a tallk with him before he went back. McDonald leaves on the 29th. He said he would be dellighted to see the D.G. and also myself and Holllis. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED DEPARTMENT UNDERSECTION OF THE PUBLIO RECORDS ACT 19f8 of 2011 73 I attended a meeting at the Foreign Office with Orme Sargent, Denning and Hayter to whom I explained the wholle position in Australlia. Denning is now not leaving until the 22nd. I undertook to put him in touch with Hollis who arrived on the sargent instructed Denning to raise the security issue with Evatt and Chifley. His present mission is only to discuss the possibility of discussions covering all the Dominions and the United States. Sargent thought that at the apropriate moment the Americans might perhaps be induced to express enxiety about Australian security. saw william Hayter after the meeting and told him about He was grateful for the information and said he would keep it under his hat. There is considerable cohsternation in the C.P over the P.M.'s ruling. All fields of artyeetivity are now to be surveyed with the objeet of improving security. The names of comrades in the Civil Service, the G.P.O. and Government factories are to be removed from Party records, registration forms are to be destroyed and list kept at Party headquarters at all levels destroyed wherever possible. Great care' is to be taken When using the telephone and it is to be assumed that all lines to party offices are tapped. Calls likely to reveal names and addresses of Party members must be made from outside telephones. In some places a strict review of membership is being carried out with the object of identifying informers. Meanwhile, there is a general atmosphere of depression and of feeling that the Party has for the time being lost the nitiative. It is hoped that failure of the Harshall plan and general financial stringency may give them their opportunity later on The suspension of Ann GEORGE, P.A. to Tofnlinson, the Minister of Education, has roused quite a stir. She has been told simply that she is a member of the Party. This is felt to be a contravention of the P.M.' statement in which he said he would give chapter and verse. This has been asked for, but it is realised that if she is told that being a Party member and has access to Cabinet documents she comes within the P.M.' ruling for transfer, the view is that the Party have not got a very good answer. Their next step will be to criticise the inadequacy of the new job to which she is transeerred. The Ozech agent 0.21 has been given an important questionna: about some secret device being manufactured by ye.Radio. 17th April THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIOI (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 201\ 74 Bill right came in. He is going back to Palestine. He will stay in Jerusalel accredited to our F.O. representative Dow. At least this is the idea. It seems doubtfull, however, whether in the present circumstances it will be possible for Dow to establish himself at all. Jerusalem looks like being a battle ground. Neither is it clear ovhom he will be accredited. He both agreed it woulld be impossible to have any communication by diplomatic bag until things settled down. At the moment diplomatic base are far from sacred. The Hagana got hold of one the other day which contained certain of our correspondence. Meanwhile a conversation between Ffoullkes and SINE has been picked up. Hagana on the Irgun put out an illicit broadcast calling Nr. Ffoulkes and saying that his D-Day was likely to be 14th April. Bill Hagan is not unduly concerned about this. Ffoulkes will be moving sortly to Haifa. On the other hand, he does seem to be rather sticking his neok out by lunching with prominent Arabs in Jerusalem. 19th April A D.Notice is to be issued oh the question of atomic research bue to an announcement that is shortly to be made that we intend to manufacture atomic bombs in this country. I lunched with page and Generall Sir Frederiok Morgan. Page is going as G.O.C. West Inates and Freddie Morgan is apparently one of the directors of Booker & Co., who are the principal operators in British GLiana. He is inmesly impressed by the potentiallities of British Guiana which Beems to be enormously rich but almost whollly undeveloped. He is, however, Worried about security in the West Indies generally. He is trying, T think, to keep B.G. out of any west Inaies Federation. His firm are in touch with the Coloniall Development Co.g and may be asking them for a certain amount of assistance provided they can keep their own independence. I last met Morgan in a haze of alchohol at the 0.H.0. A. Mess Rhimes in 1944 or early 1945 when we discussed fraternisation. He remembered the occasion. I told him that from my experience of the 1914; war I doubted whether it woulld last for more than 9 fortnight. He agreed, but said that he had to do something. T arranged for Page to come and see Kirby Green. For Minutes of D.D.0. meeting see D.D.G. Secs tray. I disoussed with Horrocks, Charles and Dick the case of GAIE who is to be our officer in Greece. The army now say they cannot pay him. e decided to make a finall approach through the military Secretary. I saw Hill about the Publication of the Anna WOLKOFF case which has been requested by Stokes. We did not wish to be placed in the position of making an application to the court as this Would male everyone who had formerly been comnected with the case feel they coulld talk freely to the Press. Apart from this certain of OLI informants may be jeopardisea. 75 20th April Holllis is still further delayed and it is doubtful whether he will be able to see Denning though the latterig departure has now been delayed until Friday, and he could see Hollis on Thursday after- noon. Drew tells me that he is seeing the Minister for Home Security inceylon who is over here on a visit. He will be talking to him about various security measures rather on the lines of the Bridges Panel. The question arises as to whether Drew should saying anything about our representation in Ceylon and whether we shoulld like to have anyone present at the meeting. T discussed vith Glegg certain documents which we are proposing to send over to the Advisory Boand to help them in their deliberations, It is important that they should know as inuch as possible about Communist activities. 21st April T attended the J.IC.ens Drew came over to talk about the case of ANDREWS & Co. There are now questions in the House asking the Government to publish evidence in their possession regarding attempts by the C.P. to cause disruption in industry. The Chencellor is anxious to publish, but Drew has pointed out that before doing so it might be advisable to satisfy ourselves as far as possible of the evidence. There is just a possibility that the whole thing might be a plant. We have arranged that Skardon should go down and see the police, and that he should, in particular, cheok up on the signature. I warned Drev that if we vere called upon to publish further evidence of this kind of thing ve should be forced to say that there was none. Moreover, the truth was that party headquarters had gone as far as to discourage anything of the kind. If therefore, the evidence was sound the action was probably taken locally without consulltation with headquarters. Thistle has returned on a Visit. AS far as I can see everything iBgeing extremely well in Washington and Canada. Thistlle evidently has the confidence of everybody in the F.B.I. and in the Embassy which he regards as being even more important. The new Ambassador vas formerly his tutor and is extremely helpful and co-operative, and Jock Balfour is friendly though disinterested in our kind of business. ie has gone no further than to ask whether Thistle is connected With the same kind of business as his cousin, namely me! Mickey Ladd has helped considerablly on the Jewish side. While Peter Dwyer is liked and accepted, in fact the distinetion betveen M.I.5. and M.I.6. has almost vanished althoughthe misdeeds of Security Co-ordination rankle a bit. M.1.6. will never be on quite the same basis of confidence as ourselves. It appears that after obtaining the approval of the F.B.I. Peter Dwyer sees C.I.A. once a fortnight. The F.B.I. do not like this however, and Mickey 76 in the most frienally way has made it clear to Thistle that if we do the same we shall no longer be persona grata. Mickey knows all about C.I.A. because he has a brother there. The F.B.I. are rubbing their hands About Bogata Which puts C.I.A. on the mat. Hoover epressed great interest in the purging of Civil Servants here, particularly from the point of view of the production of evidence and sources. There is now some move in Congress to force the P.B.I. to disclose their files. Thistle told mne that when Hater received a copy of the letter written by Inverchaple to the D.G. he wrote to the Embassy sayi that he hoped that this did not mean that a separate channel would be established between the D.G. and the Ambassador. Apart from being extremely petty this has no rdality since the D.G. has Thislle in the Embassy viith access to the Ambassador who can pass anything through him that he likes. 22nd April Vickery rang me to say that there has been a further case o leakage apparently from Government House in the punjab last agust. This was apparently a letter from Mountbatten to the Government. It seemed likely, therefore, that George Jenkin'e S letter to me leaked through the same channel. 23rd April THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED VDEPASTMENT UNDER SECTION ACT OF 1958 THE Oct PUBLIC 201\ RECORDS He seemed to me tied although this was not surprising after his experiences, but on the whole in good Spirits. T only had a few minutes talk with him. He seemed to think that although Dalley had behaved badly he was clever, and was too clever for Winterborn. He said that he had had a number of conversations with Gent before he left K.L.; and I rather gather that the question of splitting M.S.S. into Special Branches was not altogether abandoned. I told him that T had made a privisional appointment for him to see Malcolm MeDonald at 11 o'clock on Tuesday. Roger arrived at 7 o'clock this morning. T had a long tallk vith him and Dick. It emerges that for some time Travis, through Golden, had been making enquiries of Chilten the Australian Sigint about certain personallities whose names were cropping up on the Moscow--Canberra traffic. Clearly, therefore, Chilten knew that 77 the traffic existed and thet it was to Some extent being brokcen. In a letter to Chilten which Polden had taken cut in Decemiber Thavis had added a postscript without saying anything to Polden saying in effeet that the latter Would be able to tell Chilten certain confiden- tial details. Follden knew nothing about this until Chilten read the letter and asked him what the details were. At that stage Polder could only say that there were indicotions of a leakage of information From Australia, deaills of which he did not know. In the light of all this it was difficult to see what the fuss has been about the source. breanwhille, we have been placed in an entirely false position particularly if it is now decided to tell the Australians the full] story. The visits of Mawhood and Airy Still stink and if the Australians are now to be told that ve have notysEross?eh them it will finally put the lid on our relations with thein. Roger seems to have bad a very satisfactory talk with Professor Bailey, the Solicitor General and Permanent Secretary of the Attorney General Dept. under Evatt. Bailey is evidently a reasonable man to whom one can talk. He is clearly anious to get Australlian security on to a better footil Leanwhile, Longfield Lloyd is adamant about not having B representa- tive from us in Australia unllesB be is 8 member of his depnntment with undivided loyalty. AS rerards f.sa. This IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 201\ It does seain, however, that Winterborn has been wrong, perhaps, in not paying more frequent courtesy visits to the Governors. One of the difficullties there T think may have been that if you have no goods in the shop window you have nothing to sell. Purely lisison visits unless there is something congrete to discuss are apt to be tedious. 2thApril Page talked to me about the Stephens case. Dick Butler is apparently anxious that Stephens' name should be kept out. While everybody has agreed to holding the whole proceedings in carera Fage feels that this may be rather difficult owing to possible guestix by Stokes, and to the fact tha't the press allready have Stephensf name I said that our only angle was this; whatever happens it will be difficult enough for us to reemplloy Stephens. It wil. be still more difficult if one more his name is to be placed in the press. even if he is entirely acauitted somne of the mud is bound to stick. 27 26th Aprill. The D.G. saV Charles, Horooks, Hary, Dick and myself and gave us a lone account of his vlsita. to Australia, New Zealand and Singapore. He vas convinced that we should not get anywhere in Australia until and unless ve came clean. He thought that the Australlans were genuinely anxious to probe the leak. but as a result of the somewhat cagey policy dictated from London we were regarded in a mild degree by people like Evatt as either fools or knaves. There is no doubt that Evatt's office is inseoure: his principal aide, Burton, who echoed all his views, was hot at alll security minded. This the D.G. had learned from Fraser, Prime Minister of New ealand. Longfield Lloyd was thoroughly friendly but had little drive and was merely a tool of Evatt; his staff were not particularly high grade. The one hope se med to he Bailey, in the Attorney General' department, who is likely to be coming over here shortly. The cases of MAWVHOOD and FOLKES stin] stink in Australia and New Zealand. I told the .G. that I had looked up both cases over the weck-end and that it is quite clear that we had nothing to do vith their appointments, and thet they had no claim to represent M.I.5. It was, moreoven, evident that FOLKES had been appointed by the New Zealana Prime Minister on MA.THOOD'E recommendation, that Cummings had handed over on cithers to him and had subsequently, on our instructions, recovered them, that we had then made enquiries of the Dominions Office as to who was responsible for security matters in New Zealand and received R reply, after investigation by Batterby ouP High Commissioner, that all the functions performed by our office both civil and military was nov centred in FOTKES, and that we should therefore now transfer DuP allegiance to him. It was only after this erquiry that we finally instructed Cummings to hand over 0UD ciphers to FOLKES. There was evidence that very considerablle Jealousy existed both in New Zealand and Australia as between the civil and military, and it might well be that there was a good deal to be said on both sides. MAWHOOD had written a long and factual report and had had two letters, cne from the Solicitor General and another from Jones, late of the C.1.3., speaking in the warmest terma about his work and the scandalous treatment that he had received at the hands of the Australians. The D.G. then went on to telll us about Singapore. He mentioned the incident vith Dalley and Dalley's reply that he was merely repeating remark Which he had got from one of the D.Gs staff in London. I asked the D.G. whether he had named the individual. The D.G. replied that he had; he told Dalley that he knew that there had been disappointments in Loadon about his appointment., Du't the incident WaS closed ald he aid not wish to know the man'e name. Dalley had, however, insisted on giving it. The impressor left on us all, I think unintentionally, was that we any of us might have been responsible for the remnarl. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 2011 79 THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMEN'T RETAINED NDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct RoM\ I attended a meeting with Bridges in the Chair of the P.U.Ss and the Advisery Board. Padiore was there from the staff side of the Treasury: he had been conducting a number of negotiations w7ith tise staff side, who were considerably perturbed about the present machinery for bealing with civil servanta. There were a number of mninog points which were easily dealt with. The major one Wan a renueuit by the staff Bide that the suspect shonid be accompanied by the of their representatives her he went before the Boeed, and sholdd also have a lega2 adviser, Gardiner said that such in arantement Would alter the whole constitution of the Bourd, which ws not intended in any way to be a legal tribunal; the ex-civil servants were supposed to be entirely impantial and perona grata with Ministries, the Security Service aind the Civil Service in general. T it ware decided that suspects were to be acopmpanied and legally represented, or that a member of the ataf side should actually sit atn a member of the Boand, he and his colleagues wouild have te reconsider their whole positi0, since it VIRE not on this basis that they had originally been asked to tackle the problem. I said that from ou joint of view it vas clearly undesirable that the susrept should be accompanied, firstly because this wotild be the thin end pf tha edge to a leg adviser le PLATS-MIIIS or PRITT, and secondily because anyone attending the proceedings of each case would, ih the course of time, be able to dedioe what our sources wene. The 2r0Dosal was vetoed by 811 present, subject bo the R.M'E approval. 1t waE also agreed that the F.M. should he asked to endorse tha vi of the Bound that they should not be called upon by Ministers to digollnse informatio whick liad been imrarted to them by the Seeuriitsr Service; this would not, however, prevent them draying up a measoned report on the Case for the benefit of the Minister. t wer finally agreed that the Prime Minister veuld hat to say soething do 1o the House about tliese mstiters, anyhost Bouetllng Which would reorncile lTig to cenfliotini statements that the Suspect on the one hand be given chapter and verse, but that secret sources shoud not be disclosed. 27th Aril. At the D.G's meeting to-day, Hollis gave ar account of the long-range pocket projects in Australia and expressed the view that the security measures were 011 the wholle pretty good; the only wealnesa vias in the vetting, Since although all the motions were gone through, the records of the C.I.S. and the military might well be inedequste. Vickeny sadd that the Situation in Indis was trioky, and that both Hindustan and Pakiatan were tamlting of going out of the Empire, the reason being on both sides that we Would not give our whole- heantea support over the Kashmir incident. Hanny Allen told the D.G. about the D. Notice to the effect that we are going Se nenUfacture atom bombs, and that goltain Bspecte of the project should not be mentioned in the Presse Dick spoke of the Benelux talks and of various agent projecte which had been going on in the D.G's absence. Finaly I told the D.C. about the Bridges meeting. E age reminded him about his decision that ve were to have resident t officers in the neV building. I did not know how this stood. Dickc Butler came to see me, When he told me about the present position in the STEPHENS case, The eolicitors for the doctor have secured an ad journment of about ten day to enable them to consider certain evidence produced by Campbell without previous notice. They told Dick that the case against the doctor cannot possibly be finally concluded until the Ist June at the earlliest. He said that he has applied for a firm date to be fixed for Stephene' cabe.. He thinks that the hearing Will commence somewhere about the 8th or 15th June and will probably laat about B month. He haf pointed out to Page the necessity for strict recautions to pheverit the names and photographs of witnesses Buch aG Lord Swinton, Sr Alfred Duff-Cooper, the D.G. Dick White, and officer of Intelligence Division being mentioned or appearing in the Press. Page sayS that the Wer office is going to ask that the whole case shcuna be heand in camera. Dick Butler does not believe that the Court has ower tD Front such an application. He has also nointed out the neceraity from many Enlea, Df avoiaing any mention of Stephens' ovin name if noesiblle, On the 16t1 March Charles Russe3l &. Co.. sant in an appeal to the Amy Council on behalf of Stetheng. They aaked that the Secretary of State should report to the Hing on the whole position 81. and pointed out the impossibility Df Stephens getting a fair trial, for the peasons given to the D.0. and inyself by Dick Butler. The only answer So far received to this appeal was statement to the effect that material is being collle ected for the Army Council to consider before answering it. Dick Butler suspects that in faet the Army Council are not going to answer it until they banow the result of the doctors case. If that 1s the case, he says that the coats will be considerably increased because he W1ll by then have dellivered brleis to Counsel, ete. He said he was told privately that Shinwe.l Was extremely angiy when he read tie facts submiitted by firm, and that there is a battle royal going on between the Foreign Office and the War Office as to the responsibility for the treatment to which Stephens has been subjected. The doctor's solicitors, who Dick Butler saw yesterday, have been in touch with a Mr. Vhiiton, who is the reporter in Germany of the Daily Express. He saye that the Prese know that Lord Pakenham saw Stirling (the Deputy J.A.G. and Campbell before these cases were started and gave them inatruetinns that the reason why the Government are proceeding with these cases is that they wish to attack the senior officers of M.I.5. Whiton says that when the Government took office, the Head of M.I.5. was asked to give to the P.M. any files in his possession relating to members of the Goverrmment. He did 60 and the P.M. kept them, but the P.M. knows that duplicates exist in M.D.5. Therefore the Press tEB certain tthat these trials W:ll lead to aneffort to remove the eading personalities in M.1.5. Dick Butler said that the solicitor told him this in a friendly way and that he seemed to be but a decent chen. He pointed out to him, however, that the whole thing was arrant ronsonse, but it waB the sort of dangerous gossip that is going on because of the mishandling of these cases. Whiton also said that the decisiona to whether the proceedings against Stephens are to go on will rast with the P.M. who is considering it at present. A further item of dangerous gossip 18 that a member of the Foreign Office staff said to a young Woman that "nel are determined to go on with these cases in orde tD show up M:I:5. Dick Butler suggested for considerationsthat the D.G. might consider mentioninget the present position to the P.M. Dr Bridges on the following line8:- (a) He is not asking that the ppoceedinea Bhould be stopped because this office thnka they should be stopped. (b) Stephens is an officer Df a department for Which the P.M. i8 personally responsible, and the D.G. conceives it his duty to let the P.M. Icnow how this officer has been treated. It is suggested that the D.G should not discuss the master in detadlw the PoMe, but merely suggest that he should Bee the War Office Tile and particularly the letter from Chaples Russell & Co. of 16th march. 82. (c) Having mentioned the positlor to the P.M., oP Bnigges, as Head of Stephens' department, lit Waa further suggested for consideration that the D.0. should point out to the P.M. that the gross mishandling of these cases which is thought to be admitted by everyone in London who knows about them, has resulted In, (e dangerous Eossip on the lines indicated above, (b) drawing the attention of the Russlans to the personalitice concerned, and (c) the praetical certainty that, whether the case is heard in camera or not, the progeedings against Colonel Stephens il result in further undesirable discusaiions and publicity. Finally, the D.Ges if he does mention the position as Suggested, might bear in mind these faeta;m (i) It is clear that a decision waB talcen in Germany, Disk Butler thought by General Biship, that the N.C.Os and other ranks, who are almost certainly guilty, should not be prosecuted; (11) that it is abundantly clear that the first emunt of inquiry, as a result of which Btephens was suspended, was illegal From Start to finish. If the Government Ee asked who are the guilty people, the answer is the soldters who disobeyed orders and possibly twe or three of the officers who have not been charged, Dick Butler Baid he made these suggestions with some iffidence, but thought it would be appreeiated that if there proceedings on, or even if no honourable solution is reached, Stephens yili have very serio a grounds for giving the utmost publicity to the scandal of his treatment. He said that if it would be Df any assistance, he would be perfectly ready to let Sir Eavard Bridges see any papers which he has in his office which would be of interest. 28th April. At the J.I.0. to-day we discussed the paper on the World Situation in 1957 over which E understand there had been an acrimonious diapute. Hayter wanted the paper to be Bummarised and had gone far as te accuse the J.I.s. of laziness, in spite of the fact that they and al the Directors of Intelligence felt that it was not possible to summarise such a paper. I gathered that Hayter was not going to summarise it himself and to submit his version fortiit discussion by the J.I.C. The J.I.8. took sarious Lmbrage on being accused of laziness, which in the circumstances, ST think, was wholly justifiable - they have a mass of papers to prepare and are exxtremely hardworked. We 8lso discussed a sugeeation by the D.N.I. that the D.Ds of I. should spend more tame in considering ways and means of procuring intelligence. He had tabled these items, where he thought that somethin a3 might he done. There aphect M.I.6. more than ourselves. He based his BLEestion on the ENi2 report. I did not say anything, but in fact Sir Douglan 5v11 was not charged with looking into the affairs of 1.I.6. and M.I.5. He Was solely concened with the staff of the J.I.C. and its subordinate bedies. and the general organisation and gO-ordination of Intelligence. His enquiries woulla, in fact, have beer much moe profitable the had investigated M.I.5. and M.I.6, since 1it 13 clesely Good having a vaat machine te assess, Co-ordinate disseminate, eto. if thene is Nothing really good for them to Wook on. S.I.3. took the view that if the D.N.I. had any bright ideas of the kine that he had tabled, the proper channel would be to discuse them direct with the aeation concerned in S.1.8., through hi iiaison officer. The other Seevicer felt tha't there ight be some advantauf in discuming suet points at the J.I.0., as it might help them in putting forward Suggestions from their on departments. It WaE agreed, however, that in taking part in such discussions S.1.5. could mot be expeeted to diselofe too much about their work. They would. however, have been prepared to say in general terms whether the proposFla feasible DO nott. There followed a discussion about the allocation of work between the D.D6 T and the D.Da O. & S. This amused me quite a lat ga it the point that had made when it was decided to split O: these aubjeot6. The Service departments Ware complaining that matter put dowh for D.Ds I. held really go to 0. & S. and vice versa. Somebory complnined that Btaff Courses was an Obvious subject for orgenis tion ienantments. Page poplied that if he were called upon to do this world, he wosula have to pry into the affairs of D.D. I, who wae the only person who could Bay who wae qualified to speak on centain subjects, and indeed whether it was desirable to speak about them at 81l. The conclusion war that the line of demarcation extremely difeiauit to define, and that in many cases papers would have to start with D.De of I. and finish with .Ds 0. &e S. Page brenght his sucoessor, Coilonel Adnerson, to see me. I SHH Maxvell sbeut MOSLEY. He said that ho would consult the Home Seoretany te the testion pf He telephoned later to say that the Home Seeretary had agreed. Maxweil mentionca some thet he had been having considerable disousai ons with his staff about the general policy of naturalising Comunista. He said that Hudson Wal definitely against it and ntmself was father ceming rourd to the view that, to be in conformity with the general trend regarding Communista, his former ideas D1 the subject might have to be modified. I said that I felt there was a certain inconsisitency in naturalising Communiste at this time, and I mentioned to him the caBe of ABRAMSKI. I said that df these people were not naturalized, there wais a certain deterrent, since it would be possible to deyozit. forcigners back to their own oointry of origin. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 201 84 Charles spoke to the D..G. yestendsy abort 11ia yowauk at DLE meeting, that Dalley in efering $o the D.G. as flat-footed policeman with no intelligence esperience" had been guoting somethine said to him by a member of the D.G. staff in London. Charlea pointed nut to the D.G, thiit this left a rather unpleasant atmosphere thiless the maI 1a3 named, Kirby Green came to talk to me about Police lectureg on ME.I.5. He had beveit asked to speal to Inspectors at Cloucester. I said that T thought in a generall may hie should abtend the meeting mind anser question, but that It was E bad principle to have leeturas on 1.I.5. for the subbdinate parts of the ahlice. In centsiir cases Bpecialigt loctures Wane valualle where the Police wite directly goncesned. I thought, hovever, that hie gheiild draft soie reply and consult the D.G. T tolld him that lie ought not to answer lettene addressed to the D.C from Chief Constableg without letting the D.G Lnow the proposed reply, sinoe at som6 later date a Chief Consbeble might refer to the matter, which would place the D.G in EL difpictilit poabition. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION 8 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 201 85 250h Ad2. Prelvenhaltt Came oter to ask views about sf 310009E that CALyO, 1t wae prepoged slsuld return hewe GtE representative ora Sanis.s peusyeper called R.F.E. CALVO is, of course the Couvieted Gemen spy who spend at lone time as a resident of 020. Fakerham said test CALVO aid not appea? to bear any ressitmen't rnd hen recently been writing quite acceptable articles about this sctntoy IT Aid that T did 110b thdnk that the Heme Office would stomaol his return, and that although he probaisl.s would not reengage in espicuae, hia PBrence would undoulitedly become ienown hee Resulting in a ueaton in the Hnise; this vntia place the Government in ach axtremeiy slbanashing hoB61on and aoreovelt, Mould not be mandctye to any improvement in the letinns beteen thig country and Spain. T thutight that thia should be the Forelen office answer to their Press Attache in Hairid, who could, if he sa fit, paas it we to CALVO. Pakenhei said shat he was dauling with western Burorean dournalista in the Foreign office and would be very pleased to let tis lanow about any ooneeaning hich he had doubts. The D.G. hid a meeting it nyseif, Hollis, 'o' and Travis. He went e.21 the ground the Auatrtian Lealcage. I think Travis WR little shaksen by the sgEeGtioE that the Ausitrsllans proball knev abbtit the Miosoow-Canberce traffic, and Hoilis'e remark that en tuiniss had Deen made ab eaniy LS June, 1947, about certain individuals who wee mentioned 1a thie traffic. Travis said that. ha thought thie most improballg, but that he would Llpok into it. The ugshot futhe meeting wvas that a careful. case should be prepared, taking aceounit of all point of view, and that reoresentetdon should be made to the Ainericane. It should be pointed ont to ther tlist unless and until the Astralians had the fuln information, it unlike] 1g that there could be any guarantee of Becurite in Austilia. The present Gituntion as embarrassing to a12 and made dlefence tallls Almost imposable. 30th 11l. At the J.I.C. teids, Bughler D.D.M.T. mave Ficme account cf 18 vist "bnamenicn. Ie hit accomanied DLP Planners, who Mere atterntine to CO-oxdlunte the otivithes With those of the Amenleans Umike J.I.0. Liers Do Foreign Office. repleserta- tiva on the T.I.0. MeAieas The aniving Torae is General Told, ui1e ic G nencanet ncwecentutive qoutrolling the J.I.S. n aditdor to General Toa, the three Service Mmlutries are represanted.. Houelien Poutna that the anterlcane cuaeentrating muelt Mloite o1 the sewied Juls 19157 to July 191.2 and that oRel DO alseuas Rasian and AMied ghpalilatier and iutentinng frorat 1957 0nTE2a5. di NaE ont 86 neresss2y dtol alnt the AneYi0aDB thatgl.t the ugont yiee edcines to lause eteat path otr own, exce 1 that they felt that there: Vere reasonable grounds for thinking that the Russians might feel that it Was in theiy interests to provoke R gho-down while Europe Wap still fluid and before the Matshal Plan had had time to take effect. heyhad, therefore, prepared an emengency plan know 93 "Double Qnick'l, the basis of wihich wa long-range:bombing: presupably with attomic bomls- from the U.K.s Okinatia, and Karachi. Hnrachi ahcol the Eriticit delegates to the core, ticularly When the Americun3 gaid that Lt tV A their intention to ED there vtith oh thi tlleut the consent of the Palintan Government. Boncher had Vined home alont this and has cot a neaennd argument, which had the effeot of riding the Aenicans 002 dangarplis proposal. While it might be wzong to aa3une that the han Even up the idea altouether, they had agreed to accept the liddle Et R a suitable altaunttive. In their intelligence summaries the Argericans talte the line of painting the blackes't traible picture that they can. This Father tyoiesl of Anerican dthoas. Heneth Strong and te me that Esenlower had told him that he naveyr enuld cet any value from Amemican Intelligence because they always backed every horse in the race! As resources would never ello/ every possible eventuality to be covered their deliberation were ot particularly helpful. It ran ngreed thet the American Emengeney Plan, which had been Eiven to 118 more Dr 1e83 sub rosa, should not be ciroulated beyond the Directors Df Intrlligenoe. A copy woulld, however, be retained for us and M.I.6 to sae if necessary. I recommended to Gleadell tht he Should inform Brigadier Earier of the Indian Seetion, C.R.O. about the proposal to occupy Pakistan as I thought that he might hear of it by a side wind and that in any Case it was important fon hin to kow. Gleadelll readily agreed to this. There folloved a docusaion"on-Belelungecurity, The D.M.I thought it was important that the Chiefs of Staff should realise the poaitior and make up their mintls haw far they were prepared to go. I said that aithoueh careful instruetons had bean prepared by ouPsElven and 1.I.6. on various security measure Which we thought necessary, it must be understood that Allied secunity in general has lamnentable, that it tools years of educatiott Sor a country to become security minded, and that ultimatelly much debended upon the state of the 0ivil Seevioe. Cpviously if prerarations ivere going te be made, a lange number of people srouild have to knoiv ahput them. It musb, titerefore, be expected that lealages ane 1kely to Decur. This IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 200 87 THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1968 Oct 2011 I luched wvith 3 Corin and Mrs. Quin. II aslei that tlie RuBians vleme lcing in Norway. He seid that they were fninly active but that he personally did not think that anything man inminent. He felt that they er mcue interested in activities and Amenicar ecbivities iin Norany, thnn Neray itgel2. They ware, howeve, covisning nilitany establishments, air field sin docis Mth some intoresit; for mdliteny establishmenba they have used the Rusatan War Ghaves Oomdse: and for dooks ther has sent people connected wirth tlle radaine of some wreck 1n Noryouiran water; thsnea people had taken fnn mure intereat in the coclis than iin the wreol! The Russisns haa freedont 0f movement cert 80 far as military establishments were onneerned. Whersa.s the Nerwegian Attache hd had freedom of movement ir Mescow; le had conseuently been vithdnyn. The Rusians generaly made LRB Of merobee Df the Nowagian Coumunist Panty, Tie forvestng @ivil Sowvice had a centadb nuamlr cf Coamunists, the policy Age to puish the arhcunil to insocaous jols Mi,aut coming into the open 83 we have done. This wag gereroilno eective. godd that the Lorwegians mished to waintair rbotul with and suerested tut should have a trlile with Eveng when he was ove)) her in June. 88. At the: Ayoi attasnts Board o-0ns tho following mattele, sonat other, were aectded:- (a) that EMERY is to come bacl at the end of the year to gain Head office experience; he may ultimately suoceed Geofrrey JFenking, but this pill depend upon How he shapes. (b) Naincbi station came under S..1.E. and consecuently B.3.8. (a) James Rebentson is to go to B.2.0. Countenay to 3.3.a.; Patterson to 5.3.b., and Loftus BowN to B.1.B. It was decided to ask Vickery to Live an analysis of the duties performed by his section, there it may be possible to. effect some reduetior of staff. It shonid, of course, properly be a section of B.3. but there may be something in keeping it aport util we kno whether India iB going to remain within the Empire. In that eventuality N.I.6. have stalsed a claim for certain of Vickery's documents and functions. said that thought there was something to be said for keeping questions arfeoting Indta and Indians in the hands of section, that really understood these matters. The D.O. asked me to see the OUR.O. about Ceylon. The question of Palistan is deferred, owing to the, political situation, Although Ahped is anxtous to pay us a visit as soon ae it 1B thought likely that Jinnah will give his approval. The question of ilest Africa is in abeyance until Kellar returns. He has, however', wired to say that he will be recommending the appointment of a D.8.0. post in Aeeral which will necessitate two officers and the requisite staff. In view of the situation in Palestine, it was agreed that a cable should be sent to Magan elphesisine omtlete freedom of action in witharawing out staff from Jernsrer should it become desirable. 3rd May. Nichodn.en 0f the R.O.M.P. Vito I understand is ultimate: likely DoDcome Conini sioner is doine short ceunse here. He is a very likeable person and 1a anxious to eC-operate in every may. I talked to 111.10 uite hit about ct organigsatins and panticulapiy alout the J.I.0. Canada; said tlt T had always felt that the R.C.M.P. cugbt to take 100136 active gant 168 eliberations. He said that he was HOV! the R.C.L.R. representative and that tiis was in faot corjint hboub. Relatipas with the Services were Far hetse? than they LET ingen ixefor'e. and the E.C.H.F. yet mush more fonthcomlni. I exlained to hulig how during the whr in VEIOLS aspects o 0037 Woili sartotlanly the punning of D.As, W had not the co-openntion of the military through bringing them into ou vantous disougeions and getting them interested in our work. Lth May. Basicervyle -GRade came to say gcod-bye. He is leaving to take on the station in Naimobi. T had a discussion with Dicio, RA.Re Hollis and Mias Russeil-King about oUP rellations with the French. T.A.R. very keen to conduct liaison with Verneuil tnrouh Le Mian on cases which are of importance te 128. Meanyhile, 11ss Bagot ha3 out out R nuesbionnaire on International Conmunist matters which wie would non050 Bhnla be handled by S.I.S. I am sure that our propoasle are sound. Dick will discuet ther with S.1.8. ab his neact moting. Guy Burgear mane 11p about two Danes, who some time ago had given information about Jewal teerrbrist activities. He said that while he hen come to the conelusion that one of them N&S unrellable, the pthex ore who waa staying(? with him, he tlought was a13 right. He vondaned whether, in view of the recent bomb outrage resiilting in the death of Roy Farran'e brother, we might have some use for this wants services. I said thert into the cuegtion ana that if ther was anything to b oaeA OPduild let him: now. ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINEO INDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. Oct 2o01 I talked to Dicle Thite, Hill, and Dici Buter about UIB Sterhens case. Ie first of all dealt with the evidence which Dicl thite, Wan EDing to ave; he felt that he could only speak ir regard to the Intelligence product and could saS nothiing Which might be interpreted as indicating that he had any control over the adrinistratioe of either 020 on Bad Nenndorf. This vas agreed. then aecussed the case af LECUBE. It was agreed, subject to the D.GIF approval, that shoid be alloved to refer to this care. Tt iB relevant to Stephens's defence in that it shows that with mechanical aids Stephens vasablle to to refute an acousation made by ECUBE that he had been il1-treated. He had bern denied these faoilitiesrat Bad Nenndonf owing to lack of suitable personnel, Roger and I went to see Gardiner, wlren we hnd a general digeussion alout pocedue of the Board. He raised a point about what shold happen if the Minister, Rn receipt of the decision. suspect' ounter-statoment, decided to reveiise his priima facie Should 0 the papens EO to the Boana; Fe pointed oat that if they did not, the authorities bere would not have the benefit of an excamination by the Board of the sources on Which on case wae based, and certain information of a highly secnat lend which might be behind the original aceusations. Hollis took the vde I think righthy. that the Minister For na never be told about there scuces and that there as something derogt tory in the Board acting ES a protection for the Minister against M.I.5. It had alvays been the practice in the past for Ministers to accept M.I.5's word. One cannot ascape the fact, however, that the sifting of ouP evidence as & protection for Minisite a was probably in the minds of the Cablinet when they made their decision. They have certainly given that imprespion to Parliament and to the public i.n general. THIS IS A COPY UERARTMENT DOCUMENT UNDER RETAINEEC SECTi ACT 1958 OF PUBLIC Oct 201 RECORDS I happened to meet Sir Palill Patrick at the club in the evening and found that he entirely shanea DLY view. Mitchellis back from East Africa. He thinks that the main importance of establishing an office in Salbabury is to effect a really good linison with the South African Police. He thinks the moment is opportune Ena that they ane in a cooperative mood. 5th May. At the J.I.C. to-day Air Marshal Sir Thomass Elmhirst, who is in control of the Hindustan Air Force, gave a talk to the J.I.C. He said that since August 5th he had attended regular meetings of the Defence Committee Similar machinery for defence, including a J.I.0. Directorate of Plans, and J.A.P.S. has been set up. D.I.B. in the person of Sanjevi, is represented on the J.I.0. A certain amoun't of troublle was caused, however, by Sandevi claiming that he should be Chairman and in bontrol of all Intelligence - internal, external, nilitary, naval and air. His proposal was vetoed by all other parties, and he has been reduced to the status of a humble member. Elmhirst has advised him to concern himself with internal security and with the running of a certain number of agents into adjacent territory. At the moment there are no sources of intelligence of any consequence coming either from D.I.B. or any of the Services. Elmhir has allso advised the authorities that they should have a Secret Service of their own and that they should allso concentrate on ty'. As regards the latter, they are making a start with monitoring atations. The Services wish to have links on S.S. and C.E. lines with this country. Elmhirst has told them that until they make up their minds whether they are going to remain within the Commonwealth or not, such links are ou't of the question, I told Elmhirst that we had a perfectly overt representative in the High Commissioner'e office, who was getting on well with Sandevi, but that D.I.B. was a mere shadow of its former self. I also told him that as soon ab the political situation was favourable, we should be establiighing a liaison with the Intelligence Bureau in Pakistan. 2. Elmhirst said that the question of India remaining within the Cormonwealth had been deferred until July. He thought that at the moment the betting was slightly in favour of their remaining in, if they could find some formulla on Irish lines. They reallised that we were their only friends, and it is perhaps encouraging that they had asked him to stay on and had just obtained the services of Admiral Parry to run their Navy. There is no doubt that Nehru, Patel, and the Minister of Defence are anxious to maintain British connection. Their difficulty is to put their former policy of "ariving the British out of India" into reverse without losing face, Elmhirat has had talke since his return both with the Prime Minister and the Chancellor, who have apparently authorised him to say, unofficially, that the British Government might consider stretching the Constitution if a suitable formula could be found. 3. In spite of the situation in Kashmir, rellations between Army officers in Hindustan and Pakistan, and also between Civil Servants, appear to be reasonably good. The antagonistic parties are the politicians and the Press. The Government of India realises that if they are going to hold India together, they have got to be strong, and they are therefore concentrating on building up their Armed Forces and Police. They perfectly understand that if a confliot arises between Hindustan and Pakistan, or even between Hindustan and Hyderabad, British officers will be ordered to stand down. 4. The members of the Government are bitterly anti-Cormunist, particularly Patel, and are prepared to dea drastically with any situation which may arise. Emhirst himself, with full backing, has got rid of 600 Communista, or suspected Communists, in the Air Force. 5. Elmhirst is worrled about refusals to allow members of the Indian Forces to attend courses over here. Whenever he tries, he is always told that there is ToP Secret material which could not be 92. disclosed, and that the presence of the Indians woulld be embarrassing. He wondered whether there was any possibility of getting over thig difficulty. The Ds. of I. took the view that, in view of the lack of security in India and the possibility of leakage to the Russians, there waB nothing at the moment which coulld be done. If India remained within the Commonwealth, it might have a certain bearing, but it Would not necessarily imply that their security was any better than it is now. Elmhirat rathe took the view that the Forces were secure, but he seemed to base this largely on the fact that camps and aerodromes were surrounded with barbed wire. He did not seem to have considered the reliability of the various members of the Forces who would have to handle our Top Secret equipment and documents. D.N.I. pointed out to him that unless there was an efficient 8ecurity Service in the country, which ELmhirst admitted did not exist, free exchange between us and India would be impossible. I mentiloned to the D.N.I. afterwards the awkward situation created here by the presence of Krishna MENON as Indian High Commissioner. If Indian officers were over here doing courses, they would be to Some extent under the control of Krishna MENON'S office. MENON himself is in fairly close touch with the. leaders of the Communist movement in this country. I discussed wiith Archer, of the C.R.0.; our representation in Ceylon. He agreed that it should not really present any difficulty. He said he would telegraph to the High Comnmissionery recommending the appointment on the lines of a draft which E left with him. We would await the High Commissioner'e reply before taking any further action. Archer gave me a copy of Rugby's foreword to our paper on the effects of Eire neutrality during the war. I told him that we were embodying certain notes and appendices in our original report Which we woulld let him have. I gathered that Rugby had approved our draft, although he thought perhaps we were being a little too kind to the Irish! jueistxkxxDxexxgeex 6th May. Alan Roger has returned from H ong Kong on leave. Things on the whole seem to be going fairly well. It is satisfactory to dote that the Police have asked him to deall with their H.O.Ws. I think they feel that this work can be better and more securely done by the D.S.0. Difficulties have arisen in this connection over Dalley intercepting mail addressed to Hong Kong and ripping it open in the crudest fashion. Not only does he defeat his on ends, but he compromises addresses in which the D.S.0. is interested and to which correspondence is coming from other parte of the world. This matter is being taken up with S.I.F.E. 93 Mitchell gave us an account of his tour. He is emphatically of the opinion that we should establish an office in Saliabury, if for no other reason than to effect a close l1aison wi th South Africa. He met with nothing but good will throughout his visit. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 2011 7th May. Noel Wilde came to see me. He asked me whether I was gping to attend the Hollis Committee. I said that I didn't know. He said that he was particularly anxious that 'black' and 'white' propaganda should be co-ordinated with deception; in fact, he thought that even S.0. activities should be included, since all have a common aim, namely, to bring about a change of nationall policy, and all are supplementary to cach other. ar 8th, May. John Mair looked in. He is st1nn wi.th the Legation in Vienna, but he is trying to get a job of a more long-term character with E.R.P. in Paris. He ie evidently very well thought of and has received firat-rate chits from our Minister, who ha's represented forcibly that he shoulld be made a permanent official of the Foreign Office. The Foreign Office say, however, that the Civil Service Commissioners will not allow any deviation from the rule. Conditions in Vienna have improved in certain ways, but the Russians are, of course, a running sore. Mair has been sitting with them on one or the Commissions. He said that where Molotov might have to operate abroad viithin a charnel about a yard vide, the channel of the Soviet representative in Vienna was about an inch wide. There was no scoe for discussion or argument at all. The Soviet representative had made a bald statement, generally from a typewritten docunen't: the British or the Amerdcans then torpedoed it 100j0, upon Which the Soviet representative read it put again and left the meeting. This was the common form. The Russians are very sensitive - or are instructed to be S0. On one occasion Mair suggested that they were making a mountain out of a molehill: this, when interpreted into Russian is "using a match to set Moscow on firell) Serious umbrage was taken on this remark: it was Considered an insult to the Soviet Union! The Russian delegate solemnly rose and marched out with hiB colleagues, but appeared smiling next day. Nobody feels very saft Vienna, because the Russians are always armed and do not hesitate to shoot, particularly if they happen to be drunk. The Police, of course, are not allowed to carry arms. l0th May. I attended a meeting at the Treasury this morning with the three Advisers (Communists and Fascists in Civil Service) The majority of matters discussed affected their own procedure. These points are:- (a) The Establishment Office should introduce the suspect to the three Advisers. This is necessary in order to ensure that they are dealing with the right man. (b) Before the suapect comes in, a member of the Board will go out and explain to him very broadly what the procedure vill be. This 18 designed to put the suspect at his ease and to create, an far as possible, an atmosphere of the "prisoner's friend. (c) The suspeet is te have a. copy of the charge and of his own 3tatement in reply to refer to. 95. (d) The terns of reference to the three Advisers will be read out in the hope that it may cut out a certain amount of irrelevant discussion. (e) The Boand will be supplied with the man's record of service. The suspect will remain with the stablishment Officer in his department untin his presence is required at the Treasury. This is designed to avoid suspects meeting in the Treasury waiting room. The only matter discussed which really concerns us in this procedure is the suggestior by the three Advisers that we should, be present when they see the Establishment Officer. The latter will then ithdraw and the three Advisera will see our representative alone. There are two things which the Advisers would like to have from Us; (a) A short memorandurn on the I. I.P.C.S., including the extract from "A State Service" which shows the attitude of the National Executive Committee to the purge. (b) Our Views on Gardiner's questionnaire and any additions that we may care to make. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED INDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 2011 96 THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958. Oct 201 llth May. For the Minutes of the D.0. meeting held to-day, see folder hela by D.G. Sec. I attended a meeting of the Hollis Committee, When we discussed the L.0.S. reception plan. The initial aim of this plan is to deter the Russians from increasing the area under their Comnation by exagrerating our pover to make war. The plan has been accepted, but ita implementation is, of course, another matter and needs a good deal of research. General Hollis reported on his visit to Washington. He had, in fact, discovered veny little, except that the Americans were ready and anxious to co-operate. The Admiralty representative of the Planners said that when he vas in Washington the other day he was surprised to find that the U.S.A. Planners put the cover: plan into their reports. to' said that he thought this Would probably be changed, since the equivalent of the Holllis Committee had nOiV been set up in America. Those represented on it were the Services, the State Department, C.I.A. ant the F.B.I. It was agreed that the Hollis Committee should invite a representative ot this Comiittee to come over here and discuss plans. Saunders, the Secretary of L.0.8. 9 eompllained that he had been having durficuiity about "chicken food" He wan told that 97. in future he should address his complaints to the Planners, who would see that he got what he wanted either from Intelligence or Technical departments; 12th May. Roger Hollis and E attended a meeting at the C.R.0. to-day with Sir Gilbert Laithwaite and Mr. Archer, to discuss Domdnion security. I said that I did not wi.sh to go back on the J.I.0.. but that our personal viev was that it would be a mistake to down-grade the "brownit Dominions to Category B. it would be better to keep them in Category A. and aecept the ernbarraesment of wi thhoiding certain information from time to time. If necessary; and if we coulld get American approval, we could Bay that we were not at liberty to pass on information received from them, and even certain of our own information we should not be prepared to pass on in present circumstances. We should, however, do our best to give them eve ything that might have a bearing on Indiats defence. E said that I did not see how there could be any sort of a security guarantee whd which would be worth the paper it was written on for some considerable time. A particular instance was the case of Krishna MENON, the Indian High Commissioner in Londgn,whom we knew to be closely associated with the leaders of the Comunist Party. Any delegations or students attending courses Would be under the High Commisaioner's auspices, and it would be natural for them to tell him what they were doing. I said that e-had been quite frank on this point with Sanjevi, D.I.B., before MENON'S appointment made; and latterly when a suggestion was Itfowward that D.I.B. should have EL liaison officer with us in London, we had told Sandevi that it would be a waste of time because we coulld not communicate information to a member of the High Commissioner'e office. Sanjevi knows all about MENON and perfectly understood our objection. For the time being he had given up any idea of appointing a liaison officer. Sir Gilbert Laithwaite said that similar objections would exist with regard to Pakistan, who just at this moment were showing signs of a flirtation with Moacow. He thought this was probably only a temporary phase. We then discussed the "white" Dominions. Sir Gilbert and Archer were both au fait with the situation Which gave rise to the D.G's visit to Australia. Hollis was able to give them a full account of what had happened and what waa proposed for the future. Archer seemed anxious to get some sort of quick clearance of security issues with the Dominions, which Would enable O.R.O. to send them Top Secret documents with which they were concerned. The present position was extremely embarrassing and the Dominions were constantly 98. complaining that they were never consulted until after the event. We pointed out that there was no foreseeablle date when we could give any sort of guarantee that Dominions security was on sound ground; it depended upon 6D many factors which were quite beyond our control, Firstly, the general state of security- mindeaness in the country. Secondly, the measures which the Government vere prepared to take to purge their Civil Service, and thirdly, to make the purge effective, an experienced Security Service with the necessary records behind it. Some progress had doubitless been made, owing to the recent talks in Australla, and it was hoped that if we were authorised to communicate the full facts, the dangers of the position might be brought home still further. This might cause a general awakening, such as had occurred in Canada after the GOUZENKO case. It vas agreed that nothing should be done until Chifley had sent his reply to the Prime Minister, and Hollis had again visited Australia. It might then be for consideration whether some letter should go from the Prime Minister to "white" Dominion Prime Ministers, explaining to them our present dilemma in passing them Top Secret materiall, and urging them to consider way and means of conforming to our security standards. This would prepare them for discussions when they came here in October. Hollis, itchell and Simkins are worried about the Purge. which seems to be extending itself outside the Prime MTnister' ruling. A case has cropped up of a man in industry, whom the Ministey of Fueltand Powerwwish to take on as a Government servant. He is a Communist D oP a near-Communist. Winnifrith seems to think that the man should be told and have the right of going before the Advisory Board. My feeling is that in a case of this sort arman should juat be left where he is in industry and nothing more should be said. Winnifrith claims that it 1a an illogical sequel to the decision that candidates for the Civill Service Whohaualify in in the examinations should be told, if they are Cotmunists, that they will not be posted to secret work and have the right 0f going before the Advisory Board. Ho1lid and Mitchell seemed to think that this decision was outside the Prime Minister's ruling. Teehnieatlyy T think, it Service wi theut telling him tha his appeintment Pank is ahleey to barred to his sassoeietions. think thet-briigee-and-tle-u,8e-ill-have Bridgee have to consider thie- pointageing Technically I think it 1s. on the other hand it might be argued that it was unfair to allow a man to enter the Civil Service without telling him that his appointment to a higher rank iB liekly to be barred owing to his associations. I think that Bridges and the will have to consider this point again. 99, 13th May. No arrangements have yet been made for the return of TASSOEV to Germany, as it is felt locally that the conditions there are unsatisfactory. Opinion, however, is veering round to Dur original suggestion that he should be handed over to the Russians in Germany. OT allowed to find his way across the frontier. Curnming and I went over to see Maxwell to tell him that the latest Foreign Office suggestion was to notify TASSOEV that he would be sent back to Germany on Tuesday or Wednesday, and to give him the weekend to think things over. Maxwell felt that in the circumstances it would be better to get rid of him as s0on as possible, since he had expressed firm wish to be handed over Do the Soviet authorities. Cumming went or with Maxwell to see Strang. Strang was apparently very much on the spot and entirely saw our difficulties. He evidently thought, as we did, that the only course was to get TASSOEV back as soon as possible, and then issue a statement saying that he had defected Voluntarily but had subsequently changed his mind. Harrison, of our Embassy in MoBcow, came to the J.I.C. to disouss Services representation. He said tha't the present coBt of maintaining the Embassy, which included 10 Attaches, was over E40o,00 a year and rising to E600,000. This waB largely due to the extortionate rates of exchange which the Russians gave to diplomats and the consequent high coBt of living. Attaches were entirly cut off from the Rusaians; there waa no intercourse of any kind, and the Ambassador felt, therefore, that Attaches might be cut down by half. This, hovever, depended upon whether the Ds. of I. thought that they were getting any intelligence of value. D.M.I. said that he was withdrawing his M.A. and intending to leave the post vacant. The Navy wast, I think, prepared to male a reduction. The Air ministry, on the other hand, said that observation during events such the May Day parity was one of the few sources of intelligence concerning the Soviet Air Forces. D.N.I. emphaises the advantage of young officers having some experience of life in Moscow, even thought there vas little business to transaot. With this Harrison agreed. The question was then rased as to whether if We cut down by half we could te the Russians to do the same, It was pointed out that this had already been discussed, with negative results, as we were afraidl that it might end in our having no representation at all, whereas the Russians Would still have the Trade Delegation. In any case, Bevin was reluctant to action cases of thia kind. The suggestion was, however too. made that we should insist that Soviet Attaches were uniform, and restrict them to a twelve Inile limit, which iB imposed upon our own Attaches in Moscow. They do not often get permission to go outside it. Professor Brunt said that he had been considering placing a sctertiric officer under the Commercial Attache, but, in view of what Harrison had said, he did not think the project worth while. There was apparently considerable ifficulty in purchasing technical or scientific publications: these are kept under the counter' and not solld to foreigners. The Planners gave an account of their visit to Washington. The Amnericans are apparently afraid of publicity in regard to a joint short-terr plan; each party, therefore, is putting up its DANI plan but Ours incorporates the American one for Operation "Double-Quick" After the talks on "Double-Quicki, long-term planning was considered. Papers are to be exchanged Dn a Planners level. The Americans have a complex about diaclosing "Double-Quick" to any civilians. We considered, however, that once having incorporated "Double-Quick" in our plans, we are liberty (?) to discuss the matter with those concerned with shipping, eto. S.0. matters were considered. At the moment it is not clear in the U.S. whether S.0. comes under C.I.A. or the military. The Americans were told that if they intended to use the U.K. as a base for atom bomb action, we were entitled to know what they estimated they coulld achieve by such action. Owing to the secrreoy that surrounds the atom bomb in the U.S., neone seems to have considered this matter Veny deeply. We are, therefore, going into this matter on our own and an Inter-Services Comittee under Air Vice Marshal Walmsley 1s now Bitting. J.I.B. are to be kept in the picture. 18th May. Hill told me that he had a slight breakdown over the weekend and without Wakefield and K.G., who was always in the provinces, ne did not feel that he could carry on. In any case, he would be going on leave on the lat June. One of his commitments 1B the arms traffic. He said that he thought it was an important one, as we had already prevented three consignments going to Pakistan and two to. Hyderabad, apart from enquiries about aircraft going to the Middle East. He thyou thought there was a wholle-time task if the arms traffic was going to be done properly. I said that I would look into it and see what could be done, although at the moment we are extremely short of Btaf'f. /01 19th May. I had 9 meeting this morning at the Home Office in Newsam's room. sir Harolld Scott, Baker, and two representatives of the Aliens Branch were present. It twas agreed by all that the Foreign Office proposal to return TASSOEV to the Soviet Embassy at noon to-day was a bad one. It Would be oDen to him to bring an action for wrongful detention. which, although it Would probablly fail, would at the same time create a great deal of undesirable publlicity. Newsam tool the view that if TASSOEV merely wanted a representative of the Soviet Embassy to authorise his departure for the British Zone in Gerrmany his request should be ignored, as all he was doing was to question the bona fides of the British Government. Clearly he thought that we were going to push him out of the aroplane into the Channel! It was agreed by all that the obvious course war to put TASSOEV on to the aeroplane,b by force if necessary, The Police were quite confident that they could handle the matter. We then Walked over in a boay to express these views to Sir Orme Sargent. He called in Halford. Newsam told him of the Home Office conclusions, at the end of which he sat back in his chair and said that the really regrettable aspect of the whole problem was the complete lack of cD-operation that had been received from M.I.5., who had entirely failed to provide adequate accommodation for this man. This frankly +ook my breath awy, the more SO since Malcom Cumming has for the last rtnight been working more or le8s day and night, weekends inclluded, in trying to smooth out the ineptitudes of S.I.S. and the Foreign Office! I was just going to ask Orme Sargent what exactly he meant by flack of co-operation' when Newsam chipped in and said that it was, of course, quit impoasible for M.I.5. to detain people legally in this country without the authority of the Home Secretary, and that he would not in any case countenance it. I then said that whatever view was taken with regard to legality, it waa quite impossible to detain anybody anywhere in the British Isles indefinitely without somebody getting to know about it I did not go further than this, and perhaps it was just as well - I felt SO angry that it would probally have led to a show-dwon and to my saying a good deal more than was perhaps prudent. Orme Sargent agreed to the CDrae proposed. and suggested that it might be better to fly TABSOEV to the British Zone and let him make his way acroas the frontier, rather than to fly him to Gatow, which was surrounded by Soviet territory. I told the D.G. en my return what had happened. I said that I was astonished that anybody in Orme Sargent's position could be S0 ignorant and short-sighted as to think that you could hold a man illegally for an indefinite period in this country Obviously he had a complete mis- conception of the whole position, and particularly that of M.1.5. Through- ut this incident the Foreign Office had been taking unilateral action, pparently quiite oblivious of the fact tha't nobody can be moved in or out of this country or be detained in it without the authority of the Home Secretary. 02 As regards M.I.5. I ha the impresnion that he thouglit that we hed aln kinds of oubliettes a1 over the country and that we were in the habit 01 dropping any unpleasant visitors down unused wellls, in the true Phillips Oppenheim style! The fact is that the Foreign Office live in a kind of word of their own. I suspect Halford of having made mischief and of having misinterpreted my intention dt the orevious meeting at the Foreign office, when I said that in vilem we shculld de well to cut our losses and hand TASSOEV back, since the consequences of keeping him here against his will would in the long run be far worse. Marriott came to tell me that further enquiries made through Professor Flory seetned to indicate that there vould be no har'm in allowing, the Russians to purchase penicillin plant in this country. This, in spite Df the fact that an entirely contrary view had been expressed by the eminent Brofeasor Fildes, who is supposed to be the last vord in B.WI. I went to a cocltail party at the Dorchester given by Win Soott. I met William Hayter there; he had just. returned from leave. I told him that his Chief had been extremely rude to me at the meeting at the Foreign Office today, in suggesting that in the TASSOEV case M.I.5 had been wholly un-cooperative and had falled to provide suitable accommodation. I said that I felt SO taken aback and So angry that I was practically speechless: it seemed to me that he was labouring under a complete misconception of 1.I.5's functions, capabilities and responsibilities. He seemed to think thet we were a mysiterious body, read about only in the novels of Philli] Oppenheim, who dropped individuals down deep wells if they were thought likely to embarrass the Foreign Office. I then explained to Hayter why at the first meeting we had strongly aavised that TASSOEV shoulld be sent back. He agreed with our view and said he did not know why Orme Sargent had taken up the attitued he had, unless it was due to some remark of Malcom Curnming' which had been passed on to him by Aubrey Haliond. The remarlt was that M. had to safeguard its own intersts, but thefonce of it, of course,depends entirely upon the context in which it was made. I cannot see, however, that in any context it could be regarded as unco-operative. ORIGINAL THIS IS COPY 3 (4) OF PUBLIO ACT 1958. Oct 201 RECORDS 20th May. /03 THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENIT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. Oct 201 The Minister of Defence, through General Hol.lis, 1S excentea about a meeting Df the British Soviet Society to-morrow, at Which a Major BROWNING, late Assistant Military Attache in Jugo-Slavia, and a Mn. Stanley FORMAN, the Secretary, late Int. Div. Germany, are to be the speakers. I arranged wit Burt to have the meeting covered and told Holliafs P.A. Captain Beer, that ve knew all about the Society which was Cornmunist controlled, and that ye would arrange for S.B. to cover the meeting. I also took him about BROWNING and FORMAN, who were both knonn to us as Communists. 22nd May. Ve drafted a circular note for the I.I.C. on the subject of D. Notices, as there still seems to be some misapprehension as to how it all works. Suggestions have again been put forward that we should exclude the "Daiiy Workerti. We have pointed ou't that if we did S0 they would be bound to get a copy of the Notice for one of their contact in the bourgeois press, and that they would then think themselves free to publish anything and expose the whole system. the We have made it cllear that/D. Notices system has no legal force behind it; it is no more than a Genteleman'e Agreement. What Is published, however, is always subject to a prosecution if it contravenes the Official Secrets Not. We have drafted a letter for the D.G. to send to Orme Sargent, explaining Du attitude in the TASSOEV case. If he doesn't tender some for of apology I shal think worse of hir than I do now. 2lth May. Galle, who is going as S.I.M.E. representative in Greece, came to see me. He has been doing a nurse in this office tor some weeks. He seems a sensible kind Df person and is a fluent Greuk Speaker. I suggested to him that he might ezoploit Wickham. 4 He said that he knew Wiclcham and that he had found his efficeos helpful. His main work wil be with the Greek Allens Department. Parry, the outgoing D.N.I. gave a lunch for his successor, Aamiral Longley-Cook, who incidentally is a great personal friend of Peter Reid. He was full of praise for Peter, who had apparently been somewhat unlucky, oWing, firstly to his soeedalised and expert knowledge in signals, which had kept him down to Staff jobs, and secondly because when given the latest Cruiser, DIDO, she was immediately laid up oying to the cuts imposed by the Admirailty. Peter was transferred to the CLEOPATRA, which is. comparatively speaking, out of date. It was then found that this was only due to a clerical error and that he might have remained in command of the DIDO. However, Longley-Cook thinks that he is absolutely brilliant and that he will go right to the top. He said that he had got everything. I liked Longley-Cook very much. T had quite a long talk wit the D.N.I. who is taking over the Indan Navy - I think with slightly mixed feelings, although the job will obviously be an interesting one. It will be uphill work as it has never really recovered from the Mutiny. I told D.N.T. as much as L could about the security position, of which he was veny conscious. He is veny anxious to get matters improved. I told him aboutu'ren, with whom he said he would get into touch on arrival in Delhi. I pointed out that as long as Krishna MENON was here, the whole security position would be vitiated. I saw no harm in his telling the Indians, but suggested that he should seek U'ren's advice before putting it across. Burt brought over Major Du PLOOY, who is Head of the C.I.D. and Special Branch in South Afriea. Du Plooy has brought over ten men who are doing a course at the Yard. He is veny anxdous that to of them and himself should spend some time with us. He arranged to set aside three days for talks with officers here, and he has decided to emain on in order to attend counts for East African Police officers on the 28th June, to the 9th July. He seemed very anzious to collaborate Closely with ourselves. 25th May. For Minutes of D.G, Meeting held to-day, see fonder held by D.G Sec. 1o5. At the Appointments Boand tD-day we discussed various ostings overseas -- Southern Rhodesia, West Africa and Ceylon. Certain soundings have been taken. of rang me up about arms traffic. The Foreign Office, having seen certain material, were anxious to know who was handling the matter. T told 101 that we were dealing with t.within limits: that we had two bjectives, (i) to prevent illicit export We had been successful in taking preventive measures in two cases to Pakistan and one to Hyderabad, and that we were watching the Middle East. (ii) Apart fror this We thought that there was some advantage in knoving the way arms vere moving. T reminded tor that we had done this jointly for many years in the rast with quite usefull results. I made it clear, however, that we Were not in a position to cover this matter to out satisfaction, owing to limitations of staff. 26th May The J.I,C. to-day was of unsurpassed dreariness! Hollis has drafted a letter to Winnifrith,o the question of bringing under the P.M's ruling candidates entering the Civil Service for the first time. A particular case in point is a man who was working with some electricity firrn and is wanted by the Ministry of Supply as a permanent civil servant. He is a member of the Comunist Party. It seems absurd that in such a case the man should be told. General Metithews, who is going out as G.0.0. Hong Kong, called. TI Eave him a rough sketeh of the organisation particulary of .I.F.E. and its purpose. He was pleasant and co-operative. 27th May. Colonel Ransome, the new A.D.N.I., is making a tour of the office. He was formerly S.0.I. at Capetown during the wam. He is a nice enough chap, but I did not feel that he was hoisting much in! I am afraid that our expenience of Marines on that score is not a very good one. His predecessor, Phillips. i6 joining Neville, now Major-General commaning Marines, as his Staff officer. As long as neither of them have anything to do with intelligence this may be a1l right. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT BETAINED NDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 ocl 2011 106 28th May. At the J.I.O. to-dny we discussed once more the question of Attaches in Moscow. Pendred said that he had obtained Some extremely useful photographs of the May Day Parade, taken from the top of the Embassy. These were handed round for O11Y inspection. They conveyed nothing to me! He also said that.b by putting of some attachment to the Ambassador wireless set, he had been getting very valuable monitoring reports by Russian intercom. Not only did he wish to keep both his Attaches in Moscow, but he wanted the additional services of an interpreter. 'of mentioned a Stationery Office publication callled "Science in Har", which apparently disclosed GLINT. Mobody seemed to know why this had happened, but enguiries ane being made. Hayter said that the French were being difficult. They are apparntly rervous about the setting up of a Government in Western Germany, which they feel will further antagonise the Russians: they even believe in the possibility of a Russian attack. The J.I.B. were asked to supply certain data, a.which it vas hoped might convince they that there were no moves at present by Russia which Would indicate that they had 2X0 immediate agressive intentions. The Air Ministry are pressing the Foreign office to agree that ex-membens of the Czech seetion of the British Air Coree should be encouraged to come here and rejoin. Gardine 16 to replace Glaadell as Secretary of the J.I.C. I lunches with Ant (Thursdon). He is a little bit foxy about what he is doing. I asked him whether he was still a member of the old firm. He told me that he had in fact been sent over hewe on a special assignment, bit that his main interests now were in agriculture! He said he would quite enjoy it if such an arrangement were made: on the other hand, he did not wish to have any further permanent erployent in intelligence; he thought it was toe fnustrating -- one re-organistion followed on another, things neves IBeameoplip settle down. ORIGINAL DEPARTMENT DOCUMENT RETAINED ACT 1958 Dot RECORDS (4) OF PUBLIC UNDER SECTION Briscoe came to Se me about the Lab. He thinks there ought to be a undenstudy for Hedger, at a salary of about 9800 year, and another asslatant. He thinks that if we offer less, we shall noit get anyone satisfactory, since there must be some 102. compensation for what is virtually a dead end. He will keep his eye open for someone suitable. 31st.May. For Minutes of D.G. Meeting held to-day by D.D.G. see folder held by D.G. Sec. lat June. I went to see the D.M.l. on two matter's. He had made a suggestion at the J.I.0. Which was to be considered by the other Services, that Communist lecturers should not be allowed to talk to the troops, and that anti-Oommunist lecturers should be recruited. T told him that we had, in fact, been vetting for A.B.0.A. for eight years, and that ab regards anti-Comunist speakers we saw certain dangers. Such BDeakers would find it difficult not to be drawn on to the ground State Socialism. which was Dasio to the programes of both the Second and Third International There was practically no difference except in the methods by which the result was to be achieved. If there were anti-Communiat speakers, there might be a demand for anti-conservative speakers. Lastly, if the subject became a matter of discussion between officers and men, it was Dur experience that the men always imew al great deal more about it than the officers. D.M.I waB grateful for the advice, and said he would give it careful consideration. I then talked to him about the Sterhena case at some length. He knew quite a lot about dt and was as shocked as we had been. He agreed that 1t was a lttle short of disastrous, and he fullly realised that a great deal of mud might be thrown at the administration, which would not improve our stock either with the Germans DP the Ruseians. He could not tell me whether all the proceedings were to be held in camera, but he quite understood the point of view of the Defence, that they could not agree to the statement for the Prosecution being made in open Court. and the erosa-examination of the Prosecutio and the Defence being held in camera. He agreed that the best for all would be to hold the whole proceedings in camnera, but he did not know whether this was legally possible. He was quite clear that there waa no prospect of withdrawing the cane at the present stage. I had previously spoken to Hayter, who told me that the whole of the deppsitionss had been carefully studied, by Pakenham, and that they and their implications had been the Subject of a lenghhy discussion between Pakenham and Bevin. It therefore seemed to me (03. that thefe was no point in discussing. the matter further with Bridges, as had been suggested by Dick Butler. T rang him up about this and we agreed, 2nd June. Du Plpoy and two other members of the South African Police are doing a short course here. I talked to them about the organisation and purpose of the office. 3rd June. The D.G telegraphed from Washingtor to say that U.S.C.I.B. would only agree to Chifley being tod the Bourse of the information about the leakage in Australia. He had not considered it advisable even to suggest that Evatt and Dedman should be told. Others could be given the names of the individuals mentioned in the texts of the deciphered telegrama. We were not authorised to say that we had obtained the formation from the Americans, and that our previous reticence had been due to our not having obtained their clearance. We disoussed this telegram and replied to the effect that we did not feel that we could very weil go back to the ustralians unless we coulld disclose the source to both Evatt and Dedman. We pointed out that we had allready passed certain details to Longfield Lioyd and it seemed to us that a return visit wouldconly increase distrust and suspicion unless we could be completely frank. I nad B meeting with Dick, Robertson, Scherr and Kelllar about the Jeviish Intelligence organisation and our responshbilities for investigating its activities. Dick felt that it was more a Middle East matter, but that we should pass on anything that we happened to get here as a by-product. T said that I felt that until we Were more certain about the shape and bjectives of the organisation, we ought to continue enquiries on the present lines, the more So since it was in this country that we were more likely to get informan than in the Middle East, where our sources would ary up with the termination of the Mandate. After a good deal of discussion, it was finally agreed to adopt this course for the time being. MeDonald, formerly one of our officens in the Caribbean, came to say good-bye. He has got a more lucrative job in Unilevers. I had a meeting with Dick, Graham Mitchell and Hoilis about Communists and Fascists in the civil Service. The three advisers feet that a charge can only be prererred if a man is a member of the Communist or Fascist Party, or associated with it. He must be charged under either one or the Other. If he is charged with being a Communist and this cannot be proved bor the satisfaction of the advisers, the case will be dismissed, even. though it may be apparent that he is associated with the Party in such a way as to render him unreliable. Membership of the Party is to date from the 15th March, when the Prime Minister made his statement. This means that we can only charge people in future ssoetetion A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION lith June. 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Met 201 After the J.I.0. to-day, Pendred told me that he Was wortied about being housed in London. I told him that to the best of my knowledge this vas a matter He also told me about one of nis technicall draughtsmen. who had been doing work out of hours for the Editor of the "Aeropllane Spotter" This he had put a stop to. The man had then told him that the Editor had certain photogrophswhich the Americans had taken of Russian aircraft, which he was intending to publish. Pendred thought this most undesirable. I tola him that his only course was to talk to the Editor and try and persuade him not to publish. There is just a possibility that the draughtsman might have supplied these photographs, which are also in poBsesbion of the Air Ministry, and had given this warning in order to cover his own activities. The D.C. haB replied to our telegram, saying that he does not agree that there is no case to EO to the Australians, and that if Hollis does not feel sanguine he is prepared to go himself. He says that he did not know that we had already given information to Longfield Lloya. Hollis says that he told the D.G. about this, both in Malaya and here. The D.G. wants Hollis to go out imeediately. 100 At the Appointmente Board to-day it was agreed that Patterson should be earmarked for the D.8.0. post at Salisbury. Meanwhile, I Would write to the C.R.O. and ask them whether the change of Government was likely to affect our relations with the South African Police. I told 'cr and Travis about the D.G's telegrams from Washington. 5th June. Burt tells me that du Plpoy is rather anxicus about his own position, since he was in a large measure responsible for the enguinies into varicus renegades, who have now come into power with Malan's Government. He haB friends, however, amongst the Nationalists and does not think that he will be dismissd. He does not know about Palmer', whe apparently got office in viev of his relationship with Colonel Villiers. 6th June. 0.0. Lancs came in to pay a friendly visit. llth June. I retunned from a weel'B leave this morning. Winnifrith rang me about a Parliamentary question by Rayner, a Conservative, who suggests that the Government should publish a list of those organisations which Civil Servants would be well-advised not to join. I said that my instinct was that this was a question to be avoided, as it would inevitably leadvit on to dangerous ground. We shou a be called upon to prove that this on that organisation was under Communist control, with al the usual consequences. T said that T had thought the Labour Party proscribed certain organisntione, but that I would make enguiries. I I spoke anterwards to B.l. There is a list of organisations. proscribed in June 1933, Which ig largely out of date. Since then the only orgenisation vihich Labour Party member's have been told Dot to join is the British/soviet Society. I passed this on to Winnifrith and suggested that the questior should be avoided, possibly by some statement to the effect that membership of these organisations was not solely confined to Communists or Faseists and that they often changed their name and policy. It might be added that in any case each case would be treated on its merits and would depend to a large extent.ol what form of activity the Civil Servant took within the organisation and the mind of rgembers with whom he associated. Disk White and Cumming talked to me about a question put by Emrye-Hughes on the subject of Rugby Mansions. I suggested that we should really that TASSOEV was housed there temporarily during his stay here as a refugee, and that Mrs. Wiggins was the housekeeper. I gathered that Shinwellll was not very anxious to answer the question, T therefore spoke to Sir Eric Speed who said that he would look into the matter. I telephoned 'c: to tell him that we had had a telegram from the D.G. saying that U.S.0.1.B. had turned down the preposal that Evatt and Dedman should be informed about the source of the leakage and allso the suggestion that we shoulld explain to the Australians that we had had to get a clearance from the U,S.A. before passing the Information on. He and Hollis were seeing Marshall with the Ambassador, in onder to inform him of the position. Hollis is returning by air as soon as possible, and the D.G. comes back after a visit to Canaad. The visit to Australia is off. This IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT LINDER SECTION (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 2ol1 For Minutes of D.D.G. Meeting see folder in D.D.G Secretary's tray. 112 15th June. Charles tells me that he has heard from Charles Russell that the STEPHENS case has opened quite satisfactorily and that the court are-adopting a fair and impartiel attitude towards the defence. Iris got a job with U.N.0. Marsden looked in. She has in Paris. Maxvell telephoned me and said that Henderson, the Counsel for the Prosecution in the STEPHENS case was over here and that he had Sir Thomas Barnes of the Treasury with him, and that the latter was anxious to get hold of Sir David Petrie as a witness for the prosecution; coulld we say where he coulld be found. I gave them an address to which they have telegraphed. There is apparently a general flap. I gather that the Counsel for the Prosecution is by no means satisfied with the case, though what he thinks he is going to get out of Petrie I cannot imagine. Dick thinks that it may be that he Bees a possibility of the whole case recoiling on the heads of those who have brought it and that it is therefore necessary to get hold of sorneone who will assist in putting a stop somewhere in the chain of things. If, for example, Petrie were to say that the responsibility for Camp 020 was left entirely in STEPHENS' hand it might help the prosecution. This is, of course, what Petrie will not say. He will say that he was down there constantly and that he regaraed himself as responsible to the Home Secretary and D.P.W. I discussed with Alec Kellar and Patterson the curriculum for the East and South African Police officers who attend a course here. T think that we should, if possiblle, avoid giving them a blue-print; that we should not discuss. in detail our technical facilities and such matters as secret ink; that we could tell them that powers of censorship were inherent in the office of Secretary of State, and.tha that these povrers could be applied in special cases by interception of correspondence and telephone con- versations. Burt rang me up to say that he had a Baron van Heeckeren with him from the Dutch Frontier Police and would like to see me as he was concerned with counter espionage. I told Burt that I would try and find out a littlle more about him. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 16th June. (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 Oct 2o1 I attended the J.I.C. At the Appointments Board today it was decided to take on who has a knowleage of Russian. He is a regular navall officer and at present employed in L.C.S. where he has shown considerable promise. We have also talcen on a man callled 113. of the Indian Police whom I did not see. The question of Tolson is in abeyance pending an opinion from George Jenkin. See-envelope-fop-talk 17th June With-Baron-vanHeeekeren I spoke to Helsby the P.M's Secretary about the letter in reply to the P.M. which has come in from chifley, which deals with the Australian leakage case and the measures he is proposing to take. He complains that he has not been given very much to go on and says that enquiries both in the Ministry of Defence and External Affairs have been negative. He then goes on to say that he is satisfied that in So far as C.I.B. and the police are able to detect no Communist is employed in a position where he can have access to top secret information. He says that new. intake is being vetted and that a re-vet of all persons with access to highly confidentiall information is being made. None of these measures of course tas any reality since vetting is no good, unless you have an adequate set of records against which to carry it out. I asked Hellsby if he could stall bis reply until I had had an opportunity of disaussing the letter with C.R.0. who were already in the picture. I think that they might wish to include in the ansver Some proposal about security talks with Dominion Prime Ministers over here in the autumn. Helsby had no objection to this. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED INDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. Oct 2011 There are two awkward questions by Emrys Hughes and Galllagher to the P.M. about the DAG.'s visit to America, and in particular to Mr. Hoover. They want to know the D.G.' position and salary. The D.G. was gazetted as a Director on the staff of the C.I.G.S. and his salary is paid by the War office and could therefore be obtained from the estimates It may therefore be necessary to give it. As regards his position and visit to U.S.A. it does not seem to be necessary to say more than that he is, as stated, a Director in the War Office, and that he was in the U.S. on official business. T.A.R. and Marriott came to talk to me about a ozech case, ZAKPAL, who has been interviewed and his rooms: have been searched. He has made a confession, although he says that all the information he communicated was culled from the newspapers. This we believe to be correct. He passed his reports to one Hampel who is an official in the Anglo-Czech Friendship Bureau and Hampel has passed them to the Military Attache, who is now a defector having resigned his post. I said that Hampel ought to be intervieved, but I agreed that the case was haraly one to bring into court. There was a technical offence under the Official Secrets Act, but we are apt to look rediculous if the Defence say that all the information was in the newspapers. Henderson, late D.s.0. in the Caribbean looked in. He is now managing Bill Stephenson'e hotels in Bermuda. Everybody seems to be in the venture, including Bill Donovan, late of O.S.S. I rang up Archer to tell him about the Chifley letter and the G. visit. I think we ought to have a meetingbe before the P.M. replies to Chifley. This is being arranged for Tuesday. I also told him that We were proposing to go ahead for the appointment of our D.S.0. in salisbury Without waiting for the coments of the British High Commissioner in South Africa about the effeot of the recent elections on the South African police. It is important to know his reactions as one of the principal objects of appointing a D.8.0. in Salisbury is to get closer to the South Africans. I saw curtiss, the Assistant Commissioner of Police in Uganda and gave him a talk about the office. He said that it was extremely valuable for him to know what we were doing, and he entirely agreed with me that although much of what went on in places like Uganda was indigenous there was allways 8 possibility that some foreign power. might start working on local subversive movements, hence the importance of having these movements. well covered. He said that in Uganda things were apt to mnove very quickly. Trouble blev up almost from novhere. If natives heard of strike in one place they immediately thought that they might be missing Something if they did not go out on strike themselves, whether they had any reason for doing so or not. He told me that he was getting an Alliens order which Woulld compel all foreigners to register. He did not know whether Kenya would sueceed in getting one too, but he hoped so. 18th June At the J.I.C. today Hayter confessed to the DS of I that he had expunged two recommendations in a paper which had been discussed by the Deputies and had to go up to the Chiefs of Staff immediately. The paper deal't with the down-grading of India and Pakistan to category B. A.C.S.I. supported by the other directors felt that a principle was involved, namely that any agreed paper should not be altered by any one party without reference to the others. Hayter said that he fully accepted this, but as the causes were plitical and there was no time to refer back, he took the step that he had. A.0.S.I. produced reasons why one of the paras should not have been deleted. These seemed to the meeting to be vallid. It struek me that there was a slight feelling of resentment on the part of the DB of T that Hayter had taken this action, and that they intended to see that their rights were preserved. There vas a long discussion with J.3.8.C. who have to plan an exercise and ane unable to get any facts on which to base it. Both DS of I and the Planners, who were present, felt there were considerable dangers in such an exercise, and that on no account should our own figures be produced. This was agreed, and J.S.S.C. were told to apply for figues, fictitious or otherwise to training branches of the Services. It was also agreed that they would make it cllear to the course that all figures were fictitious. Margot Huggins has returned from Singapore and is taking a holiday until September. I saw Victor Westgarth at t he War office. I felt extremely sorry for him. He has just done 9. months imprisonment on a fraud charge for which he was really not responsible. He had been to the Ministry of Labour who. had told him that they could not find him any employment in a position of trust. I said that I would do what I could personally to get him a job. Mean- while he has jointed up with an ex-prisoner colreaguewho-deals colteague in scrap metal. He did not want to do this, but hads aternative. His mother Ias debts outstanding of about E60. DEPARTMENT UNDER RETAINED SECTION DOCUMENT 21st June. ACT 3 (4) 1958 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS Oct 20l( Dick and Hollis talked to me about the difficurtreswhk we are running into in connection with the purge. It arises from the fact that the three services, the Foreign Office and the Ministry of supply will categorise whole departments as seeret. They are putting forward cases about which we have informed them in the past, but which have never been hotly pursued beeause the individual was not really employed on secret work. These cases will, of course, be turned down by the Board when any further enquiry will be difficult. The alternative is for us to re- investigate all of them and this will take an enonnous amount of time and labour. on top of this the M.0.S. are asking us to vet 20, 000 industrial men in their outstations and say that we shall probably get another 80,000 froin the, Services. At his request I went to see Harold Scott with Howe. Scott has been attending a conference in Paris organised by Boursicault, head of the Surete, which was attended by representative from Belgium, Holland and Luxembourg. The idea was to have a general interchange of Communist information and individual Communists. Scott had received certain documents with photographs and details which we are examining. He wondered whether we should send a periodical report, and possibly a list of prominent Communists, I explained to him all the complications of liaison with the French, their insecurity Apart from this I did not think it was a good idea to send them details of our Communists in the form of a list. Inevitably such a list would be distributed alll round control points and would ultimately leak. This might be extremely embarrassing. Howe agreed. I said that I should like to talk the matter over with M.I.6. and I would let him know the answer. What I shall try and ascertain is yhether the details given to Scott have reached either us thro S.D.E.. This is, on the whole doubtful, owing to the bad relations between S.D.E.C. and the surete. For minutes of-D.D.G. meeting see folder held by D.G. sec. I am arranging for the D.G. to be given the parliamentary questions and answers about himself before he comes ashore in case he ds picked up by the press. This IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED VDEPARIMENI ACT 3(4 OF 1958 E PUBLIC RECORDS Oct It is to be hoped that we are in no way tinveilvedl. Spencer tells me that the War office have sent a tellegram en Ollair to India about one of our girle who is joining U'ren and is referred to as M.I. Staff. This is a gross breach of security on the part of the H.0., and I hope willl have passed unnoticed by the Indian authorities who may become suspicious. Holllis and I saw Briages about the categorising of whole departments as secret. He was extremely sympathetic, but neither be nor Winnifrith think that there is anything to be done at the moment. They thought that the obvious embarrassment that woulld be caused to Ministers would, in the long run, bring about a change. Meanwhile, if our burden, became absolutely intolerable we are to. let Bridges know. 22nd June. At the D.N.I's request I went over to see Admiral Pallliser, late C-in-o East Indies. He asked about the position with regard to D.S.0. Ceylon. I told him that we had had a nuber of difficulties. Forst of all we vrere asked to wait for the new Constitution, then for the Prime Minister' approval of the appointment, and finally the approval of the High Commissioner who was worried about having a D.S.0. on his staff. I said that I thought these difficulties had been finally overcome, and that we were proposing to appoint an officer as soon as we could find someone suitable. He said that he had diseussed the position with Winterborn and on Winterborn's suggestion had said a word to the High Commissio 6r with a vievi to persuading him that there was nothing derogatory or dangerous in having a D.S.0. on his staff. He thought he had been Successful in persuading the High Commissioner about this, but he did see his difficulty as at the moment he only had a stafr of one. If the High Comissioner was still reluotant to have our officer he suggested that he might have the cover of an additio S.0.1. I said that I thought the ma'tter was now clinched and 17 clinched and that it vas only a question of our finding someone suitablle to take over the post. If, however, there were further difficulties we should be very glad to take aavantage of his suggestion if the D.N.I. Could make the necessary administrative arrangements Aamiral Palliser thought it was important that we should get someone out as soon as possible since, in his experience, it as a good thing to clinch an arrangement of this kind before there were any changes in the personnel of the Government. He had a good opinion of the present Prime Minister, although he said that he was not too discreet. He did not think, however, that he was a very good life. orpeeeco This ORIGINAL RETAINED 3(4) OF ThE ACT PUBLIC SECTION 1958 Oct RECORDS 20u Supu, Unogger, late ot the Palestine Police, came to see me about employment. We had it on record in the file that Catling did not think him suitable for employment in the Security Service, but no reasons rrere given. Clogger has been more than 10 years in the Palestine Police and speaks Hebrew. T think he is of Jewish origin. told him that we had nothing here we could offer hiem, but that if I heard of any suitable employment I would let him know. He has quite a pleasant personality and has certainly had considerable experience. 1/8. 23ra one. The D.G. D. has returned from Americs and has seen the P.M. who has replied to Chifley thanking him for his letter and saying he will discuss the matter when Chifley comes to the U.K. The D.C G. had a meeting in the afternoon with Orme sargent and Hayter when it was decided to Bend a cable to Washington requesting the Ambassador to find out whether Marshalll could now give an anser to the proposals made to him by the D.G. and the Ambassador. If the reply was negative it was proposed that Mevin should send a telegram to Marehall pointing out that a complete impasse had now been reached. Either a certain risk had to be taken in informing Evatt and Dedman and giving particulare which would enable the Australlian authroities to carry out investigations or we should have to face the fact that discussions with the Dominions on matters of Imperial defence, and indeed diseussions in which the U.S.A. are bound to be involved, Would have to cease. I attended the J.I.C. Burt carne over to see me. He said that he had learnt from du Plooy, the South African, that the Broederbond and the Ossewa Brandwag vere now recognised bodies in South Africa and that all those in the police who had been associated with these organisa- tions and disinissed by the previous government would now be re-absorbed. He thought that de Plooy was perfectly straight, but he could give no 100% guarantee. He certainly felt that if it was a question of his career he could not be regarded as entirely reliable. He had many friends among the nationalists and should survive. the present regime. Personally, he had confidence in du Plooy. Roger and I sent over th see Archer. We explained to him the Australian situation. Ancher seemed to think that if we got a negative answer from Marshalll we should have to consider breaking faith with he Americans. I said that this would be a very difficult matter as there vene wide issues at stake. I shall, in fact, oppose it strongly if the issue comes up. There seemed to be some hope in the situation due to a move in Washington to dovm-grade the integrated Australians to 'Restrictea'. This would probably be laid at our door, but we should ceny any responsib- ility and say that the Americans clearly fellt the same as we did. This might, in fact, help the Australians to realise that there really was something behind our noprphensons an yegardt leakages in Australia. NDEPARTMENT ORIGINAL DOCUMENT UNDER RETAINED 2lth June ACT 1959 Oct (4) OF THE RECORDS SECTION PUBLIO M.E. and Marriot ether came me about the ease. I told them T had seer Hayter after the J.I.0. mee'ting yesterday when I explained to him the two cases, firstly that of which did not seem to present much difficulty as he had made a voluntary request through his roistress 1/9, to the American Dmbassy to be Eiven right of asylu, and seconaly the case of Hayter had grave doubts about our proceeding with the case and said that in any case he woulld have to consult orme sargent and possibly Bevin. He did not think that either of them would agree. Before doing So he would see Courtenay. This seemes to raise quite serious issues. If it is desired to obtain defeetors here &ix the initial move must be made by someone in official cincles who knovis the potential defeotor fathly intimately and in whom the derector has confidence. This obviously involved certain risks and unless the authorities are prepared to be tough and to say that they know nothing about it they will have to make up their minds thet any form of proveotior on the matter of defection in this country is out of the question, We also discussed the case of It was decided that through Cimperman and his mistreas, should be told that his visa application for the U.S.A. might take Some time, and that means while he might regularise his position in this country by an approach to the Aliens Branch. I subsequently say Maxwell who agreed to being told that he could go to Paice. Meanwhile, we have learnt that MILOZOROV' office is aware of some scandal in connection with and may therefore be on his tracks. It is important therefore that should make a voluntary declaration to the Aliens Branch before we become too deeply involved. There can then be no question of an attempt to suborn him. Brooman White vants to talk to Kirby Green about making an approach to one of the pilots who is taking aircraft to Palestine. I have agreed to his doing this. I saw Sir Harold Soott and Howe again and returned to the the documents which had been handed to the Comnissioner in Paris by Monsieur THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION (4) OF E PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct T explained that was trying to build an empire of his own and that there was hot rivalry between him and the 3.D.2.0. Seott was evidentily in some difficulty. In view of his reception in Paris and the documents Which he was given he did not wish to appear whollly unco-operative; the more SO since this might reaot unfavourably on his rantions in regard to police matter. He proposes therefore to send an interim and noneonuittall reply. lennwhile, he woulld consider the possibility of letting Boursicault know the rough lay-out of the Comnuniat Panty and its associated bodies. He would say that in regard 20. to the movement of couunists enguiries shows that this was confined to a very whose names were more or less household words, that if the Surete hats informeion about other's who were visiting France and Ftheroname he would ascertain what vas know about them there. UNDER SECTION (4) OF THE RECORDS ACT 1958. Oct 2oL This shoulld have the effect of showing that we were speaking with one voice. Dick Butler came to tell Us about the Stephens case. I gather that up to the present everything has gonewal He said that Henderson the Counsel for the Prosecution had rather lost his head owing to the Weakness of his case and seemed to have a bee in his bonnet that he was designed to unearth somne frightful seandal in the Secret Service, hence his Visit to this country when he had plunged about in high circles. At Maxwell's request I went over to see him and Hutson of the Home office on the question of naturalising Communists. I think he ia more or less persuaded tha't the test, as in the case of Civil Servants, should be a loyalty teat and that where we can show that an allen i8 either a member of the Communist Party or associated with the Party in such a may as to cast reasonable doubts on his reliability, a naturalisation certificate should not be granted. We also discussed the question of the naturallisation of Zionists. Maxwell had before him our two letters on this subject. He was reluctant to regard a Jew as ineligible for maturaliaation on the grounds that he vas interested in the establishment of a Jewil State in Palestine. He would not necessarily, therefore, regard a Jew who had given active assistance to illegal mmigration as ineligib He did however raw a distinction between Jews of that type and those who had been definitely a ssociated with terrorist activities. He thought that if we could show that the Revisioniat Party as a matter of policy was giving active assistance to t.errorists there woulld be grounds for excluding members of that Party from British naturalisatio I said that there was considerable evidence that the Revisionists had been supporting Irgun and that I woulld let him have a note on the subj He then referred to evidence in certain cases which seemed to be of a negative kind; one of them was that of a man called PHANDEL who was a associate of BELLA and PONIEMUNSKI. He seemed to him to depend to some extent on what the na ature and frequency of the association was. Was there anything to show that the connection was either social, Political or commercial? I said that it was possible that we might be able to ansver these questions, but that we were serupulously caref not to go fufther than the evidence voulld warrant and that ve coulld probably say no more than we had already. Hutson thought that 1n cases of that kind it might be helpful if they could call upon an 1.1.5. officer to discuss the case with them and go into a certain amount of detail which he quite understood We should not Wish to put on paper. I said that I could Bee no objection to this. haxwell did not feel that he could recommend to the Home Secretary that he shoulld holld up all cases of naturalisation of people with Zionist affiliations until the position in Palestine clarified itself. He hoped that in the acurse of time we should be dealing with a / 2/. frienaly statee If however Israel vent communist or came definitely under the domination of Russia we might have to take a different view. Maxwell then tallced to me about the STEPHENS case: It seemed that in trying to get Petrie for the prosecution Henderson wishes to counter any attempt by the defence to say that the methoas adopted by 020 were fully justifieble and that for the same reasons similar aibious methods employed in Gerinany coulld equally be justified. This is, of course, precisely what the defence are not going to say. Petrie T gather has reluctantly agreed to come if noone else can be found. Maxwell is sending me a letter from Sir Thomas Barnes in which he asks for alternative suggestions. 25th June. At the J.1.o. today I spoke to the D.N.I. about the proposal to employ anti-Comunist speakers in the Navy. I pointed out to him the same objectiona as I had raised with the D.N.I. previously. T also spoke to Fawtry as far as the Air Force wa.s concerned. D.N.I. .said he could not see why the Oonunist party vas not declared illegal. I think T convinced him that provided it did not get out of hand it did provide something of a safety valve. Ve discussed the question of reciprocal treatmen't for Russian and sattelite service attaches. In Russia there is no rail travel without permission. Attaches can travel by car as far as their petrol will take them. They cannot fill up outside Moscow; it is not possible ta get accommodation outside Moscow. It was felt that Attaches should draw such petrol as them could in jerry cans and pile them into the back of the can. I suggested that the only way of getting over the accomodations difficullty woulld be for them to be supplied with caravans! I ve insist on reciprocal treatment here we shall go further than the Russians go in MosCOW and encourage them ta be more troublesome than they are now. The D.N.I. wanted pro rata reduction, but witharew this proposal when he was told that it might lead to a total abolition of Attaches on both sides which would still enable the Pussians to use the Trade Delegation. AS regaras the satellite countries treatment is to be reciprocal, in other words there is to be freedom of movement but no invitation to a demonstration. Hayter told us that Sokolovsky had asked for the surrender of EXCISE on the gounas of misappropriation of funds. We then discussed the question Of Benelux security with a representative of the Planners and with an officer who is discussing military matters with the Beralux countries. He wished to tablle a paper prepared by the Planners which gave the prepared strategic concept. The Committee modified this in certain respects, particularly with regard to the date 1957 and certain statements about atomio warfare. It was stated that the French quite prepared to consider this document and indeed any ot at 36 Whitehall without taking them out of the country. It was however quite clear that these measures vould not ultimately solve the (22 problem as the Benellux countries woulld be forced to plan in detail for possible eventualities. They would then need a date and their instructions would have to go dovn to the lower levels and even, for example, to aircraft factories which in France were thoroughly penetrated by Comunists. The recommendation was made that this questions shoulld be considered carefully in detail. It vas also proposed that the L.O.S. should proceed imnediately with some form of cover plan on the assumption that there Would be a leakage. cumnming came to tell me that two further questions for the S. of 8. for War about Rugby Mansions and Mrs. Wiggins. Some sort of noncomittal answer to being prepared. Maxwell thought it was better to answer the questions than to say that it was not in the public interest, since the latter course might lead to the questions being raised on the adjournment. came in to ask my advice. He had been offered a job as P.R.O. in Dusseldorf at 1,500 a year, and had also had an approach from S.I.S. through some female in that organisation. He did not want to go to Germany and Wished to know whether 8.I.8. were really in the market. I said that frankly I did not know. It was, however, possible that they did require additional staff. I told Stewart Menzies about the case of one who had worked for Geonge Jenkin in Persia during the war and was now employed by a London firm dealing in furs vith the Russians. paid periodical visits to Moscow. Jenkin had given particulars about this man before le left the Punjab, but as far as he knew no approach had ever been made. He thought at least that the man was well worth seeing. He was a Latvian Jew, aturalised British. Jenkin believed him to be honest, but even if it were not thought desirable to give him a brief, it would at least be worth someones whille to have a talk G. said he would certainly look into the matter. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 26th June. OF THE PUBLIO RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 20 I discussed the pamliamentary questt Rugby Mansions with the D.G. He asked me to discuss it with Sir Erid Speed. 28th June. I saw Sir Eric Speed. explainee to him that if truthful answers wexe Even to the question put Down by PIRATIN it really father opened the door to general enguirius about, pnealises and the cfficera employed by DL Department, and if possibleit would be desirablle to say that it was not if the public interest to disouss these matters father. Speed esid that ne thought that the Prime Minister could Give this answer, but he father doubted Lf it could be given by the Secretary of State. We went over to see /Mr. 123. Helsby, the Prime Minicter's R.A. Helsby said that the Frime Minister diia not ke MD. PIATIM and micht We1i be prepared to Give the unavier we desired and would let Speed know in due house Ultinetely the Secretary of State for war was instructed to 8ay that further discussicg on the subject vas not in the publie interes This was give: in the form of a written answer as PIRATTN was not in the Heuse. I gave a talk to the ast African police officers OI the DEfice organisetion, the principles on which ve worled and the appilication of these principles to our activities during the wan, I explained to them that there was mueh which they might feel did no apply to their local conditions, neverthelless I thought it might be helpful to them to lenow the lines on whioh we vorked in case they might come across something which they wouiid now know WES E matter of interest to ourselves. Johnston's assistant ait the Foreign office telephoned He about a libel action being brought about by a Jew named againat the New York Times. This man's name hed been meTitioned as assisting to introduce Russian agents into two shipload of illegl immigrants from Constanza. The Foreign office had passed the report to the New York Times as they thought thet it would make good propagenda in America and cause EL reallisation of the faet that a left wing Jewish State under Russian influence in Palestine might not be altosether a good idea The F.0. getion, as far as I lenow, was taken without reference to anybody. the F.O. ane now anious to give the New York Times chapter and vense in order to help them te defend themselves against the ibel action. For minutes of D.D.G. meeting see folder in D.D.0's Secretary's torny. Te had an Appointments Board meeting today. ATKINSON on liia Return is to go tD 3.1. Thare is some doubt about PATTENSON' appointent to Salisbury owins to the changes of liis piciing ur Another dose of amoebic dysentry. Tis ie a serious blo as ve nov have four poats to Pill, one ir Balisppry Afnioa and oite in Oeylon. ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 29th June. (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 2o0 Monsn, the is Beeretnry to the 1e35 epureil came to see mes le disousaed vaious matters in regard to situation in est Afinden. He WaB most cororerative and is going to do al0 he can or the question of accomodetinn. He iLs quite prepared to ive us coven in his ovn Organisatidon He was particularly complimentary about Kellar'a isit. Ie had zend the repont which he thought vaS excelllent. He said that Kellar had gone domn extremely w7e12 LI. 311 roles. He had a difficullt talk to perfor becanse the Collomial Goverror ays not aIay8 easy 24. casy people. Noell Wilde came to see me and be told me tha't the had a brightmidles in the decention field. He had suggested on acoulesced in 8 proposal that Brian Robertsoh should instruct his staff in the British Zone to look for acconmodation for a division. It was thought that this would get back to the Russians and that they gould be imoressed. Wilde had only heard of this after the event. He saw the D.1.0. who agreed ith him that if such a deception was put into force it hnd better be done properly and a division alerted in this country. Wilde wanted to know what T taught about it. I and that he Would have to look a little bit further than this; if a division is alerted here a large number of people would get to now about it, the American Ambassador would vant to know what WaS happening and there would undoubtedly be questions in the House. It was important to know what answer would be given. Would the Foreign Secretary be prepared to say that in the present state cf the European situation this was a precautionary move? If he did not the alerting of a Division might be thought to have some bearing on the dockers' strike and the recent reimposition of the Emergency Powers Act. I also said that T thought it was necessary to have some clear conception of what such a division was intended tD do 8.&. was the idea that it would be ufficient to prevent the Russians from entering the British Zone or was it to be implied that the division would be used to nun a convoy into Berlin. -What in fact did ive want the Russians to think'? T gather that Colonel Wilde vas gping over to see Brian Robertson and he seidrhe would endeavour to clear these points up. Curry looked in on a friendly visit and told me that his book on the Commundist International was nearing completion. I told hirn it might perhaps be wise to get the book cleared. did not anticipate any difficulty about this as at the present time anything that Would assist the cold war would probably be welcomed. Baker-Cresswell telephoned about the case. He wanted to know whether it was dead. II said that as far as T knew it was dead. The case did however raise certain definite issues which I thought should be thrashed out in the J.I.0. It was abundantly Clear that if we were called upon to provoke defeotion the basic assumptions would have to be accepted in principal; (2) that the peson promoting defection would have to be a Government official known as such to the defector; (2) that this Government official would have to be known and tnusted by the defector. It would further be neeessany that if things vent wrong and questions were asked, the Government would have to make some form of denial that any approach was made. In this particular case they would have to say that wife had completely misundenstood Commander Courtney. The F.0. point is that even if such a denial were made This secretary would not be ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS prepared ACT 1958 Oct 01 125. prepared face the Jrsue 10 via of the recent trouble ohout TASSO.V. Bake'-erensweil aeemned to be satisifed a th this appresch to the question. There is yet another question about TASSOEV and his detention at Hammeramith Police Station. It LS for the Home office to give a reply which should not be difficult. SOth June. I spoke to Hayter after the J.1.0. today about the case of I told him thuit vas ready to defect but wanted to disappear. He would 11ke at beat half-full to be Washed up on the Brighton beacl and for a report to be put round that he had been acen going out in it. This meant that if any questions were asked or a demand was made for him by the Russians on the pounds bliat he had moiseppropriatet Funds, it would be necessary for the Government to say that they had no idea as to his whereabcuta Hayter seemed to dotlt whethe they would be prepared to 2 ive an ansiver of this kind. Sir Richard Pin, 1.0. in Uster came to see me: He told me that the CIVII Service purge hed not been extended te Northern Ireland where in fact: very few civil servants vere members of the Communist Party. On the other huund trade union penetratipn had gone quite a Iong may. He left me a note with details of this. He BEd that there were signs of a certain revival of the T.R.A; three seotiong and 8 hendanarters have been formed but 80 far 1O acts of vddlence have been committed. The Eire Government seern fairily entisfied largely becnuse most of their bad hats have gone up north. The police in Eire apparently take a POOT vie1 of the present Government and do, not think it is likely to last. This is diametrically opposed to other views thnt T have heard but it is 0f course unlikely that one would get any consistent view about anything that happens in Else. I saw Sir Robent Knox about decorotione for the civill Staff in Paleatine. He Bad that as far 88 he lmew there was ro civil liat although there was a lilltany and Air Force list in which Burbiage and HaclettPaine have, we hope, been included He said that 1f we Would Det him hrive the citations 1c vould include them in the 01vil List if there was one, otherwise he would iceeD them for the half-yenrls liat without phejudice to Dur normal appliontions. I saw a representative of the South African Police who wanted a blueprint of the office and a brenkdown of the funotiens of B.IL. and B.2. I told him that this Father embawrassed me as was out practice nos to give such Informatien. This had atood ns in good stead io the part hs the Geimars had never been able to get anything of E picture of DLP onganioation nnd hov it THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED eolked. DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 200 E 26. Worked. Ve aid hot ia Thet give Btich ntormatlon even to 01r owD Denntmente at hora and 1 had mnde this clear to the fficeng bf East Afican Police who wee attending Dur counse. The South Africat oficer sa1d that he thoroughly understood this and had even himself said ns much to Major du Plooy. I aslced him to makce a speciall point of explaining to HTajor du Plony the reasons 8or this and assaring him that it in 1o way implied s1y 1 ick of confidence in himself or his officers, came in to ray good-bye. He appears to hae several irons in the fire including 9.0.8. I had a disoussion with DIcIo and John Marriott about the case, Et was decided that IT should see Professor Bruant and show him the report by Jobn Cimperman vhloh indicates a Considerable lnpwlledge by about scientific matters in Soviet Russia. T thought it was necessary thet we should peit the highest sclentiric baeline before we made any approach. of S.I.S. has said that there was virtually nothing that could tell UB though when challlenged he somewhait modified this view. If Bruin't approves we shall proceed With the case and Met into direct touch. he Anericans have amarentl.y refused THIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMIENT UNDER SECTION lst July (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 2011 The D.G. is to see Orme Sangent nnut tue Sigint Road about the Austalian leakage case. A telegram hos arrived from Washington to 8ay that U.6.0.1.B. nos agree and that we can speak to Evatt and Dedman on the Same lines aE those authpriped for Chifley. This in fact means thut ive can teld Chifley, Evatt and Dedman that the basis of our information abDLit the leakage in Australis is the interception of one telegram from Australia to Moscow and that we can give the names of the Australians involved. The lattar concession might be stre'tehed to the extent of giving the Australians the notes which have been soueered from the original tet, biit these imply infornation received over 8 period of four yeara. This would be inconsistent with the statement that the information wag derived From one toessage. Roger would like authority Snomn Jlashington to say H series of messages. Clearly however U.S.2.1.B. have sid tone messager as they think that this may imply a message found on stolen whereas a series of messages would definitely imply oryptographic breal. The D.G. is inclined to say "nessages" without further refe eace to Vashiington. Hollis points out that if anything were to go wrong in the handling of the detailed information we night well be acclised of a breach of faith with the Americans. I sim inclined to think that if we go back to the Americans at a1l they will loolc into the imnsentions of DuT request and realising its purpose will give us a flat "not. They may say noreover if this ie What you wanted why did not you gay S0 in Washington. It 1ll very awkvard, but I am aure that we must make the sitution alsolutely Clear when alling to the Foreign Office end t.o SICINT. 27. I tried to et on to Professor Brunt and told by hia .A. that he hati wallted Dut until the Ministry of Puel and Pover condescended to give him sufficient petrol to enable him to Carry out his duties. He hed now been vrangling with them and the Ministry of Defence for over to months. Tommie Hanpis rang up to gay that he had heard from GIRBO that FEDRIOO through the pld cover address wan trying to get thto touch with him. FEDERICO and hie ansociateg are apparently still residing at the Same address where they vere visited by GARBO after the waT. They have never been repatri ted to Germany or interrogated. Gpencer came to talk to me about our mhobilisation in the Middle Dast in the event of Double Suici. He shoid hive to supply about a dozen bodies. 2nd Jily Dick tells me that has turned up at Florey's at oxford ind has asked him for his assistance. John Marriott is to go down to Oxford to s9e Florny llrrhed the following off the record at the J.I.O:- 1. A paper had been put forward auggesting some modification of bur policy towards Spain which Would permit the Service Attaches to reenond to tentative amproache for aBsistrnce behe tntde by officials cf the those services in Spain. was argued that if any trouble should anise cn the Onntinent Spanish coroperatid vouid be of considerable value to ani three services and that if something wene not ane Sitin might declare hesseln neutraz in any future conflict that might anise. 'ot that in recent lisdussions which he hse had ith menbes of fire French General Staff they hed expressed enxiety about the Dosibility of Spanish neutrality SS it would virtually cut off any posaible retreat by French forces to North Africa. Hayter took the view that i this paper was endorsed by the Chiefs of Staff he Would feell bound to register his opposition to any move of the kind suggested. He did not think that on the moilitany, naval or air side sufficiently ceovincing case had been put forvand to outveigh (a) the prejudice of the present Government with regerd to Spain, or (b) the harm that a rapprochement with Spain might do to Benelu talks. He emphasised the urnbrage that had been taken by Benelux to the Anerican suggestion that Sbain should participate in E.R.P. He would mDreover advise that the paper should not be shown to MP'. Eevin as it could only have the effect of creating bns blood between hin and the Chiefs of Stafe. The gaper ig going forard to the Chiafa of Staff itt certain manot amendment. 2. 1o teld me that the Spaniorie had cot hold of tha This IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED /Russen VDEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 20l1 128 Rueginn cl adestine wineless. T thitile he meant that they had raer one o2 the tations and obtained the ciphens. rot did not aprentr think it politic or possible to ask them for the information. 3. 'or said that the French had told the Suniande that the Russlans were reading their cipher's. He also said that the Russians nere reading the Frerch ciphers but ve could not tell the Frereh. Lt. It was stated thet as far as coulla be ascertained there were no signs of any contemplated action by Russian orces either in the Bussian zone of Germany or elsewhere. It was pointed out however that the Russians had sufficient troops in their Zone to Start operations although they might not be able to maintain an offensive fo. veny long. 5. The D.H.I. said that the Var Office had given approval for an M.I. laison officer in Jerusalem. Hayter said that there was a British Oonsul in Haifa, but that there was nd representaition in Tel Aviv as it web felt that this might give offence to the Arabs. T speke to Hayter and 'c' and at the D.G.' nequs DBled that a letter of thank both to U.S.C.I.B. and to General Marshall for the co-operative attitude they had displayed in the Australian leakage case in alloving Evatt and Dedman to be brought into the pictunein addition to Chifley. Yesterday the D.0. first attended a meeting of the SIGINT boand and fterwaris one at the Foreign Office with Orme Sargent. The SIGINT board agreed to accept U.S.C.I.B. offer and at the Foreign Office it was decided that Hayter should prepare a note for the P.I. for discussion with Chifley. The P.M. would tell Chifley that certain messages had been intercepted which vere the basis of our information about the Australian leakage and he would also tell him off the recond that the delay in giving him this information was due to the fact that we had to obtain American approval. This latter decision has been taken unilaterally by the Foreign Office and as far as I know without the knowledge of the SIGINT board. It has also been decided that ve shall interpret the American decision to allow us to communicate the names of the individuals concerned as permission to transmit such details from the original messages as will facilitate the conduct of the enguiny in Australia. It was decided not to refer back to U.S.C.I.B. the question a8 to whether ve should say One message from Australia to Moscow but rather a series of messages as it was fet tha't this might cause the Amenicans to close down on the whole project. If we do not say a Iseries of messages" the particilans that te shall be handing over for the purpose of the investigation will not make sense as various ineidents described date from 1944 te 1918 which could clearly not have been obtained from one message. THIS COPY SECTION /EHAM'S Oot 129. At the Appointments Board todey it was decided to ssnd Simpkins to Saljabury, UO conshIt SI.F. about sending to Ceylon and to tell Magan that Vagstaffe would have to go to Test Africa. Meanwhile we would send Busk te the Middle East and suggest the promotion of de Wesselow. It was further decided that we should give no cover name to our new office at Leconfield House, but that we should get Admiral Thompson to notify certain representati of the press and request them to lay off. Burt drew my attention to a report which he had submitted regarding FREUDENHEIM a communist photographer who works for the Association sorenlfic Workers. He says that we might like to know the fact that GURRIN whom we used during the war as a handwriting expert, invariably gives his photographic work to FREUDENHEIM. This matter probably has no immediate significance. If we ever have occasion to use GUPRIN again we should certainly bear it in mind. Group Captain Stapleton of the Ministry of Defence rang up to say that he had instructions to prepare two memoranda for the Prime Minister in connection vith discussions that he would be having with Chifley, one on Commonwealth defence policy and the other on security. He already had a copy of our interim note on Empire security which we had sent to General Hollis. General Hollis would however like to discuss the form of the memorandum on security with the D.G. I gathered that General Hollis intended to make an appointment for this purpose. I told Stapleton who was evidently aware of the purport of the D.G's recent visit to the Uni ted States, that basic to any suggestions which the Australian Government might be prepared to take to put their house in order was we organised Security Service with the necessary records behind it. Such a Service did not exist at the moment and with the best will in the world could not be really effeotive for a couple of years even if the work was started must set tomorrow. an efficient If the P.M. Security were to Service tell the he Australians woulld probably that give they serious offence up and little was likely to result. The first thing was to convince the Australians that they really have something to worry about. ThiB, I hoped, was now going to be done. THIs A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION ACT 1958 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS Oct 2011 130. Meet liide in. He is off to Aerica and Sanders Bring sont to See 1E1-9I Rebetsor ir. Gemmany. Drow is to hecompany Vilne. John Marriott has arrived baei: fYo: Cxford. Everything has gone extremel, vell. is not it the le88t apprehensive. he has thought everything out very carefully. He dues not think that his netarn to Russia #ill have any effect on the fate of his family either onO way or the other, but is certain that he himself would ie h1qidsten.. He intouds to reiait in his deprrtient and Clear up all his affaire so that there can be no accusation of misappropfiation of funds. He says that nobody here can question his visits anywhere as he is master in his own house and would not brook interference ron anyone except the Am'bessadoz'. He has a great eal tell us and a.wil11ng to co-operate to the full. T met last night at dinner Generl John Marriott cormanding the London District, and a man called TEROSCHENKO(phon) a White Russian who has a Norvegian wife. TERESCHENKO was at one time a direetol of the Kredit Anstalt in Vienna and was there at the time of the Anschiuss. He noi seems to have many big business interests in Vnich he is associated with Harbro's During the war he was apparently in P.IT.E. or S.0.E. and spoke freely of 'C', M.I.5. ete. General Marriott said that on a recent occasion when he met Anthony Eden. the latter had talked bout Captnin Butcherie book. Butchep was Einenhower's T.A. Eden had been surprised to seG that sutcher had taentioned an incident of the capture of certain British document from the body of an officer which had been washed up in Spain and that putcher was apparently unatiare of the significance of this incident which he thought was genuine. Eden thought ut was a great tribute to Eisenhover that he had obvdously never disclosed the true facts to Butcher. He then went on to say that of course this body had been expressly dropped, by the British from an aeroplane over the corst of Spain with faked orders. The reference was of course to plan MINCEMHAT end shovs how indisereet ministers ame when they get out of office.. A lot of them of course are extremely indiacreet when they are in office. This IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN IDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3rd July. 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 20 There are non three notes affecting Australian security being prepared by different departments- (1) a bae by the Foreign Office for the Prime Minister (2) a bpi by Genenol HTollis fo2: the Prime Minister (3) E oicuanr letter for a21 Dominions by C.R.0. 1 discussed this matter vith Arehen of 0.R.0. when /he 131. he rang me up today about the Foreign Office note which he had not yet seen. I said that I thought it might be a good thing if Sir Erie Machtig called a meeting early next week of the Foreign office, the Ministry of Defence and ourselves to CDmondiinate these activities. Archer thought that this was a good idea and intends to speak to Machtig. Mr. Hewison, who hes taken over from Drew in the Cabinet offices, rang me up this morning about a leakage in the News Chronicle of lst July which gives a full account the meeting of the civil Aviatio Committee meeting hela at 4.D.m. on 30th June. There was forecast 61 this ticeting in the Times leader of June 30th and an account of it in Ithe Times of July Brd, The minutea of the meeting were duplicated ate on July sit and were not circulated until July 2nd. Sir Harold iartley and Mr. Whiitney Streight both visited Lord Pakenham on July lst, arew his attention to the leakage and denied reeponsibility. Those present at the meeting were- M2. Dalton:z Mr. Douglae Jay word Addison Mr'. Rees Mlliams, Perliamentary MP. strauss, Minister Under Seoretary to the Colonial of Supply office Lord Pakenham, Minister Mr: Lindgren, Parliamentary Secretary of ivil Aviation to the Ministry of Civil Aviation. Lord Hall, Finst Lora Mr. Bottorley, Secretary for Overseas of the Admiralty. Trade. MP. ae Freitas, Perllementary Secretary to the Air Ministry. MI. Roger Makine., Foreign Office. Mr. Maserdeld, Assistant Secretary to the Ministry of Civil Aviation. Mri F. C. Musgrave, Assistart Secretary to the Ministry Suprly. Mr. A. E. Woodvard-nutt, Hinstry of Supply Mr'. Morlley, factotu" of the Lord Privy Seaats Office. Mr. Drew and Mr. Hewison DIf the Cabinet Secretarlat HT. T. Paris of the Civil Aviation Departmen MT. G. P. Osborne of the Ministry of Education who weis abterding the meeting as part of his training for a secretaria dob at 10 Downing Street. of possible significance is the fact that the News Chronicile drew attention to Dalton's presence and made a suggestion whiich I gather is untrue, that he hes been charged with looking into the affaii's of Civil Aviation. "otolcel 132 5th July. I arranged with Archer for a meeting with the D.G. Hayter, and Group Captain Stapleton of the Ministry of Defence to discuss a brief for the P.M. when he sees Chifley. We have seen Hayter's draft, which is not bad, although it is at least intellectually dishonest. With Hayter's permission a copy is going to C.R.O. Horrocks brought me the citations for Ffoulkes and Mary Lachlan, to which I suggested certain amendments. If there is a special list, these will go in. If not, Sir Robert Knox will keep them and include them in our half-yearly list without prejudice to other submiasions. Hayter telephoned to ask whether we would have any objection to Carey Foster deputising for him on the Deputies' Committee (o. & s), is he were unable to be present. He wanted to do this as the F.O. security had now been placed directly under himself. I said that I would consullt and let him know. For Minutes of D.D.G. meeting held to-day gee folder in D.D.G.Sec.' tray. I discussed with Dick, Horrocks, Harry Allen and F.J. the draft letter to Bridges, drawing attention to the heavy demands on vetting due to the purge (some 500,000 names from the Ministry of supply involving an additional yearly intake of 50,000) and pointing out that these figures represented three years normal work for the vetting section. We pointed out that whollesale vetting of this kind was, broadly speaking, 11kely to defeat its own object. It was agreed that the case should be based on this theme rather than on a complaint that we could not carry out the work. F.J. is making a redraft. 6th July. A request has come through from Sir Thomas Barnes for information about Stephena's knowledge of the German language. The prosecution, for some reason, fear that he may deny knowledge of the language. Oughton confirmed my impression that Stephens put down German in his R. of S. as a language which he know, 133 subject to refresher courses, is in fact confined to tha't of any ordinary schoolboy. He never interrogated inygermannand, although he Seemed to get the gist of certain short replies in German, he never proceeded, to oughton's knowledge, and always employed an interpreter. In any written communication he always used an interpreter. I asked Oughton whether if he, Stephensy heard two Germana conversing in the passage he would know what they said. Oughton replied that he undoubtedly would not. Dick spoke to Sir Tomas Barnes and gave him a reply on the above lines. Hayter has sent over a brief to his Minister for the Debate on the ad ddournment on Thursday wom the TASSOEV case is once more te be discussed. The Statement iB a purelyfactual one. It seemed all right, ith the exception of one point where it is stated that questions in the House by Piratin and others have caused a fallling off in defection. It had been-previously stated that we were pleased to hear from defectors what tas going on behind the Iron Curtain, as information of that kind was hard to come by through normal channels. This seemed to mne a bad idea, as it would only encourage Piratins to pursue any other cases in the same manner. I gather that Hayter intends to make some amendment. D.G. Meeting. The D.G. and Hollis attended the meeting at the C.R.O. when the brief for Chifley was agreed. After Chifley'e visit a letter to alll Domminions is to be considered: it will give our general views on Security, explain measures that we have taken here, and suggest aesecurt conference in the Autumn. Dick Butler came in. He and Eddie Cussen are coaching Dick White for his evidence in the Stephens case. oledd I saw Alan Grogan toedayi yTheorkobaing compiled by the shadow Censorship Committee is realy a bllueprint for the next war and embodies all our experience in the last war. I am certain that it is important that Grogan should see this matter through. It is estimated that the work will be completed by the end of the year. Meanwhile, Grogan is writing a short memorandum on what will be required on censorship lines from this office in the event of mobilisation. While Grogan himself would be willing in such an eventuality to help us get the organisation on it feel, he would not Be anxous 134. to rejoin the staff as our permanent representative in Censorship. Grogan will be seeing Mr. Martin some day next week. He gees no point in Martin reading up all the old censorship files, but he will endavour to obtain for him proofs of the new documents for the purposes of study as they come out. 7th July. I told Hayter that we did not think that Carey Foster would be a particularly good Chairman forhthe Deputies' (0. & S.). He said that he would like te give him a trial, and if it did not work he would make a change. He would try to take the meeting himself as often ab possible, He said that Carey Foster would not be attending the Security Sub-Committee, but another F.O. representative would be sent. At the J.I.C. to-day we considered the paper on Russian intentions, capabilities and aims. The Foreign Office put forward a new draft of Annex I of the paper. The meeting decided that they would like time to consider t is draft, which may possiblly be taken at Friday's meeting. We then proceeded to consider Annex II, when the draft amendments of all Department were accepted. The more important ones relate to the new situation created by the split between Jugo-Slavia and the Cominform. I made a suggestio that a paragraph should be inserted at the end of para. 1 or the beginning of para. 2, roughly on the following lines:- "It must be assumed that sinceevery.Russia nceevery Russian holding a 0 responsible position from the age of fifty downwards has been brought up on Marxian doctrines, to the rigid exclusion of all others, the majority woulld be ready to support their leaders". I thought this was important because there was a tendency to forget that the Soviet regime had been in existence for thirty years, and that most of its us sjbects had been completely isolated from the outside world. There therefore seemed to be little chance of any change of attitude in those who from time to time would be replacing the Soviet leaders. This rather threw a spanner into the works, since it became clear that in assessing Russian capabilities no stock had been taken of the internal position in Russia and the generall stability of the regime. This point is, I gather to be considered at the Drectory 135. meeting on Friday. Either the amendment will be ruled out or it will be allowed to stand at the end of para. 1 of Annex ID, DPa brief summary of the internal political situation woulld be made at the beginning of para. 2. The paper would, I thing, be more balanced if the latter course were adopted. We are considering the final draft of the letter to Bridges on the subject of the purge and its effect on our work. 8th April. Dick White has given his evidence at the Stephens trial. He was worried by the trickiness of the Prosecution. He waB asked whether he believed in punishment as a means of extracting information. He said "No". Cussan then asked him what he understood by "punishment" He replied that dftplapingiagma in soltary confinement he would consider it appropriate. He was also asked whether any war criminals were interned at Bad Nenndorf. He said that he did not know; he might have sadd on the dates given to him that in fact he was no't at G.0.G. at that time. He was generally appalled by the red herringe that were being drawn across the trail, and the attempts - genuine or otherwise - by the Prosecution to misrepresent the facts. 9th April. At the J.1.0. today Sir Charles Peake, our Ambassador in Belgrade, spoke on the recent Cominform crisis. He Baid that the document to study was Tito's eight points in reply to the Cominform manifesto, rather than the manifesto itself. The publicetion of the details contained in Tito's reply seemed to indicate that the breach having occurred, Tito was interested in making it as wide as possible. The Military Attache, who.w also present at the mee'ting, recounted that the day before the publication of Tito's reply he had seen, from the windows of his house which overlooks the Royal Barracks, the Guard in military formation praaticing slogans. In one of them they mnoved their arms like the piston of an engine, shouting 'Exxpress Tito, Express Tito" at an increasing tempo. Peake felt that the worst blunder tha't the Russians had committed was to suggest that the Jugo-Slavs had made no real contribution to the war effort against the Germans. There was no point on which the Jugo-Slavs would have been liable to be more you touchy and it has had the effect of rallying them almost to a man 136. in support of Tito. As to the timing of this particular incident, Peake could give no explanation. It was, however, clear that things had been boiling up for some considerable time. ( It may be that Moscow felt that a show-down was necessary before the Jugo-Slav Communst Party Conference, which might have provided a focal point for the dissemination of Jugo-Slavia's point of view and extended the schism to other countries). Peake thought that there were two main causes of the trouble. Fixstly, a clash of personalities, and secondly a divergence of views on foreign policy. On the personalities side, there was every indication that Tito was becoming more and more a Prima Donna. His photograph had even been displayed alongside that of Stalin at a Communist Youth Congress in Callcutta. It might be that the leading men in Russia under Stalin - Shaanov, Malenkov, Beria, Molotov, etc., - felt that when Stalin went the centre of gravity might pass from Moscow to Belgrade, and that something should therefore be done during Stalin's lifetime to discredit Tito. On matters of foreign policy Moscow and the Jugo-Slavs had for some time failed to see eye to eye. Tito obviously wished to head a Balkan federation, and Dnitrov had already been rebuked for thinking on similar lines. Moscov wished to bargain Jugo-Slavia's interests in Trieste for advantages they hoped to receive elsewhere, while in his assistance to the Greek rebela, Tito had been moved by a desire for a Balkan Federated Macedonia and the power politics of the Eastern Bloc, rather than by international considerations. Peake said that an incident, whichche did not altogether understand at the time, had, in the light of developments become highly significant, In October, 1947, he was at a diplomatic party, when the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs said to him that after careful consideration Manshal Tito had decided that the visit of an important personage should take place. Peake did not know at firat what he was talking about and finally had to ask him to whom he referred. He replied "Montgomery". It now seemed evident that Tito could not stomach the idea of Montgomery going to Moscow and not going to Belgrade. Peake is quite convinced that even if Stalin were to descend from the clouds in a white robe and say: "What is all this ridiculous sugbble about?", or even if there some approach from Tito's side, (both of which eventualitiles he regards as extremely unlikely), there would be no real degree of confidence between the leaders of the two countries. That. he regards as gone forevers This does not, however, mean that Tito will abandon his present Communist policy, except in so far as he may be forced away from 1t by both internall and external consideration Peake thinks that he will, if anything, intensify his grip on the country if only to show that his brand of Communism is the right one and that the Rusaians are the Right Deviationista. The Military Attache said that the Jugo-Slav Army consisted of They 30 could on mobilisation put about 1,000,000 men into the field. Divisiona, which eretequipped about fifty-fifty with Russian material. /Whole Regiments and 137. Whole Regiments and officers had been trained in Russia; their equip- ment had been paia for in grain and their training in dollars. He did not think that the Russians could lightly afford to dispense with the advantages of having Jugo-Slavia on their side in the event of trouble, but there did not seem to be much possibility of a coup d'etat by the Army, or indeed by any politician. There was nobody of any standing to take Tito's place, and the majority were be- hind him. Tito himself was extremely well guarded; he even had someone to taste all his food and drink. On the economic side, Jugo-Slavia had to some extent been depen- dent on Albania for Dil, up to about 10,000 tons a years There was now some suggestion of her buying from the Anglo-Iranian. Tito has 35,000,000 bold dollars in the U.S.A. His payments to Moscow for servides to the Army, and on the balance of trade, have been roughly 35,000,000 dinars a month. Recently the Russians had insisted on this money being paid in dollars and there had been a transference of golld through Berne in April last. Tito appears to have a complete contempt for Albania; which is dependent economigally on Jugo-Slavia for about 56/ of its imports. The present policy of H.M.G. is one of detachment and academie interest only. Thinga are to be allowed to develop in a perfectily normal way and no overtures are to be made. Any demand for inclusion in E.R.P. will be turned down. It is felt, however, that there may come a time when Tito will find it difficult to remain aloof from both the Eastern and Western Blocs. 2. A note on the aesirability of collecting as much information thare may be about deception by the Russians was discussed. I asked what in fact Johnnie Bevan had told Stalin then he went to Moscow before D. Day I gather that he had left a copy of Plan "Bodyguard" and that discussions had taken pllace with Molotov, Vishinsky and Dekanosov. Two military officers had also taken part and they were now repectively D.M.I. and D.D.M.I. There seems, however, to be Bome doubt as tohow far the Russians comprehended our plans and methods. It was felt that they were somewhat disinterested on account of the fact that their offensive was so successful that deception hardily seemed necessary. They promised to do various things to assist our plan, hut there is no evidence to show that they did anything. L.C.S. are going to produce a paper on what they think the Russians know. I said that as far as our experiences went there were one or two cases, like the KLATT case, but it was very difficult to draw inferences which would be likely to be of any value. 3. Gerald Templer is going to Washingtor to see General Wedermeier. It has been suggested to him that he should urge Wedermerer to come out into the open with the Australiane about theif Security. I gathered that at the moment no Top Secret information on long-range rockets is going to Australia. (38. L. EXCISE is to come out into the open. This has how been approved by the Foreign Secretary. The Canadians and Americans are to be informed. I lunched with D.B. He told me that he was thoroughly satisfied in his relations with Malcom Cumming. He told me that, at the request of Todd, the Mil1bary Adviser of the shadow Censorship committee, he was Beeing a man callled Kenneth WESTMAN, who ia the London representative of some political news sheet published in Bnnssels. WESTMAN says that he 18 in touch with ta foreign group in London who are interested in anti-Comuhism". WESTMAN had written this subject up for them. The group apparently had a source which went right into the Kremlin. This is, of course, one that we have heard before. T should doubt whether the source got further than Whitechapell The matter is, however, of some interest, since Rickthorn, M.P., has asked Ronnie Howe more or le8B the same question. The D.G. saw the PM., but missed Chimey, whom he is to see on Monday. He cross-questioned the P.M. aB to what he had said, and the P.M. was definite that he had told Chiefly about the Amnerican Connection; the origin of the information and the undesirability of communicating any details by wire to Australia. I had a meeting to disouss the question of arms traffic with D.C.; D.B. and S.L.B. We agreed that it was desirable to get the War Office to appoint someone in M.I who would collate information relating to traffic in arms to foreign countries. I think it might be preferable if we got M.1.6 to send us a copy of anything they send to the War Office. We could thencomment direct to the War Office and I16 1f we had anything to say, U.I.B. feel that they are only concerned with the industrial mobilisation aspect of this problem. It would be of interest to them to know tha't Skoda were manufacturing certain quantities of a particular type of armament, but they would not be interested in knowing that a certain quantity of surplus stocks had gone from this country, br elsewhere, to some country in the Middle East; that woulld be a War Office matter. I will speak to the D.M.I about appointing someone from his department to deal with arms traffic. 134 I had a long talk with Bill Crean, of Canadian External Affairs. He said that although the R.C.M.P. were now represented on the J.I.C. and were generally coming more into the political and intelligence picture, the GOUZENKO case had shown the need for someone with the necessary political background in the Cabinet Secretariat to give guidance when such cases arose, and to obtain the necessary authority for action. An appointment of this kind was in contemplation and he thought that it would be extremely useful if this officer could pay us a visit and be versed in the general background of Dur work, both on the subversive side and on the counter-espionage side. He was careful to point out that any such appointment would be with the full agreement of the Commissioner of the R.C.M.P. and that there would be no question of this officer acting as an independent channel. I said that I could see no objection to this proposal, subject to the D.G's agreement. Crean ha'B had conversations with Saffery about the security of Canadian Embassies, Legations and Consulates abroad. He is not satisfied about leaving these matters in the hands of Gambier-Parry's representaives in our Embassies, and would much prefer to deal with Saffery direct, so that whenever his officers visit an area they can look after Canadian affairs in the same way as they look after those of the Foreign Office. His only difficulty is in the matter of communication He would like to be able to telegraph to Saffery through our channels if this were acceptable. I said that I would look into this, but prima facie I could see no ohjection. His wires Would come through the R.C.M.P. in the form of "Following for Cumring for transmission to Saffery" Crean has visited R.5 and said that he would very much appreciate the opportunity of having a look at our R.I.S. research section before he returns to Canada. I gather that he will be here for another month. Burt rang up to say that Winston had sent along a Swede, who was very knowledgeable about what was going on behind the Iron Curtain. Burt wondered whether we woulld like to send someone along. I spoke to Dick, who thought it better that we should have a Special Branch reort and then consider later whether we wanted any further cinterro- gation. lOth July. Michaelis has telephoned to Tess to say that the French police- presumably at the request of Mme. NEY - wished to know what had happened to her 160,000 francs. Tess said that there waa no doubt that they had the money in the office, and that Michaelis used some of it for current expenses in connection with sending NABEL back to Gerany. If the law in France is the same as it is here, Mme. NEY 40. would be entitled to her 160,000 franch, unless it could be proved that she had got it from German sources. It seems extremely doubtful whetherthis coulld ever be proved, as she resolutely refused to say anything. This A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED DEPARTMENT UNDER DER SECTION THE PUBLIC RECORDS 12th July. ACT 1958. Oct 20M Dick rang me this morning to say that Bill Donovan, who was ovef here on ordinary business, was anxious to talk with people interested in combatting Communist activities. I gathered that Bill Donovan is a possible Republican candidate for C.I.A. told me that he was inclined to be a little critical of the F.B.I.; he thought that they wene not going quite far enough. I said that I thought it was undesirable for us to see him, since if it got back to the F.B.I the old feud would be renewed. Apart from this, there was always the danger that he might malce use of the information in some form of publicity. I suggested to that 'C' should put him on to the Conservative Central Office - Hopkinson or Clarke. 'o' could easily do this through Anthony Eden. Dick, TAR, Marriott and I had a discussion about liaison with the French. The Benellux security machinery is working, but there has been a suggestion for a War Room. We all feel that this would serve no very useful purpose in the present state of distrhst, and that it would be far better to continue on our present lines with periodical meetings with all those concerned in security matters, plus visits such as that made recently by Marriott and TAR to Verneuil. This brought us to a general discussion about our position vis a vis S.I.S. and the moratorium. Dick, TAR,a and M.E. have reached the conclusion that there is a positive waste of effort in having a section in consisting of some 25 bodies dealing with the R.I.S., and also a section here, and are anxious to discuss a proposal that we might put an officer over in S.I.s. and close down our section. Personally I think this is wrong. S.I.S. are,generally speaking, a body which collects information and distributes it to interested departments. To the War Office they supply details about the order of battle. It is, however, for the War Office to collate this information and not S.I.S. It is the D.G. primarily who is charged with counter-espionage and he is responsible for ensuring that British territory is not penetrated by enemy agents. He hes in fact to take certain executive action, or at least to initiate it. He cannot, therefore, by private arrangement offload his responsibilities to S.I.S. It would be far more appropriate, therefore, if the colllation and grading were done here, where ve are much better equipped for the purpose, and that S.I.S. should attach one or two officers in order to extract any information which may assist them in their offensive operations. In other words, the ovenla really starts in the charters and until they are got on to a rationa basis the overlap is bound to continue. I subsequently discussed this matter with Dick and the D.G. It vas agreed that Dicko woulld elicithft Erom S.I.S. at his next meeting their detailed proposals. We would/consider whether we would agree to ther: without prejudice to a discussion when the moratorium question comes up, or whether We would take the matter up now with Briages. For Minutes of D.D.G. Meeting held to-day see folder in D.D.G. Secratary'e tray. 13th July. We waded through Soviet Interests, Capabilities and Intentions at the J.I.C. to-day. I rather threw a spanner into the works by pointing out that we had not said anything aboutth internal situation in Russia and the extent to which the country would be prepared to back its leaders. A compromise was reached by inserting a paragraph to the effeet t at since all those in a position of responsibility, from the age of adownwards, had been brought up on Marxian doctrines, to herexclusion of all others, it was probable that the majority would support their leaders. This long paper has some 450 paragraphs and is nov to be finalised. I had a meeting with D.B., B.1., Oughton and Furnival-Jones, on the subject of Communisits in industry. A paper is being produced shoving exactly what the position is,a and is to be circullated to the M nistry of Supply. We feel that the Government willll have to make up their minds to come out into the open, since M.P.S like Pritt are already feeling round on what they call "the extension of the purge to industryil. The Government will have to make it plain that there is a clause in every seoret contrast which permits the Admiralty the Ministry of Supply to request the exclusion of any named individuals from work on the contrast. This may lend to some demand for an appeal tribunal comparable with that of the three advisers. IT would be impossible for us to accept this position, 15th July. I discussed with Oughton, Bennett, D.B. and Hill the question by Pritt based on the MANLEYcase, and a letter written by MANLEY 14 to the Lord President, in which he complains that officers of M.I.5 have caused his dismissal from the firm of Kestner, The facts are that We have not visited the firm since 1946 and that we have never said anything to the firm about MANLEY. We did, however, write to Special Branch on June lst stating that, according txs our sources, MANLEY was engaged on some new work for the Communist Panty, and asking whether they could enlighten us. They replied on the 28th June, telling us where MANLEY was employed and that he was still active in Communist Party interests. I got Burt over and it seemed clear that the dismissal was due to the visit by an officer of S.B Burt said that from enguiries that he had made, the firm had already decided to get rid of MANTEY before the S.B. officer called upon them. I said that I thought he should so Finform the Lord President. Fonlkes. came in to see me. He appears to have had a frightful time in Haifa. The worst of his troubles arose from a reluctance by the military to recopnise that he belonged to an independent organisation. He was charged with maintaining the unit until the evacuation. It was, therefore, difficult TOP him to explain to anybody, except the Chief of Staff and the G.0.0., vthy heawas there and what he was doing. The result was that from the administrative point of view he was extremely badly served. +Magan has spoken of the extremely valuabiresw COPY that Foulkes did under very trying conditions ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED DERARTMENT LINDER SEOTION (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 20( Peten Hordern came to see me to-day. He has a friend Robin Whityenth, who 1s a son of Geoffrey Whitworth connected with the National Theatre movement. Robin Whitworth has a consolentious objeetion to taking life. During the. war he went to France with the Friends' Ambulance, and lter did service with the R.A.M.0. He appar ntly has a Communist friend, whose name and address he will not give, but who lives somewhere near Loughton, Essex. He told Hordern that he was rather worried by an incident which occurred when he was visiting this friend not long ago. Ther was present another individual, who appeared to be connected with the Post Office. Aftee asking whether Whitworth was the kind of man before whom he could speak with safety, he said that he was nov leaving the area and he could, therefore, no longer give rotection with regard to the telephone. The impliention was thee Bomebody was intereepting the conversations of Whitworth'e friend and that the G.P.O. official had been taking these down but had not included anything which might have been detrimental. This does not, of course, fit in with what we normally do, and there is probably some mistake in the story somewhere. Nevertheles I think it might be a good thing to try and identify Whitworth's Communi friend near Loughton, and also the name of any Post Office telephone operator or mechanio who has recently been transferred from that area. The only other clue to Whitworth'e Communist friend is that he was at one time in Jugo-Savia where he had maintained liaison vdth a Jugo-Slav female doctor. Whether he eventual married her or not I do not know. Hordern cannot get any further particulars out of Whitworth, who now has seruples about giving his friend away. This individual is almost undoubtedly SPROULES, a highly plased scientific offdcer in the firm of Hughes &e Co. who work for the Admiralty. We gave orders three or four daysago for the withdrawal of Wright and Hackett-Pain from Jerusalem to Amman. S.I.S. were worried about Wright, since he had knowledge of and since the Irgun had recently kidnapped four Britishers in Jeusattem ORIGINAL COPY DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION l6th July A0T 195 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS Oct 20( I had meeting with Whitestone, AID.N.I. (Ransome) Hit and F. J. about Communists employed in firms engaged on secret work. The purpose was to dissuade N.I.D. from going forward with a secret contract to Hughes &: Co. until the Government had made up their minds about what they would say to the House if they were challenged. The Admiralty wanted to write to Hughes &: Co. saying that they would place a contraot with them on condition that SPROULES Vas not employed. Hill pointed out that this was dangerous and laid them open to a charge of conspiracy. on the other hand, if they first placed the contrast and then exercised their right in respect of SPROULES, under the special clause, they would be on safer gound. In any case, it seemed undesirable to proceed at the moment until the Government had formulated their policy. His] and I saw Sir Norman Brook to-day, when I showed him a copy of the note on Communists employed on seoret contract, and also discussed with him the general implications of certain questions in the House which seemed to make it inevitable that sooner or later the Government would have to make some atatement with regard to Communists employed on secret contracts. Brook called in Winnifrith. It was agreed that Brook would speak to Sir Harold Parker of the Ministry of Defence and suggest to v44 him that the memorandum should be put up to the Cabinet through the Minister of Defence. We approved a draft brief by Minnifrith to the PaM. giving him the background of Pritth question about MANLEY and the wider issues. The P.M. has been urged to stall. 9th July. F.J. has brought me a further question by Pritt in the case of MANLEY. I went to see Maxwelll, when it was agreed, subject to what the Yard had to say, that t Is question should be taken by the Home Secretary instead of the Minister for War, as the matter concerned the Police and not M.I.5. Hill and I saw Sir Harold Parker and left with him four copies of the note on Communists employed on ecret contraots. He said that before the paper went forward to the Minister, he would have a meeting with Sir Archibald Rowlands and Sir John Lang (P.U.S. Aamiralty) We discussed with him alll the implications of the document, and in particular the possibility of a demand for some sort of tribunal to assess the evidence on which either the Ministry of Supply or the Admiralty might exxercise their contractura right to object to certain individuals being employed on a secret contract. We said that we felt that any sort of procedure similar to that adopted in the case of Civil Servants would be inappropriate and most undesirable. It would, in fact, be almost impossible to put our cases forward as Top Seer t sources Woul.d be involved, and, even if they could be revealed, they would not constitute evidence in the legal sense. Hin maintains, and I think rightly, that any procedure of the kind might well constitute an infringement of the rights of an employer to dismiss his employee. Maxvell, with whom I had previously discussed the matter, felt, in the other hand, that it would be difficult to escape the implication that the man had either been transferred or lost his employment through information supplied from Government sources, and that logically he Would feell that he had been given no opportunity to rebut the evidence against him. As soon as we hear that the paper is going forward to the abinet, the D.C. will like to be informed in order that he can discuss it beforehand with the Prime Minister. T am told that the Shop Stewards of de Havillands' have asked the manageent to dismiss all Communists. This is something anite new and rather refreshiig. It will certainly be a new one if the management feel bound to support the Communists against the Trade Unions. For Minutes of D.D.G. Meeting held to-day see folder in D.D.G. Sec's tray. Baron van Heeckeren called here again on 20.7.48. He left with me the attached note about PABST'S relations with PETRUSKA and wished to apologise for the action of Sternfeld in making iireet approach to a certain MURPHY. He said that the officer was acting right outside hi.s instructions; not only was the approach stupid and indiscreet, since no steps had previously been taken to ascertain anyting about MURPHY, but such an enquiry shoulld not in any circumstances be made by a Dutch officer. An approach should have been made to the British authorities and their assistance requested. Van Heeckeren then went on to tell me that several recent cases had come to his notice of the smuggling of arms. He sadd that cases of revolvers and dum-dum ammunition, consigned as sporting guns, air Guns, and ironmongery; from the Skoda works in Czecho-Slovakia were being sent to Holland via the American zone and the British zone. From Holland they shipped to singapore, South Africa, Ecuador, and other South American countries. He told me that British frontier control had confiscated three loads on the 7th and 8th July. T rather wonder whether we have heard anything about this from S.I.S. or C.0.G. If pevolvers and dur-dum ammunition are being sent to singapore, it is of some importance to know to whom they are consigned and any further details on which S.I.F.E. could initiate action. Van Heeckeren said that since he was here last, four Russian- trained agents had been caught crossing the frontier. One of them Vas a man called FISCHER, formerly a German OIficer. He said that this man's particulars had been checked with ourselves. presumably through M.I.6. and that we had had some sort of a trace. H e thought that these agents were double-agents, although he had not succeeded in getting very much out of them. He had various other stories, which Seemed to me a little bit wild. It is abundantly clear to me that what is required is a trained counter-intelligence officer, who could teach van Heeckeren what is what in these matters and bring about some satisfactory CO-t ordination between his activities and those of C.C.G. We might all benefit from the results. Van Heeckeren said that there mas likely to be a change shortly in the genera set-up of Intellligence in Holland. In future the Department of Justice, the Ministry of the Interior, the War Department, and the Mavy Department are to have a stake in the counter-intelligence organisation, at present under the control of Einthoven and the Prime Minister. Van Heeckeren said that, as a result of his previous visit and of his talks with van Moyland, he had come round to the view that this was highly desirable. 146, Dick, James Robertson, Skardon, and Curnming came to see me about He telephoned to may that he has been peremptoril summoned to the Embassy. He intends to go and says that lf we do not hear from him by midnight he hopes we will do all we can. If he feels that he is in danger, elaborate arrangements have been made for his protection. I said that if the Russians were really suspicious about him they would not let hiim out of the Embassy. If they did allow hiim to go home, I did not think he was likely to be in any danger. T was delighted to hear that Stephens has been acquitted on alll counts. This i's a real triumph for all concerned, not least Dick Butler. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEGTION 21st July. (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Ock I asked Val Boucher at the J.I.0. to-day whether the War Office were making any mobiliaatinn preparations in view of the situation in Berlin. He said that they were considering what stores 'were required and what troops Would be available to g0 overseas if necessary. They were allso having a hasty manual printed on the Russian Army. I had aslced him this because D.D.N.I., Roskill, had told me at the club the night before that he had bust attended a meeting which had lasted from 14 - 7 and at which all Staffs and Administratiy departments had been present. The meeting had been prefaced by a remark from the Chairman in the following terms. "Owing to the European situation the Government may have to make an announcement within the next week to the effect that the events in Berlin might lead to war. It was therefore necessary to consider the War Book and to draft interim emergency instructions." They had considered the question of security. Roskill was hoping that in an emergency M.I.5 would arrest all P.D.Os (potentiall dangerous Communists). T said that we should do nothing of the kind and that the only course would be to deal with them administratively, i.e to get them off the ships. At the Appointments Board I raised the question of our mobillisation plane in the Titht of what I had heard from D.D.N.I and D.D.M.I. when it was agreed that we should form a Working Party and decide who should go overseas and what the expansion of our various sections here Would have to be. So far there has been no communication addressed to officers formerly employed in this department. 147. Hollisi to succeed Harry Alllen as Director C. TAR is unfortunately leaving at the end of Auguat. Mitcheill will take B.1. and Marriott B.2. Kirby-Green is going to West Africa. Stephens is to be offered Ceylon. said that the Ambassador had had a telegram from Marghall, asking whether we would vet British applicants for American quota visas. We are already vetting 30 alien pplicants per day on hebasis of a five day week. British subjects in addition would increase the commitment to something like 100 a day - in other words, a overall addition to our present vetting commitment of 110,000 a year of over 18,000. I t old that the purge was already stretching us to the utmost limit. We had in fact been asked to vet 300,000 industrials- in other words, three years work - with an additional yearly intake of 50,000. I should also have to seek approval from the Home Office. I said that, subject to these two considerations, we were of course anxious to help them in any way we could. 22nd July. I saw Sir Alexander Maxwell and Kenneth Younger this morning at the Home Office about the question which Colorl Wigg has stated he will ask in the House of Comons, s,regarding HAMPL,, on the adjournment. Kenneth Younger considers that it is inadvisable to start a precedent by explaining the reasons for the Home Secretary's action. If the question is put ( it is not certain that it will be, as Collonell Wigg may be unlucky in the ballot for the available time) Kenneth proposes to say, in effect, that the question of aliens residence in this country. is in the discretion of the Secretary of State sho is satisfied on the evidence before hiim that his decision in this case is the right one and that it is not in the interests of this country to disclose the evidence. If necessary, he will add that the Secretary of State is satisfied that HAMPL has not been framed by a member of the Embassy who has resigned as there is independent evidence that arrangements for handing the letters were made by Prague. Sir Aleander Maxwell agreed that it would be best to say as little as possible and not to use bur evidence. He seemed quite satisfied that HAMPL should go and there was no question of the Home Secretary rescinding his decision. ThIs IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER:SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 2o1 14371 PALMek H1I and I saw Sir John Woods about GRAHAM-OAMPBI of the Ministry of Supply; who, according to our inf ormatior had disclosed the findings of the Cabinet Committe about the emaargo on armsto the Middle East to RICKETS. Woods said that his only course would be to hold an enquiry Which would, of course, lead to the dischosur of sources. We both agreed that this was impossible. It was left to us to let him now if we Could find suitable cover for pursuing the matter. T saw Man and asked him about his liaison officer in Singapore who has been withdrawn I said that if S.E.D. could see their way to replacing him we would do our best to supply him with any information which might concern Indo-China, I could not guarantee that there would be a great deal, but I thought that such an appointment would be mutually advantageous. He said that heevould bring the matter to the notice of his own authoritiess I saw Mr. Anderson, Superintendent of the British Somaliland Police, who is doing a short course here. I explained the general structure and purpose of the office. He said that it had been very useful to him to know the ground we covered; that he and others in Somaliland were all apt to get parochially minded He oWknew how he fitten in to the general picture and woulld be on the look out for anything of national or international interest. THIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 21th Juily. OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1968 Oct on Burt came to tell me that at an R.A.F station in the soth a sergeant had been approached by the Jewish Legion for thermite and a limited quantiity of ammunition - 500 rounds, The sergeant had Police. reported Burt the had matter. then sent to his up 0.0. an officer who had to reported interview it to the the sergeant and, with the concurrence of his Commanding Officer, it was arranged that the sergeant should supply the material wanted, and that Burt should cover the meeting. He asked if we would put on appropriate tellephone checks to test the reactions. This I arranged to do. Dick tells me that 3how that formerly emplloyped by the Foreign Office as ublic Relations Officer in Berlin, has admitted that he wasreaponsible or passing to a Russian officer certain information for the guidance of our Press which had been biven by Bevin on the occasion of his Visit some months ago, We had in fact been asked to investigate the leakage at the time. On getting a list of these who had hnadled the infomatio vie found 149 that was included. We had previously warned the Army about but in assing him over to 0.0.G. they had failed to warn the Foreign Office and the atter had not callled for a ne-vet. As a resultt of our representations the Foreign Office, with some reluctance had removed Subsequently he had turned up in Greece, where he had again made contact with the Russians. We had again been instrumental in getting him turned out. It is satisfactory to know positively the warnings Were well justified. This ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED 26th July. ACT (4 OF 1958 THE 2o11 SEOTION Mr. Hann of the R.C.M.P. administratid called to see the D.G. and nysefree He is visiting various offices in London. A telegram has come in from Mallayafrom which it eens that there is a move to create a P.I.C.F.E. which would presumably be run by Dalley. The Commissioner-General does not apparently seem satisfied that the Special Branches will be able to give him the information he required. Kellar will discuss this matter when he gets out to Malaya. We feel that if a distinction can be drawn between political information and security intellligence the politicall information could well be given to the Commissioner General or the District Commissioners and be co-ordinated by Dalley, While the security intelligence should be co-ordinated by S.I.F.E. S. Grey is to become Commissioner of Police for Malaya. Vickery has seen Grafftey-Smith, High Commissioner for Pakistan. Things in India ane extremely sticky. Pakistan have 11OW gone into Kashmir with three Divisions and a rather desultory war is going Dn against Indian troops. Pakistan feel that we have let them down badly. The atmosphere for starting up a liaison is clearly not good. At the Same time Grafftey-Smith thinks that no harm can come from a direet approach by his office to the Pakistan Prime Minister, The D.G. has agreed to this being done. The position between India and Hyderabad is extremely sticky. The Indians are aslcing Nepal for several more Divisions of Ghurkas which they may empiby in Kashmir, thus releasing Indian troops for dealing with Hyderabad. IT they start a war with Hyderabad, the wholle communal (?) issue is likely to flare up again. The only moderating influence at the moment is the arrival in Kashmir of the U.N.O. dellegation. (S0 Burt telephoned to say that his informant had handed over the ammuniti and thermite in Hackney; that the recipient had been followed to an address in Moorgate, which he had entered with a key. We have had few reactions from our own sources. One, however, indicates a training area for the Jewish Legion in North Walles. It may be, therefore, that this material is required solely for training purposes. I have written a minute to the D.G. on the proposals for an amalgamation of our research section on Russian and satellite intelligence organisatione with that of TI pointed out that the present wasteful overlap is really due to the overlap in the definition of our functions, which appears in our charter. One point, as to who should card and Collate 8ll this important matter, is left in the air. We are responsible for the Defence of the Realm against esbionage and sabotage and subversive organis tions, whereas S.I.S. ae shown as being responsible for the activities of foreign Intelligence Serviceslir So far as they affect "other British interests abroad'. This particular phrase has very little meaning and the S.I.S. case for research is mainly based on their interest in protecting their own offensive operations and assessing the value of the information they receive. My view is that the ma jor executive responsibility is with the DG.: and that he must, therefore, card and collate. If he makes any provate arrangements with S.I.S. it will not relieve him of this responsibility if anything goes V wrong. I feel, therefore, that the work should be done here and that S.I.S. should attach such personnel to extract what they want from the records for their own purposes. S.I.S. are pressing the reverse, namely, that we should put our officers into Broadway. As T have so often id.before it probably would be 90,0 solved if both organisation were in the same building working from the same set of records. The D.G called a meeting of the Appointments Board to-day to consider a suggestion that Stephens should go to Ceylon. An account of an interview between Hankinson and MoDonald of S.I.F.E. seemed to indicate that Stephens was not very welll suited for the job. Hankinson van'ts somebody much more of the type of Simkins, who will assist him in writing up his political reports. It was agreed that Stephens woulld rejoin us on the 16th August and that the matter shoulld be reconsidered in September, as Hankinson did not want anyone to arrive before October. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED NDEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS 27th July. ACT 1958, Oct 201 Wilde came to see me about his visit to Washington. He saw Forrestal, who is more or less the king-pin in defence intelligence matters and also Grunthai. There is no doubt that Sl the Americans ane out to collaborate with as in all L.o.S. matters, but at the moment they do not appear to have any organisation comparable to our own. It is proposed that they should attach an officer to L.0.S. in London. As discussion between Drew, who accompanied Wilde, and C.I.A. on the subject of "black" propaganda led to a general freezerup. This discussion took place at the request of hristopher Warner and General Hollis, but it subsequently transpired that Jack Easton, who had already discussed this matter with C.I.A., had sent a telegram whichewasathe cause of the freeze-up. This iB rather reminiscent of the D.G's visit to Washington on the question of Australian Security. One department of the Foreign Office asks you Wo discuss matters with the Americans, while another torpedoes you. We had a preliminary meeting about our mobilisatior plans. We discussed Bbrstthe Ministry of Defence paper on the revison of the War Book. It was clear that quite a number of the items affeoted us and that ve ought to be in on discussion on drafting. As a preliminary step it was arranged that Hill should see Burley, who 1s responsible for the revision of the Home Office War Book. It was felt, too, that we should carefully consider What action vis a vid the Communtsit Party was desirable in the event of an outbreak of war with Russia. While it was clear that this might depend to some extent on the circustances in which a war brolce out, it was felt that something on the following lines would probably be necessary:- (a) The immediate internment of Communis't Party leaders in London and the Provinces: (b) The removal of Communiats from all important vulnerable points. (c) Some plan for conducting raids on Communist Party official or unofficial offices, which woulldr supply us with the necessary evidence from overt sources to convince whatever appeal tribunal is set up. Lastily, Ve discussed our own expansion. It vas agreed that D.E./A. would put up B plan of our requirements both for the extension of our offices at home and abroad and alBo for our oontributon to the Armed Forces proceeding overseas. Having got this plan into shape, we woud then consider as far as possible how the Tacancies could be filled from existing personnel and the lists of exofficers who have been approved for re-ermloyment in time of war. I had a visit from Commander Shepherd of the J.S.M. Washington, who is I.D's representative on the Intelligence Bide. He has been told, purely as a precautionars measizre - I hope a remote one - to review the machinery of Securdty Coordination in far as the security (52 of our shipping in the Western Hemisphere is concerned. During the war this included all the Americas and the Caribbean. The organisation was run by Oonnop Guthrie under B1ll Stephenson, and 1as based, T think, largay on our Consular officers. Connop Guthrie played direet to Swinton's organisation. I told Sheppard that we had no responsibilit for this organisntion, although we did pases through the Home Defence Security Executive, certain details DI1 countermsabotage and the types of infernaib machines used by the Germans. I also made it clear that When the Anenicans came into the War this organisation was gradually liquidated, at any rate in 80 far as the U.S.A. waB concerned. Ve then discussed the Caribbean. I told him why we had packed up DuP organisation and how we operated at the present moment. He Seemed to regret urdepanture, but understood the reasons. He made it clear, however, that in his opinion it would be essential for LS to open up again in that area immediate on the outbreak of war, if not before, since if the Russians could obtain refuelling cases in the Islandn they could do an immense amount of damage. (Incidentall the Ruselans appearit be coneentrating on submarines and have already made consirarable progress in construction, although the Navy doubt their efricienty at zea). Sheppard then told me that he had from time to time received a certain amount of security information from D.N.I. In particular he mentioned certain illegal immigration ships. He wondered whether there would be any advantage in histilehaving a link with him. I said that is-might possibly be useful, although I could not say positively without kowing whether the had been in touch with the Naval Attache. L Baid that I would disouss it with THistle in September and that if, meanwhile, he cared to ring himuppoanhhislretunntto Washington ND harm would be done. Lastiy, Sheppard axpressed some anxiety about the way in which the Admiralty's Civil Adviser took on staff. It seemed to him that they combed the streets of Washington for English or Canadian girls, and that the: tonly precaution was an F.B.I. vet, which was usually nugative. He mentioned a Captain Merrigan in this connection, who must I suppose be the Embasey Security Officer. He did not wish his name to be mentioned in this matter, bit we might perhaps discussi it when I Be Thistle in Washington. I have put all this down as I thought by the time T reached washington I might have forgotten it! 28th July. Hill and I attended a meeting inSin Harold Parker'e room yeaterday with Winndfrith and representatives from the Admiralty and the Ministry of Supply. The whole ground was explored and Sir Harold Parker w1ll be circullating a minute, auggeating that we, the Admiralty and the Ministry of Supply should, after considering the minute, meet agadn in order to clear up certain point, 153 It Was Generally agreed that in the present "purgel atmosphere the Covernment woulld sooner 01 later be forced to say something in he House about the present procedure in regard to secret contracts in induntry, and that there might then be a demand for some appeal tribunal. One sugestior put forward by Winnifrith was that the three advisers should review the case before the Mindatry of Supply or the Admiralty exercised their contractura] right to exclude any particular individual from work on a contract. The Minister would thereaftor accept responsibility, which in faot he does now, although It has not been the normal practice for such cases to be brought personally to his notice. I said that this procedure mightin satisfy the House, as the avowed purpose of setting up the three advisers to deal with the cases of Civil Servante was to satisfy those who felt that it was a principle inherent in British justice that anyone accused should now the nature of the change and have an opportunit, of refuting it. In the procedure surested by Wimnifrith, no such opportunity would be given. Moreover, Winnifrith'e proposal was tantamnount to a vote of no confidence in the Security Service. I think that quite an important principle is involved here, and that a Minister mut be prepared to accept the assessment of the evidence given to him by the Director-General of the Security Service without calling in the opinion of an outside body. Gleadell gave me a memorandum on Communism in the Colonies, prepared by somebody in the Colonal Office,fo discussion between the Colonial Secretary and the Ministersof Defence. It is, I think, a thoroughly bad document and amounts to a aont of general whitewashing of Creech-Jones to his colleagues in the Cabinet. He talks a great deal about progress and colonial development the necesnity for sound Trades Unions and for the development of cultural and welfare activities. He regards all this as the best antidote to Communism. He does not, however, stress sufficiently strongly the necessity for adequate forces of law and order. His policy really is to teach the ooloniall children to 13un1 before the can walk, without giving them any nurses to see that they do not get into mischief! As Grew said to me then E had tea with him to-day, it would be far better if instead of spending &l00, 000 on the creation of a Malayan university, the money wan spent on providing adequate Police Forces. Grey is accepting the job in Malaya. He said that he liked Winterborn but that he lacked a certain experience in our type of work: hemight be too honest for people lile Dalley. I explained to Grey that Winterborn had originally joined us as one of the attached soldiers, but we realised he had nott had experience of our work we hnd, however, talcen steps to build him up with experts frrom the Indian Police. The show had only just begun to get on its feet -/54 and until we were in production and making a useful contribution, winterborn had rather avoided going round paying courtesy visits on Governors. I de not think Gray had quite appreciated the position. He had taken a hearty dislike to Dalley and was quite determined to see hir out. 29th July. W/odr. Balden came to see me. He has just taken over security in the Air Ministry. He is not a very impressive type. but is was a hot day and I think he had had a rather heavy highteout I think he had something of a hangover! John Marriott and I went to the 'Home office to see Kenneth Younger, who is to carny the case of HAMPL on the adjournment to-morrow: Wigg, who is the Parliamentary Private Secretaryt Shinwell, refused to be deterred and is now dragging in the case of a man called who had a false British passport and who had, in fact, gone out from Czech refugee. cireles here with the Dn that question Kenneth will simply say that a man called did get a British passport on the basis of a irthcertificate - more than the he does not know. Wigg is also raising the case of one ARTEN, a 6sech whar he alleges was told by the Foreign Office to clear out. Wigg wants an assurance that this man vill be allowed to return. Kenneth proposes to say that after the assurance he was asked to give in the case of HAMPL, he does not feell able to say more than that the case will be dealt with at the discretion of the Immigration Officer. Nobody seems to know the facts of the case of ARTEN, who is on the committee of the Anglo-Czech Friendship League. It looks a little as if he had a guilty conscience and had cleared out. The case of HAMPL will be fairly easy and, dependent upon the teniper of the House, Kenneth will say that the Home Secretary has a perfect right to deport undesirables and does not propose to give his reasons. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINALDOCUMENT RE DOCUMENT RETAINED NDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 30th July. 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Ocf 201\ I went to see Sir Robert Knox about BRIT, who has been giver a Norvegian decoration. Ve aranged that hre would be described as a tranBlator in the War office. Know raised the question of oun calling oDrselves"Civd Assistants of the War Officell and He says that both these titles are peculiar to our Services and that if anyone got a tip-off they could easily get our names from the Gazette. He thought perhaps it might be more appropriate if we were called "Temportry Civil Administrative Assistants' This is a kind of vague omnibus grade which could cover a multitude of sins. He then told me that, on the recommendation of the Coal Board, a coal miner who was a Communist had been given the B.E.M. The Labour Chief Whip, Whiteley, had taken grave exception to this and had asked that in future such cases should be put forward. Knox wanted to know my views. I said that I could perfectly wel.l see why the Labour Party did not wish the good work done b? this man to be recognised; it might indicate that the Communists in the T.U. Movement were harder workers than the ordinary Trade Unionists and make things difficult for the Labour Party, who were urging their U. supporters to get the Communists out of influential positions. Personally I felt that it might be rather good for this man to receive, the B.E.M. it was. rather like giving a truculent ranlcer a stripe -- the effeet on him of having his services recognised often resulted in his joiningit. the forces of law and order. Knox was inclined to agree with me and T think he is Going to return to the charge with the Chief Ship. I gather that the individual in gueation had incurred the displeasure of the Party in accepting the order. He was equally unpopular with the Right Wingers, who were jealous. The pity is that he cannot receive his decoration from the King, as B.E.Ms do not go to Buckingham Palace. The D.G. has beer over to a meeting at the Home Office, chaired by Newsam, at which two Chief Constables were present. The purpose was to disouss embryo war plans. The .G, was asked to say what he voulld recommend with regard to the Communists. He said that we should want the ringleaders arrested as a first step and that 7e might want extensive raids conducted. He did not mention vulnerable points. There 1s, I gather, to be a Head Policeman for each Region with full powers over other Police Forces. I told the D.G. on. his return about the arrangements that we wene making to prepare the brief for the Home Office on measures we proposed for dealing with the. Communist Party. L also told him that Hill WEB in touch with Burley on al matters aflfectingisthe Defepge Regulations. ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED INDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 OcE 2ou We have heard through S.I.S. of a defeotor trr the erson Df a Russian nurse of the Russian Hospital in Addis Abbaba He name is YORENDEVA. She wanted to marry an Italian called SAVRINO. The Russians locked her up in the hospital, but the managed to essape. she has done a certain amount of work in the Soviet Embasay and may have an interesting story. It is proposed to get her out to Somaliland or to Kenya, 156 Kenneth Younger rang me up about the Debate. He said that on the whole he thinks he get away with it fainly easily. He is still mystified about the case of ARTEN, whom he tells me has apparently gone to Canada. He wonders a little whether S. S.I.S. did know something about it. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RE TAINED DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 201 23rd September. I had a long talk with Dick. Quite a lot has been going on since I have been away. Hollis is still in Australia. but returns on Monday. Harry Allen is away and Charles i.s away. Kellar has taken over S.I.F.E. and the D.G. has been in Salisbury to see about our accommodation. Dick has therefore been carrying the burden of the work here. A good deal has been done to overhaull our war machinery. Notifications have been sent out to ex-members ofathe office, and extension plans have been considered. There have also been conferences with the Home Office and plans formulated for dealing with Communista should war break out with Russia. The question, however, as to whether arrests should be made immediately on the outbreak of war is still in abeyance. The Home Office apparently have doubts. We should, however, be allowed to conduct searches. Dick has completed a memorandum about the joint section with S.I.S. for the study of the Russian Intelligence Service, but a final decision is being held up pending Hollis's return; he has a point of view in connectior with Empire security which he thinks should be very closely tled up, and he is I think a little inclined to agree with me that as the major responsibility for countering activities of the Russian Intelligence Service mus.t rest with the D.G., the organisation should be here and that S.I.S. should second personnel to extract what information they require for their own purposes. M.E. and Martin have prepared a memorandum on the development of R.S.S. in war time. They point out that at present L.S.I.0. are using the military, naval,ai and Foreign office stations for the purpose of interception, and that in war time the Services would undoubtedly request that all L.8.1.0. resources should be directed towards obtaining operational information. C.E. would then become a very poor relation. For this reason they think that we should request the Treasury to allocate funds to set up C.E. monitoring stations and that we Should begin by taking over the mobile units, Which in their spare time carry out certain monitoring tasks. At the D.G's request I am to make an approach to Travis on these lines. I intend to mention the matter to 'o' before doing so. It is, of course, right that we should make this contribution to L.S.I.C., and it is, moreover, desirable as it would give us the right to a seat on the SIGINT Board, which we should have in any case, as une of the principal consumers of L.S.I.0. material. Wing Commander Currant, who is to go as Secretary to J.I.C. Washington, came to see me. I gave him the usual talk about our organisation. 2lth September. T attended the J.I.C. We had quite an interesting talk from our Minister in China, Sir Ralph Stephenson. He said that in assessing the position there were four fundamental points about the Chinese which must be borne in mind. Firstly, there was no patriotism in the ordinary sense of the word; Confucian ethics stressed self-interest and the family. Secondly, sinee 1911, China had been in a continuous state of revolution. With a slow up-surge of an oppressed people, a certain emancipation had taken place after the formation of the Kuomintang, but this had been checked in 1947, when the Kuomintang was purged of its left wing elements. It has been said that Chinese Communism was solely a movement for agrarian reform. This was not the case: it was wholly wrong to 158 assume that Chinese Communist aims were any different from the aims of Communists in other countries. Like Russia, however, their tactics were opportune and whenever they gained control of any city or area, it was their policy to grant concessions to private traders and to prevent looting, etc. In this way they were to some extent leaving a good name behind them, if they were driven out by the central authoritiess Thirdly, fundamentally xenophobia existed in China. While it might be admitted that the foreigner was clever mechanically, he was regarded as vastly inferior from the cultural point of view. The central authorities were constantly playing on this theme. Fourthly, the Communist Parby and the K.M.T. were equally hostile to foreigners, but of the two the K.M.T. was possibly the lesser evil. In spite of the fact that the K.M.T. was strangling private trade through the operations of the Cantrall Trust, which controllled the purchase of raw materials, the Communist Party was still, on the whole, more unpopullar than the K.M.T. While it was possible that the new currenoy might have a certain unifying effect, it was important to remember that nobody, whatever his political beliefs, could effectively govern the wholle of China. The country was too great and too diffuse for a central control. There have been complaints by the Central Government that Hong Kong is being used as a base for Chinese Communist activities. Hond Kong did, however, traditionally provide right of asylum for various political refugees in China, and it was doubtful whether the Central Government would press this point far, unless Communism in Hong Kong became really serious. While it was true to say that as long as we held Hong Kong, relations with China would be difficult, it was equally true that if we gave up the Island, no substantial improvement in those relations could be expected, and there would be many in China who would regret our departure. He thought that we should regard Chinese representations with equanimity. Although the Chinese disliked all foreigners, they disliked us probably less than the Americans. These dislikes, however, did not affect persona] relations with individuals, which were on the whole fairly good. Wibroe came to see me about a notice that he had received asking him to return in the event of an emergency. He said that he was quite ready to come, provided he were given a short time to Bind up his affairs. He is now engaged in supplying plant for the manufacture of heer in various parts of the world. He is acting on behalf of an American group. 159. This IS A COPY IN ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED DEPARTMENT ACT (4) OF 1958. THE PUBLIC RECORDS 20 The Americal are taking the somewhat irritating abtibude that,a we may well be blotted out in the first fev hours, it is better not to go for focal integration, but rather for co-ordination committees. Not much progress, therefore, has been madd. 'c' told me, ,too, that the Americans were making difficulties about bringing the Benelux countries into any such arrangement. 27th September. Kirby-Green is anxious tha some further memorandum should go to Chief Constables, explaining to them our present policy and giving them up-to-date information about the Communist Party. He said that he had been doing his best to explain matters to them, but agreed with Mitchell that many of them were extremely ignorant. The D.G. has cancelled my Monday meeting. In future there is to be a Directors' meeting on Monday afternoon, with the D.G. in the chair, and the D.G's full meeting on Tuesday mornings. He feels that in this way he will be kept more in the picture. H11l and I attended a meeting with Sir Alexander Maxwell, Sir Frank Newsam, and Mr. Dixon at the Home Office to-day, on the subject of Communists employed on secret work in industry. This arose from the fact that I had informed Maxwell about our previous meeting with Sir Harold Parker of the Ministry of Defence. It was realised that the Admiralty and the Ministry of Supply, or the Prime Minister, would have to carry any questions in the House on this matter. At the same time, the Home Office were interested in a general way and would be glad to be represented at any future meeting. Maxwell thought that the whole question of a tribunall was an extremely difficullt one. He evidently felt that there was some sort of moral obligation on the Government to Give a man in industry 160 the same opportunity of defending himself as is given to Civil Servants. At the same ti, he gaw the very great difficulty in making this concession. Newsam, on the other hand, was quite positive that the matter should be regarded as one between employer and employee, and that the individual concened had his redress in bringing an action against his firm for wrongful dismissal if his contrast had been infringed. He thought, however, that, as the man might be dismisse as a resullt of information supplied by the Government, the Ministry concerned should, before exercising their right under the contract, make up their mind whether they were prepared to reimburse the employer for any damages that might be held against him. 28th September. For Minutes of D.G's meeting held to-day, see folder in D.G' Secretary' tray. Colonel T.J. Kendrick, formerly S.I.S. representative in Vienna and during the war employed by C.S.D.I.C., came to see me to-day. He is retiring from S.I.S. and is going on a visit to rellatives in Durban, where his address will be: This IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED INDEPARTMENT UNDER ER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oc 200 161 29th September. At the J.I.C. to-day we discussed again the queation of defecto S.I.S. were in some doubt as to the degree of encouragement that shoulc be given to defection. This has now been more clearly defined. Hayter was against any proposal that the defection of any Russian should be encouraged; he thought that we should stick to the categories laid down. He felt that if we did not exercise discrimination, we should only end in getting the whole business stopped. He pointed out that he had had quite a lot of difficulty in the case of with the Foreign Secretary. This did not imply that he himself thought was a bad case, on the contre he thought, the informatian he had given was of considerable value. I lunched with van Moyland and Goosen, who is head Of the C.I.D. and S.B. of the State Pollice. Goosen makes a very good impression, and I am sure that relations with him voulld be profitable. I discussed with him the question of traffic in arms. He told me that consignments of an entirely new type of revolver, manufactured by Skoda, had been coming through the British and American zones to Rotterdam. consigned as "ironmongery and sporting goods". The Czechs had apparently got an import licence for the U.S., but they had been refused a transit licence for the American and British zones. The Dutch had confiscated the arms., which were in consignments of 3,000, coming in at the rate of two consignments a week. Goosen had no doubt that they were destined for Palestine, or for some country in the Middle East. When they were confiscated, the firm of UDEN, a welll-knovin transport firm in Rotterdam, who represented the Czech transport firm appeared with a letter from some American Government department, saying that the import licence to the U.S. was in order. The Dutch are still refusing to rellease the goods. I told Goosen that we were very interested in matters of this sort, in fact in any information relating to the traffic in arms to whatever destination. Our reason was that shipments of arms were always an indication as to Where trouble might be expected. Goosen took this point and said that he would always be ready to help us, Maxwell came to say goodbye. We are air terribly sorry to see him go. Newsam has taken over. COPY ORIGINAL IDEPARTMENT (4) OF THE DOCUMENT PUBLIC UNDER RECORDS RETAINED SEOTION ACT 1958 Of 2ol/ 30th September. I gave my usual leoture to the I.D.C. to-day. I think it went quite well. I wa's plied with many questions, mainly relating to Russia and the Communist Party, about which they seemed much concerned. Profesor Florey and Lang Browne came to discuss the case of Dr. CHAIN. Dr. CHAIN, who had somewhat improperly entered into a contract with the Trade Delegation (Soviet) to sell them information! about penicillin, has now gone on a years holiday to Italy. Florey hopes to edge him out, but if necessary would like, at some future date, to inform the appropriate authority at Oxford that we could confirm the Professor' information about the disreputable conduct of Dr. Chain. I said that I could see no objection. It was agreed that, if the necessity arose, Florey would again get into touch with us. The Commissioner has had further information from Bourcicault. The latter wants to know whether he can now enter into closer co-operation. The Commissioner would like to know whether the Benellux Security Committee Mow includes the Surete, and whether on that score he can write to Bourcicault The D.G. consulted me about a letter from Lloyd of the Colohial Office concerning Dalley. Malcom MacDonald is coming over here and wishes to discuss the matter further with the D.G. and with Dalley. The D.G. is, rightly, adamant in having Dalley forced upon him. He has asked me to draft a letter to Lloya, stating that he cannot possibly have Dalley; he would not have the confidence of S.I.F.E. nor indeed of many of the authorities in Singapore and Malaya. The D.G. has seen the P.M. and informed him about Australia. Incidentally, we have now been asked to assist in the setting up a Security Service in Australia. The D.G, also told the P.M. that, in our view, immediate action should be taken against the Communists in the event of war, and that it Would be wrong to wait until they committed some over act. The P.M. entirely agreed, and I think, if necessary, will interve with the Home Office. 163 lst October. Research 8O far shows that there are roughly 200 Communists in the Civil Service. A number of these are in positions where they no harm, and we should not, therefore, recommend the Ministry concerned to take any action. In other cases the evidence is not sufficiently strong. There are some fifty cases under investigation and a limited number are ready for action. Holmes. one of the three advisers, iB retiring and a suggestion has been put forward that Bowen, late of the Post Office Union, regarded as 100, reliable by Gardiner, should take his place. Personally, I am doubtful about the advisability of this step, as it creates a precedent for having a Trader Unionisty or at any rate an ex-Trade Unionist. I gather that the proposal has been put forward as a sop to the T.U.0. who only defeated a motion for Trades Unions representation at the hearings by a narrow margin at their conference a few weeks ago. Meanwhile, L.C. White is complaining that Civil Servants are not being given chapter and verse, as was promised by the Prime Minister. This is largely due to Ministries, for some. reason best known to themselves, not putting forward such facts as we are able ogive them. The whole question of unherallded arrivals was raised at the J.I.C. last week. They thought it was a pity that political refugees from behind the Tron curtain shouibd be sent back. I was asked to ascertain the Home office views and procedure. It seems that stowaways who come direct are almost invariably landed if they appear to be bona fide political refugees. If they come via friendly countries they are sent back, since it is felt that they should adopt the normal procedure of obtaining a visa. There has been a serious leakage in Australia. First of all, Fadden, Deputy Leader of the Opposition has quoted an official account of Chifley'e meeting with the Cabinet on the question of Austrlian security. Chifley had previously told the House that there was no cause for anxiety, but in this document it was made clear that, owing to bad security, the Americans were withholding documents. Two copies of the documents which leaked were sent to Mr. Chifley personaly. The other leak is a statement in 188 Melbourne paper that the Australians are going to set up an organisation on similar lines to M.I.5. This follows within a fen days Chifley' decision to do so and to invite an M.I.5 officer to go out and assist. #64 Both these leaks must have been from Chifley'e own office. Embarrassing though these revelations may be, it is possible that they may have a salutary effect, although certainly little proppect of security is l1kely if everything that Chifley know gan go 80 easily either to the Opposition or to the daily Press. 2nd October. Dawson-Shepherd came to see me. He is looking for a dob. Derek Hambllen came to talk to me about a paper by the Planners on our Far Eastern strategy. This papers is apparently to form the basis of discussions in Washington. We feel that there are all sorts of basio assumptions which have very little foundation. The possibility of an invasion, either by Russian or Chinese forces, of South East Asia seems to be left out. I propose to. mention the matter at the J.I.C. Lth October. John Gwyer came to see me about deception in relation to the history of the war, a part of which he is engaged in writing. I said that as far as I renew the ban on global deception 6tinl existed, and that as far as D. Day was concerned it woulld not be possible for anybody to go further than Eisenhower's despatch. He said that the leading historians had been indootrinated as regards ULTRA; and of course had Been minutes of the Chief of Staff and the Cabinet, which made frequent references to deception. IT seemed, therefore, desirable that something should be said to them. I suggested that Noel Willde perhaps might give them a Lecture on what happened, so that they woulld not be searching about for the answer to something they did not understand. Any application for his services shoulla go through General Hollis. I discussed with Cumming, Max Knight, Hill and Dixxon the case of a man calllled HARGREAVES, who had been introduced to Dixon by Bernard NEWMAN. HARGREAVEBe ARGRHAVEBehadicertain documents on counter-intelligence which he had allowed Dixon to examine. One of them contained a secret manual on counter-intelligence, which had partly been written by us, which had been supplied to 21st Army Group. HARGREAVES had also had a lecture from Maxx Knight on the running of agents. He was pressing to write a book, for publication in the U.8.A., and did not seem to be above selling what he had to any intereste party. It was arranged to find out something about HARGREAVES'S military record, since he had claimed that he had these documents with the authority of the Intelligence School,f the purpose of a write-up. We also decided tto ask Bernard NEWMAN to attempt to persuade HARGREAVES to return the documents. and if he refused to do so, to teil him that the matter would have to be reported. We do not want proceedings as it would be undesirable that Jimmny Dixon should appear. Herbert, des Graz, Monitgomery Hyae, gGrogan, Hill, Cumming and Poston came to discuss war censorshipe plans. They wanted us to vet their key personnel, and subsequentiyyall their personnel. They also wanted us to help them with vetting of local personnel in such places as Malta and Trinidad. This is easy where we have a D.S.0., but inTrinidad the matter may be more difficult. We have agreed to do what we can. Censorship will have stations both at Mallta and Trinidad, the latter because they feel that the Russians will attempt to stir up trouble in South America. As in the last war, they will operate with the assistance of the navicert system. At the outset they will, try and cover all communications to and from Scandinavia, Spain, Portugal, Italy, Turkey, Greece, and South America. They willl check by telecommunications They hope that we sha1l have a D.S.0. in Trinidad, to give them the same assistance that they got in the last war. This, of courses is an added reason for our reopening in the Caribbean. For minutes of the D.G meeting held to-day, see file in .G's Bec's cupboard. (Directors) 5th October For minutes of D.G. meeting nei to-day see file in D.G. Sec's cupboard. 166 THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AT 1958 2o11 Saffery has been drawn in to examine certain equipment used by the Germans for microphoning. This equipment is known to be in the hands of the Russians. our testing apparatus Would not disclose that these telephones are doctored;it may be, there- fore, that all our Embassy telephones will have to be checked again. 6th October. We have a telegram in from the Far East about Colonel who is said to be organising ex-Force 136 officers to assist the Karen revolt in Burma. is at present in Calcutta. We are trying to find something out about He is an ex-I.S.L.D. man and we have slight suspicions that he may still be SO employed. The question of C.S.D.I.C. in Singapore has arisen, but Grey is not quite ready for it. We have certain suggestions to make when he is. Dalley has again blotted his copybook by telling neofficer of Security Control in Calcutta that he might expect a Communist revolt in India within a month. This has gone through to D. D.I.B. B. who are rather Wonried and want to know what is behind it. While such a thing is always possible, there is probably nothing behind it except Dalley's imagination. This is a typical example of the kind of irresponsible things that he says. At the J.I.C. to-day I showed the Planners! paper on Far Eastern strategy to Roskil and Hawitrey (Hayter was not present). Neither of them appeared to have seen it. Whille Roskill thought that some quallifications might be necessary in regard to the analogy wiith Japan's southward move during the war, they were both in substantial agreement that the basis assumptions in the paper were open to considerable doubt, 167 and that the whole question should be discussed in the J.1.0. They both made E note of the nuber of the J.I.C. paper and proposed to have its discussion placed on the agenda even at this somewhat late hour. I said that ve had not put this matter forward officially because we felt, finstly, that it was more a matter for the Services, and secondly, that the whole situation was so fluid that it was difficult to provide any firm evidence as to what was likely to happen between now and 1957. The D.G. has had a letter from Hemblys-Scale who has visited Sydney. The situation there in C.I.S. is deplorable, as it is elsewhere. They have four private motor-cans, the numbers of which are all known, and twelve agents, who are equally rell-known. The most that can be got out of the Poet Office is a sight of the exelopes being sene to certain suspect individuals! The local C.I.S. representative was full of complaints. Meanwhile, Chifley is highly incensed at the American hold-up. He has decided to set up a Securit Service, with our assistance, and has said that the "bloody" Americans can have a liaison Officer of their own if they like! THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Ocf 2011 At the J.I.C. to-day Beach reconaissance in Eire was discussed. Apparently the G.0.C. has already entioned the matter to McKenna and received a favourable reply, although McKenna does not reallise the magnitude of the task, he had suggested that the work should be done by one British officer and one Eire citizen. An enormous paraphernalia is, however, required. I said that I thought if McKenna was co-operative it would be better to deal with the question through him rather than to get Rugby to make an approach on a hi.gh political level. I had a talk with at the Club and he told me that he was going out to the Far East for a year to try and build up S.1.3'8 organisation. Donald Prater has been recalled and Ross-Smith, from the Middle East, has taken his place. is to attempt to set up two organisation, one to operate in peace and one in war. He told me that recently he had heard from Billl Stephenson, who in the present situation was desperately anxxiDus to ensure for himself some intelligence role in the event of hostilities. 'C' had so far put him off, but had been asked to approach 'c' before his departure to the Rar East. He wanted to know whether we should object if S.I.S. gave Bill any post in the Caribbean to look after S.I.S. interests. had the same misgivings as I had, namely, that if Bill were given any position, he would immediately set up a huge office. thought, however, that this could be controlled more easily than Security Co-ordination, where Bill was serving BO many masters. I said that while I had no persona feelings against Bill, and in fact liked him, I should be afraid that he would extend his tentacles everywhere. Moreover, who ever went to the Caribbean would obviously have to have Considerable dealings wi.th the U.S.A. and the old trouble with Hoover would start again. Verneuil was dining with Roberts, Le Man and John Marriott. I had a talk with him after dinner. He was extremely friendly and told me several quite interesting stories about his "ecoute" It seems that the Russians are singularly indisereet. Anna Pauker, for example, presumably on behalf of the Cominform, was telling the what the policy of the French Communist Party should be and the names of agitators who were due to arrive. Verneuil could hardly believe such an indiscretion possible, but by observation discovered that the agents did in fact arrive. Money to France appears to be passing through a Swiss bank. There is no doubt thet France is a profitable field for asdertaining Rusrian form, since everything there is far more open than it is here. Verneuil is very anxiqussto get as Close to us as he can. ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 314) OF THE PUBLIO RECORDS The Admiralty ane worried about divergereeso opinior 201\ ACT 10F8 between the J.I.C. and the Chiefs of Staff on the strategic intentions of the Soviet Union. our J.I.C. and J.I.O. Washington appear to agree that by 1957 the Russians may well be in a positior to wage war on a large number of fronts simultaneously:- 169 (i) A campaign against Western Europe, including Italy; (ii) An aerial bombardment against the British Isles; (iii) A campaign to seize control of the Middle East, including the Suez Canal area; Greece and Turkey. (iv) A campaign against China and South Korea; (v) Air and sea operations against Japan and the U.S.A. bases in Alaska and the Pacific. (vi) Smail one-way air attacks against the U.S.A. and Canada; (vii) A sea and air offensive against Anglo-Ameican sea communications; (iii) Subversive activities and salotage against Anglo- American interests in all parts of the world. The Soviet forces for this purpose would be something like 12,300,00 by 1956. They could mobilise 7,300,000 by D + 30, and within a year twelve to fourteen millions. There are, of course, many uhknown quantities in these estimates, both as regards manpower and production, and any estimate of their capabilities is 9 to aolargetextent, crystal-gazing. The main contention of Dun Chiefs of Staff is that in preparing the appreciation, the J.I.C. have not paid sufficient attention to Russian psychology, that experience has shown that the Soviet Union, unless invaded, would limit her strategical bjectives; that Russian possibilities were greatly over-estimated, and that it was doubtful whether 155 Divisions, 1,500 heavy bombers with 20,000 other aircraft in peacetime was within the economic capabilities of the Soviet Union, and lastly, that the Russian command would not be capable of handling several large campaigns at once. 8th october. Colonel Munn of S.I.S. came to see me about giving He a said that normally they lnew nothing about M.1.5, except regular lecture about once a month to S.I.S. students. what they might have seen from time to time in the Press. He felt, therefore, that it was desirable that they should know something of the structure and functions of the office. I arranged for Courtenay to give them a lecture. It may be good policy from our point of view to vary the lecturer fror time to time; it gives junior officers an opportunit Df a collecting their throughte and focusing their attention for brief moment upon what the office is trying to do as a whole. 170 l1th October. For minutes of D.G. meeting held to-day see file in D.G. Secis cupboard. Du, Plooy. has arrived for the Dominions Security Conference. I asked him how he found things on his return to South Africa. He seemed to think they were settling down nicely and that Palmer's position was quite secure. .J. Maunsell rang me up from Oxford. He said that an ex-informant of his in S.I.M.E., by name who is I gather of Jewish extraction, had rung him up from Geneva to say that he had a matter of great importance to communicate could R.J. possibly meet him in Paris. I passed this on to 'c' with the suggestion that might wait on the Consul in Geneva, since R.J. could not possibly go to Paris. 'o' agreed and said that he would S0 inform his representative. I passed this decision on to R.J. who said that he would apeak to at 9 'clock on the telephone. Perfect came to talk to me about his work. He felt that it was impossible for the R.S.L.Os Os to do their work satisfactorily without some motor transport. While they could go down to .0s' conference by train, this did not fulfil any usefulspurpose unless they could afterwards go roung the area and get into touch with Superintendents and Inspectors of Special Branch in their own offices. It was only in this way that they coulld stumulate police action. Personally I am incliined to agree, although I was against giving Perfect and Kirby-Greene each a car to use as and when they liked. I said that I would the matter with the D.G. which I subsequently did at his reetingUs ISThe DUG. agreed that facilities should be given; ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED: IN IDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 20( John Marriott came to see me about the Czech case. Our Minister in Prague is anxious to have details of the case against ZEMAN and ZATRAPALEK, as the Czechs have asked: kedforothe ithdrawal of Gibson, who in fact has already A1I left, and Merton, the Air Attache. The Minister blew up when the Czech who came to see him told him that no grounds had beenp ut forward, and that in fact no grounds existed - it was merely a tit-for-tat policy. It is, I should say, extremely doubtful whether any grounds existed with regard to the Air Attache, unless very indirectly he has been assisting in the escape of Czech defectors. We have Replied that a matter of principle is involved in disclosing information of this kind. Even if we were able to do so in this case, Which I doubt - owing to -the sources of our information and our agent, who is still in position -, there may WE be cases where it woulld be quite impossible to disclose informatio tior we should then invariably be open to the aocusation that because we did not disclose the facts we had none to offer. The only possible action for the Foreign office that I can see is to pick up some perfectly innocent Czech diplomat here, in addition to ZEMAN and ZATRAPALEK, and to say that this man is being expelled, not because we have anything against him, but because the Czech Government, by their action in the case of Merton, have forced us to retaliate. But this, of course, I gather does not appeal to the Foreign Office. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE FUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Ocf 2011 Roger Holllis went over to Paris last week, where he met Evatt.. He talked with him for some hours. Evatt was extremely co-opetative and all in favour of getting security in Australia on a proper footing. He did not appear to know of Chifley's intention to set up a Security Service under his ovin direction. Hollis discreetly did not mention this. 12th October. For Minutes of the D.G. Meeting held to-day, see folder in D.G's sec's cupboard. Kirby Green and Martin came to see me about the operations of the mobile vans. It was agreed that they should inform the Police chiefs that these operations Were likely to occur from time to time, and that they should give specific advance notice to the Area Superintendent concerned.w! when an operation was to be carried out. Giles Isham came to tell me that there was some move in the British zone to allow the Germans to set up an intelligence organisation of their own. They were Co ntending tha the Laender Governmentsam keep themselves informed about the activities of revolutionary parties in their area. Bruce Lockhart is apparently coming over to discuss it. I said tha't once the Germans were allowed to have their own Government, it would be difficult to deny them the right to set up some kind of a service. I reminded Isham that by 1920 they had already set up a service knorn as the Kommisariat fur Offentlliche ordnung, which was in fact dealing ostensibly at any rate, with movements of the Left. It was staffed by Dr. WEISSMANN, who employed ORLOV, late of the Russian Ochrana, a Balt of the name of BARTELS and a dubious individual called STRAUS, who subsequently became German Consull in New York. Later the organisation was clearly concerned in preventing the Allies from detecting infringe- ments of the Versailles Treaty. If the Germans ane now allowed to set up a similar organisation it might be possible to control it to some extent through a British representative in some executive position, but the Germans would undoubtealy keep information from him if they thought 1t expedient to do SO. I felt, however, that there would be little use in denying them the right to have an organisation at all, since it would only lead to their having a clandestine one, 113 Roskill sent Captain Cazalet, who is doing the I.D.C. course, to see me. He nad certain information about a man called COLLET, who is something of a trouble-maker in the Seychellles. He said that Abrahams, the local adviser to the Colonial Office, was anxious to know whether this man was in fact a Communist, but was in some difficulty in making enquiries since COLLET appears to be a friend of Creech-Jones. QOTTET is residing in the U.K. 13th October. We gave 8 cocktail party and lunch for the delegates from the Dominione for the Security Conference. I talked to George McClellan and B1II Crean afterwards. I told Crean that they woulld probably be hearing a good deal which they knew already, but that we veny much valued their support because the other Dominions were far behind Canadian standards. The more, therefore, that they could say about what they doing the better; it would come better from them than from us. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. O 20 174 llth October. I gave a short talk on the organisation and functions of the office to officers from the Ministry of Supply. We are giving them a course here. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. Oct 2011 I had lunch with van Moyland, when he gave me certain information about the arms traffic which he had received from Goosen. One of M'S agents has interested Jimmy SHIELDS in a proposal to obtain an agent in M.1,5. I have said that it might be dangerous to go too far, and that I did not see quite where we were getting. If the agent were established. the name and address would probably have to be given. In any case some information would have to be forthcoming. It Would be difficult to maintain this for long without the situation getting too hot for us to hold, although there might, of course, be suitable opportunities for some form of deception. Monier-Williams of the Board of Trade telephoned to tell me about a Mrs. KAUNITZ, an merican student of 2, Peter Cooper Road, New York City 10, and 9, Walton Place, London, S.W.3. 175 This woman, who was introduced to the Board of Trade by Douglas Jay of the Prime Minister's Staff, states that she is writing a thesis on industrial estates. For this reason she desired to visdt certain of our industrial estates in this country and was given introductions by the Board of Trade. Scottish industrial estates have not told the Board of Trade that they are worried about this woman, because, in her conversation with certain members of the company, she seemste display pro-zionist and pro-Communist views., and because she has asked for copies of estate plans and aerial photographs. She has been told that she cannot have these as hone are in existence. Monier-Williams is trying to find out more about this woman from Douglas Jay. Meanwhile he has asked whether ve can help. After ascertaining whether there any records here, (presumably there is a Home Office fille in connection with her visa application, and possibly registration particulars) we might make some enquiries through the F.B.I. 15th October. At the J.I.0. to-day the question of Russian intentions was discussed. Hayter said that at a meeting with the Dominion Prime Ministers, the Prime Minister of Ceylon had stated that the Russians were making approaches to the singalese Government regarding the purchase of rubber; he woulld like to have some guidance. He was quite ready to turn the Russians down if other suitable arrangements could be made to purchase the stocks. Bevin took the line that it was difficult to impose economic sanctions against a country which had not been declared an agressor. The Prime Minister of New Zeland replied that this was hardly a valid argunent, since should the Security Council decide that Rusaia was an agressor, the U.S.S.R. would always exercise the veto. Wilson of the Board of Trade followed, rather weally, with a statement that under the Trade Agreement Russia was purchasing rubber and other commodities in exchange for grain and other commodities which w required. It was also pointed out that the Russians were obtainingicertail amount of rubber from Madaya. The whole matter was left rather in the air; it is, however, to be reopened because J.I.B. on reliable information they have received; have reached the conclusion that the Russians have procured ascmuch rubber as they need for peacer time purposes, and that there are indication that they vill KayEX henceforth be stock-filing for war purposes. Hayter stated that Malcom MacDonald had made a speech at the last meeting of the Russia ommittee of the Foreign Office. 1761 He had given a fairly optimistic statement about Malaya. He thought the position was now fairly well in hand. As regards Hong Kong, While thereswas no doubt that it was being used as a centre for the dis semination of Communist propaganda in South Chins, it would be unwise to take any drastic aotion until the troops, Which were loaned to Malaya, had been returned to the Isand. He anticipated that if action were taken against Chinese Communists in Hong Kong, there might be disturbanges. 'ot stated that General Nye, who is to be ouP new High Commissioner in India, had taken exception to even an embryo organisation of S.1.S. being set up in India, and had SD informed the Prime Minister. The matter was, hovever, being taken up. 'or was optimiatio about starting up some show in Pakistan vith the connivanoe of D.I.B. Crean and McClellan lunched with me at the Travellers. The D.G. saw Malcom MacDonald, Lloyd, Seale and Paskin at the Colonial Office last night, to discuss the position of DALLEY. Malcom MacDonald put forward a strong case in DALLEY'E favour. He said that he was the only person who had supplied reliablle information, that the Police had taken no action, and that a number of people in official posiitions regarded DAILEY with high esteem. The D.G. said that during his stay in Malaya, Langworthy, the. Commissioner in the Union, had complained to him about the reprimand he had received from Gent that certain activities Were going on on the border about which he seemed to have no information. Langworthy had said that he had received no information from DALLEY and that, having no Special Branch and no funds, he was powerleas to act. The D.G. then reminded the meeting that DALLEY had employed Foulger's C.I.D. in Singapore to carry out aids,without even asking hiB Permission, The D.G. concluded by saying that both for internal reasons and external reasons, he could not posaibly contemplate having DALLEY either as Head of S.I.F.E. or in any subordinate position. Prior to this, Paskin had informed the meeting that DALLEY Would not take a suborainate position - it was Head of S.I.F.E. or nothing. MacDonald was quite undeterred, and the meeting went on for nearly two hours. Finally, the D.G. said that if the (77 Colloniai Office could find DALLEY a post for six months, he would, provided that DALLEY did not blot his corybook, be prepared to consider his name anong others for Head of S.I.F.E. I gather that the D.G. has no intention of employing DALLEY We have had a Russian, his wife and child, named FEDEROVSIY, wished on us from the Middle East. FEDEROVSKY Who is a Major in the Soviet Army, defected from Germany as he wished to marry a Rumanian of Hungarian origin. He posed as a Poiish refugee and was sorted out in a camp in Cyprus. He was apparently told in the Middle East that he would be given a job as a doctor! This not quite SO simple as it sounds! 18th October. For the Minutes of the D.G. meeting held to-day, see file in D.G.Sec's cupboard. Miss Harris came to tell me that a letter had arrived for Tommy from GARBO. He anticipates war and places his services once moremmmreservedly in our hands. He has a plan which he Would like to discuss. I gather that he would begin by an approach to Soviet circles in Venezuela. I have asked Miss Harris to acknowledge the letter and say that Tommy will give it careful consideration on his return early next month. KUH is at his olld game. He is getting information about Benelux affairs, through a Belgian diplomat, and passing it on to the Czechs, from whom he hopes to get a quid pro quo. He later sends the information to America for publication. R.J. Maunsell telephoned to say that he had heard from his contadt, who had arrived in Frankfurt,. He wanted R.J to follow things up here as he would know more about the personalities involved. R.J. will be in town on Wednesday and will look in. .1-78 19th October. Robert Stephens looked in. He has toured the wholle of the West African coast from Dakar to the Belgian Congo. He seems pleased with his new job and said that he met with certain difficultie: owing to Kellar's report having been passed down by one of the Governors to the Police. This is the one thing that Kellar had feared, and he had in fact made a particular point in urging that this should be avoided at all costs when he sent his report to the Colohial Office. However, Stephens seems to think that he has smoothed matters over. He has visited both the French in the area and the Belgians, who ane co- operative THIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED 3 DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION ACT 1958 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS A serious view is taken of this, since negotiations with the Argentinians for the purchase of further stocks of linseed ane pending. About a year or S0 ago the Argentinians, seeing that we were bulk buyers, decided to become bulk sellers, with the result that the Government had to pay an enormous price. The deal, which wal the inevitable result of State trading, was subjected to severe criticism in the House. Firth said that he had seen Sir Percivale Liesching, Permanent Secretary to the Ministry of Food, to whom he had shown the telephone conversation. Liesching is trying to arrange for the removall of PAIN on grounds of age (I believe he is 65) but if he is not successful he would like us to nake enquiries with a view to es tablishing PAINS guilt without involving the source of the information. Such an enquiry would, of course be difficult and delicate. We might put PAINCon a telephone check and obtain some information which would enable us to get the necessary cover, but this is by no means certain. This woulld, however', be subject to the D.G's view as to whether ve should embaok on an enquiry of this kind. We have ceased to conduct anything in the nature of Black Market enguiries, on the Prime Minister's specific instructions. This case, however, 18 of a slightly different nature, since it constitutes leakage of Government information to a foreign power. Vickery and TI saw the D.G. about Almed. The D.G. has agree that e should pans Our information to Ahmed for father distributio 179 to the D.M.I. if he thinks it necessary. He wants, however, the position to be quite clear to Cawthorne and proposes to speak to them both simultaneously. Ahmed says he is not in a position to appoint a liaison officer here, for the simple reason that he has only two intelligence officers apart from himself. He thinks, however, that in about six months time he may have someone available Meanwhile, he does not want us to send anyone to Karachi. The reason is, I think, that he fears criticism that he is allowing the British to establish an intelligence post inPakistan. If he had someone from Pakistan here, he Would be in a better position to counter such accusations. He would like, however to correspond with us through the bag and to have cipher commnioution. For Minutes of D.G. meeting held to-day see file in D.O Seo's cupboard. Des Graz came to consullit me about Hawlins doing a course with Hedger. This was agreed. Curnming and Saffery came to talk to me about a letter the Post Office had had from Sir Orme Sargent, suggesting that in future all security work on Embassy telephore S shoulld be carried by ambier-Parry's minions. Saffery has no confidence in Gambier-Parry's people Their function is purely to see that any outsiders who come to mend the telephones or to effect structural alterations do not insert microphones. In the ordinary courge there should be no reason for any foreign telephone engineer to enter the house at all, since our Post Office take over as soon as the line enters the building. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL RETAINED NDEPARTMENT UNDER THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. DcH 201 118d 20th October. Vickery brough Ahmed to see me. We had quite a long talk of a general nature on intelligence organisation. He was extremely friendly and is ready to receive a liaison officer from us in Karachi as soon as he can provide an officer to conduet liaison with us in London. He does not wich to do so before as this may involve him in political complicati ns. Meanwhile he would like us to correspond with him by bag and to establish cipher communication. stephens is asking for a Czech translator and Post Office equipment, and an adviser on Censorship, to be sent out to West Africa. I told him that until a case was established against, the Czechs he had in mind employees of the Bata Shoe Company - it might be a bit early to sent out a Czech translator, who incidentally, would be pretty difficult to find. I thought that we ought to explore how the mails went; it might be that we could intercept them in London. IT not, they shoulld be sent back here for translation and,i and when they disclosed anything serious,we would consider sending someone out. As regards censorship, I told him to have a talk with Malcom Cumming 21st October. I took the Chair at the Dominions Security Conference at the C.R.O The meeting had several papers before it which were discussed. The general impression that I gained was thet Canada had the right ideas and were already doing quite a lot; that Australlia said that they were doing everyting, but in fact were doing very little and indeed had no effective machinery; that many of the finer points did not worry New Zealand, who, for example would not hesitate to remove anybody from any position where he might do harm, without any fear of political complications; that South Africa were extremely co-operative and anxious to model themselves on our lines, in SO far as their police system vould allow, and that Southern Rhodesia took the same view, although they had not much of a problem to deal with. Commander FARRAN'T same to see me on the recommendation of Stephen Rosicinl. He is an ex-Naval Officer with extremely good recommendations, but I should say would do a good administration job. He is very presentable and gets on vell with others. Derek Hamblen came to talk to me about the case of TULLOCH, late of Force 136, who is believed by the Burmese Government to be intrigueing with the Karens. H e had been in communication from Calcutta with one; CAMPBELL, a journalist in Rangoon. CAMPBELL had also been in Force 136. Both of them had been given away by a rather unpleasant character called SYMONS, who is a steward on one of the B.O.A.C. flying boats to the Far East. SYMONS had been asked by CAMPBELL to carry lett to TULLOCH, which he had opened and handed over copies to the Burmese authorities. I n consenuence CAMPBELL had been arrested, to the embarrassment of H.M.G R.J. M aunsell and Oldfield discussed with me the case of an ex-S.I.M.E. agent who has been in touch with J.ewish intelligence. Oldfield and Scherr are going to work out details together and pass the case to S.I.M.E. for exploitation if possible. I have given Van Moyland Notes on Munitions Secrutiy and particulars of a new contract which our supply departments propose to have in future when placing secret contradts. Van Moyland is anxiious to have this information as a committee is sitting in Holland to frame legislation for the safeguarding of secret contracts. Incidentally, the Dutch are framing a law to prohibit the issue of a passport to any Dutch subject who is thought to eanstitute a danger to the State. This will cover Communists. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS 22nd October. ACT 1958. Oct 20( At the J.I.C. to-day Kenneth Strong talked about the marked eagerness of Russia to obtain rubber, for which they were offering very high prices. He thinks, from the point of view of war, this may have a long-terr significance. D.M.I. drew attention to the fact that the present Metric system did not cover the W estern Union Commanders-in- Chief organisation recently set up. It was realised that this raised a very difficult and delicate situation, since if the latter organisation was to work at all, obviously they would have to be briefed on the Order of Battle and other highly secret matters. The SIGINT aspect of this problem is to be discussed at the next meeting of the SIGINT Board. Hayter drew attention to the unsatisfactory corposition of the Metric Committee, which consists largely, of course, of diplomats instead of security personnel. O n the basis of a memorandum we have submitted, he intends to raise the matter through the Foreign Secretary. There was general sympathy with a proposal put forward by A .C.A.S. CI) thats since the movements of our Attaches in Moscow had wbeenhalmost totally restricted, similar tactics should be employed here, even though they might not be particularly effective. Although the Foreign Secretary has set his face against retaliation on similar matters, an attempt is to be made to get him to modify h views. Broadly, the proposal is that all diplomatic personnel should be instructed to report their movements if they wish to go outside the thirty mile radius. There may also be other restrictions. The Home Office are to be consulted. A S regards the Trade Delegation, it was felt that it would be difficult to recuest any reducion of staff as long as it was the policy of the Government to trade with Russia. The number of eighty was not considered to be excessive for a State trading organisatio. It was pointed,ou moreover, that unless the Russians were given facilities for inspecting the goods which they purchased in this country , cases arose of their alleging that the goods did not come up to specification and refusing to pay. There was, therefore, some advantage ingetting a certificate from Russian inspectors in London before the goods were despatched. I told the meeting that the Russians were in touch with some 214 firms, 8 of which had secret contracts, but that We had no evidence of espionage by members of the Delegation, although we regarded it as axiomatic that they would pick up a certain amount of data off the surface. We did not know what actual business resulted from the various contacts that the R ussians made. 1C! said that General Nye had got an undertaking from the Prime Minister that no S .S. activities would be carried out in I ndia. Representations have been made to the Foreign Secretary, but the latter declined to intervene. The J.I.C. decided to inform the Chiefs of Staff of the position. The Ds. of I. will suggest to the Chiefs that they might get hold of Nye and teel him that, as he has thrown a spanner into their works, they would be interested to know how he was intending to fill the gap. I told the meeting about our negotiations with Ahmed. ICI mentioned that he too had had conversations, and that he hoped in due course that he might be able to establish himself with the 183. concurrence of the local authorities. D.M.I. mentioned that Pakistan is extremely apprehensive abou an attack by India. He wondered what we were doing about supplying Pakistan with arms. If we did not, he thought they might well go to the Russians. Negotiations for Beach reconnaissance in Eire have been successfully concluded between G.O.C. Northern Ireland and McKenna. I attended a lunch at the Dorchester for the Security representatives with Gordon Walker ixkhexewairx, Parliamentary Under-Secretary to the C.R.O., in the chair. At the J.I.. 1 had been shown, by 1C' and Hayter, pieces indicating that Baileyas the Australian Solicitor-general, had lunched yesterday with VORONIN of the Soviet Embassy and PRITT in his room at the Savoy Hotel. Hayter sat 'next to Bailey at the lunch and thre W a fly over him, but got no rise. It was agreed that we would look into the matter. Harry, Vickery and I had a meeting with General Cawthorn and Ahmed. We told Cawthorn that in our view it would be preferable for us to conduct a liaison with Ahmed and to trust to his good offices to pass on to the Pakistan D.M.I. any information which might concern him. Cawthorn was at first a little difficult about this, as his blueprint lays down that the military are responsible for their own security and, indeed, in some measure counter-espionage within the Forces. Harry successfully rode him off by saying that his officers in London should establish contact with the security officers of the three Services. This view was finally accepted. 23rd, October THIS.IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 OcF 201 For minutes of D.G. meeting o-day see folder in 25th. Octoher held D.G. Secis eupboard. 184, 26th 0 ctober. Vickery came to discuss a. letter which Admiral Parry has written to the D.G., in which he announced that an official request from the Minister of Defence in India has come in to the P.M. through Krishna Menon for somebody to go out and put the Services and D.I.B straight on matters of security. It is not clear whether this has been done with the knowledge of D.I .B. , and evidently Parry has forgotten that we have a liaison officer in Delhi. Moreover, it is a bad idea to put anything through Krishna Menon. Vickery thins that as the request has already been made, there is nothing that we can do until it reaches us. We will then suggest that if the Services want assistance they will do better to send officers over here, since the job is obviously one that they will have to do themselves. 27th October. At the J.I.C. to-day Sir Marston Logan said that W oolley Governor of British Guiana, is worried about security in his area. I told Marston Logan that I had seen Page in Washingtor and tha+ he had sueested that we should re-establish ourselves I discussed this with the D.G., who agreed that until something is done about the Police we should probably be wasting our time. We thought that it should be the first task of the newly appointed Colonial Police Inspector to visit the Caribbean area, and I suggested that possibly Thistlethwaite might go round with him. A S soon as we could get the Police on their feet, we would consider sending an officer to Jamaica, whom Page was quite ready to have on his staff. Logan viewed this proposal with favour and we should initiate discussions with Lloyd ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBL RECORDS ACT 1958 Oof 20(1 I had a discussion with Max Knight, Mitchei] and Etmming about a proposal to provide the Communist Party with a suitable agent in M.I.5. The initiative had come from the C.P. I pointed out that the proposal was a difficult and delicate one, since sooner or later it would be difficult for us to conceal names and to refuse a certain amount of information without 'y85. jeopardising the agent' position. If these difficulties could be got round, I was all in favour of going ahead. The proposal is that M-7 should apply for an intelligence job in the event of war, through A.G.23; he might then be notionally taken on in Cookiels Port and Travel Control Group. This would have the effect of keeping the ball rolling and might draw the C.P. in an interesting way. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 OcH 2o1 28th October Roger has completed his note on the implications of the Dominions Security Conference on our relations with S.I..S.. He thinks that not only should we control the proposee section for the study of Russian and satellite intelligence services, but that we should seek a revision of our Charter, which would give us the right to establish posts abroad where it is profitable to do $o. He feels that, apart from our own responsbibities, we have a very definite one to the Dominions in the matter of keeping them informed about Russian activities. He feels, too, that the Benelux countries are equally important to us from a defence security point of view, and that, therefore, direct contact with them is essential. Personally I entirely agree with him, although it is difficult to say whether it is expedient to take the bull by the horns. Roger argues that the moment is opportune in view of the Prime Ministeris interest in the Dominions Security Conference, and the efforts that are being made to improve Benelux security. Hill came to tell me tha.t he had had a request from Johnny Cimperman for information about KUH. It seems that Carey Foster has spoken to some security officer in the American Embassy about KUH on the basis of our information, and has said that M.I.5 M.I would provide further particulars. /86. I rang up Hayter and pointed out to him how undesirable this was. Hayter said that he had just had a draft letter put before him from Carey Foster to Irvine. He agreed with me that it would be extremely ifficult, and probably undesirable to take any drastic steps about KUH, and he felt that we should reply to Cimperman that the approach made to the American Embassy was only on a very low level and that he had better, therefore, forget about it. We considered a note by Stephens on West Africa, which showed the places that he had visited. He had, of course, seen all the Governors and Police of the four colonies. He had also made contact with the French in Dakar and Braszaville and with the Belgians in the Congo and in Leopoldville. He found them all co-operative. He seems to have got a somewhat alarmist view about the whole situation in West Africa. Although his fears may be well-founded, it is not very clear to me on what they are based! His first difficulty is over staff. He needs an assistant and at least two members of the female staff. We are having great difficulty in getting volunteers. He has got the Governors to impose censorship, but he would like a representativ from the Post Office, with the necessary equipment, to show them how to do the job. This was agreed. He was also anxious for a Czech speaker, who could translate any correspondence intercepted between the Bata Shoe Company aind Prague. It was felt that this was hardly- justifiable at the present stage; it seemed that we should probably intercept a good deal of the correspondence between West Africa and Prague which was routed through this country, and that for the rest it would be better to send it back here for translation. If it appeared that any- thing serious was going on, we could reconsider the question of sending out a Czech translator. It was, however, agreed that there should be periodical conferences between East and West Africa, particularly since there would be contact with the Congo from West Africa and also from Salisbury. For minutes of the D.GIS meeting held to-day, see folder in D.G Sec's cupboard. The D.G. has ruled that I am to look after the Police Diaison Officers, who will henceforth be detached from S.L.B. although in their spare time they can take on a.ny jobs that Hill may have. A Mr. Keith STEPHENS, recommended by Nott-Bower, came to see me. He wants employment. He made a good impression; he is an old Wykehamist and has taken a good degree in history and modern languages. 3th November. I lunched with Auberon Herbert. He is now secretary what of he described as deliberate interference with Poles in almost every Anglo-Porish committee. He was worried about South Wales mines, and attempts by the Seamens Union to keep Poles out of seamens' jobs in Liverpool. I said that if he would get the facts dow for me on paper, I would look into it and see what could be done. I saw Johnson with the D.G. The former is the new Inspector General of Police attached to the Colonial Office. We discussed his future work. It was agreed that,subject to Colonial Office approval, he should go first to the Caribbean, which he could visit with Thistle, and secondly to West Africa. He is coming here to study our files. Mann came to see me. I gave him a general talk about Russia and explained to him why all the machinery was being overhauled. There was a good deal of uncertainty in Police circles, largely due to the Home Office having called together a few C.Cs some months ago, when things in Berlin were boiling up. Other Chief Constables, of course, heard about this and, on the basis of a little knowledge, were talking in rather a alarmist way. I told Mann exactly what we were doing and what we required of the Police. 4th November. The following points emerged at a conference of Immigration Officers which I attended last week. 1. Traffic Index. There are now 1,800,000 cards and each clerk has to deal with a block of 40,000 in the live index. Great difficulty is experienced over Belgian and Dutch names, particularly in the cases of women, who frequently use their married name on the passport and their maiden name on the landing or embarkation card. I am suggesting to Perks that, as we are now closer to the Belgians and Dutch on account of the Western Union Treaty we might get them to institute some measures which would improve this situation, if he will let me know exactly what he requires. I understand that seamen who are coming here on contract to join ships and arrive as passengers are not in the Index at all. 10,000 Germans have been landed here in the last nine months, 1,900 of whom were German fiancees. Harwich say that they cannot cope with this situation if all these people are to be conditionally landed. Coombes of the Immigration Department, who had been in Germany, was opposed to granting unconditional landing, on the grounds that owing to conditions in Germany there was an increasing tendency for them to stay here. It was therefore, decided that onditional landing should be maintained, subject to the discretion of the Immigration Officer, in special and very obvious cases. Very brief particulars will always ba given on the back of the landing card, but reports will not be submitt in future unless the case is a suspicious one. I understand tha t a special commission from the Ministry of Labour is studying the amenities, or lack of them, at all ports. An attempt is to be made to improve the general layout and to provide better accommodation This should in turn make it easier for Immigration Officers to conduct their examinations. As I think you know, the Aliens Order provides only for entering by sea or air. This means that if an alien enters Northern Ireland from Eire he has committed no offence under the Aliens Order. It appears that if the Ministry of the Interior in Northern Ireland are prepared to make representations to the Home Office, the latter Would take steps to get the Order suitably amended. I have written to Roger Moore, tactfully suggesting that he might give his Ministry of Interior a prod There has formerly been a serious gap in our control of aliens through the Isle of Man, but this is now being remedied. 1819. 5th November. Colonel Stratton formerly one of our S.C.Os, who is employed in the printing and advertising section of Imperial Tobaco, came to see me about a calendar which he had been asked to print for West Africa. At the top of the calendar ane pictures of all the leading political negroes in the Gold Coast, including Nkrulah and others who were arrested in the Gold Coast riots. The calendar is obviously being got out for political purposes. We got Goresuch of the Colonial Office to come over and look at the calendar. He said that two somewhat similar cases had already been brought to his notice. He had discouraged the execution of the order, but he does not know what ultimately happened. It was agreed to let the order go bn. Stratton will inform us when and how the shipment is made. About 100,000 copies of the calendar are being printed; some of them obviously for circulation through the post. I lunched vith Peter Hope. He wanted to talk to me about Elsie THOMAS, formerly Vansittart's and Cadogan's secretary.an now doing Foreign Office welfare THISIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS 20.11 After examining the files, I told HStle195that he could tell Mnrs. Watts that M.I.5 were not responsible for her husband' recent dismissal from the British Society for International Understanding -S whatever that body may be. Hope told me an interesting story about the safes in the British Embassy in Moscow. A safe had recently been delivered at the Norwegian Embassy the Soviet officially stated that it had come from Norway. The Norwegians replied that they were not expecting the safe, but toook it in. They discovered that it was really intended for ta Norwegian firm in Moscow, but on examining the combination lock they found that it had been drilled in such a way as to enable anyone to open it easily by the insertion of a pin. The Norwegians told our Ambassador. He found the story interesting, as the Embassy had recently recie'ved two safes from England which had arrived in a somewhat damaged condition. IT appeared as if the crates had been opened. On hearing the Norwegian Minister's story, he decided to have our safes examined; he found that they also had been drilled. 090. As far as I can ascertoin we have never been told about this excep't in the form of a note which states baldly that the Russians are in the habit of drilling safes. Why the Foreign Office did not remove the combination locks and send them in the bag,I cannot imagine. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. Oct 201 8th November. Noel Wild came to tell me about a proposal that Monty should have a deception staff at his H.(. I agreed with Wild that this was undesirable; deceptior should obviously be controlled by L.C.S. 9 and the most that Monty would require would be a liaison officer. It also seemed undesirable that he should talk about the project to his foreign colleagues. This could b. done if it became really necessary later on. 1/9/. For minutes of D.G. Meeting held to-day see folder in D.G.See's cupboard. I save Peter Hope. I gave him a brief outline of the WATTS case. I said that my basic impression was that he was POlling' stone I did not regard him as a security case. I suggested to Hope that he should discuss the case with Carey Foster. I told him that SO far as Mrs. WATTS was concerned, he could say no more than that M.I.5. wene not in any way the cause of his dismissal. Derek Tangye came to tell me he had been run in by the Police for dangerpts driving. He had been accused of being drunk, but when taken to the station had been completely cleared by the Divisional Surgeon. He asked me whether it would be in order for him to go and seek advice from Burt. I agreed to his doing this and rang up to tell Burt that he THIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER ER.SECTION l0th November. (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 201( Burt came to see me. I discussed with him the arms dealing case, where it seemed to me that there were possible grounds for rosecution. I told him that Thompson had indicated to us on the telephone that he would not intending to pursue the matter further. Burt said that he would look into this and let me know the result. He telephoned subsequently to say that there was a general enquiry on this subject, with particular reference to Lord Elphinstone, and that he hoped that it might be possible to take action. I then talked to him about the case of A.A. WATTS. I asked him to let me have a copy of a S.B. report alleging that in 1940 WATTS aas attempting to obtain money by false pretences from refugees, and also to let me have the sources of his information which had apparently led to WATT'S recent dismissal from the British Society for International Understanding. Burt then talked to me about Cummings with whom he had had long discussions about the King's visit to New Zealand. He said that Cummings was still a somewhat bitter enemy of M.I.5. Burt had been given the whole story o:f Folkes. It is uite clear that the old man has got a pathological obsession about Folkes, and that 192. nothing we On anybody else could say would ever get it out of his head. Nevertheless, I told Burt that I would like him to read a note of mine on Mawhood and Folkes before he went out. This would show him quite clearly that M.I.5. had no responsibility whatsoever for sending out either Mawhood or Folkes, or for their subsequent actions. If he got an opportunity of ramming this home during his visit it would be all to the good. Burt had seen quite a lot of Du Plooy., whom he thought was nervous about his position. I saw Kirbyareen and told him that he would in future be working direct to me, but that I would like him to help Hill whenever this was possible. He said that he thought he would have plenty to do for the next few months in getting the Police on the right lines, but that later on he would have time on his hands. l1th November. T saw Newsam about two H.O.Ws on Scottish Nationalists. I gave him full details, showing that these people were implicated with Welsh Nationalists in preparing bombs which they intended to use sometime in December. Newsam was fully satisfied and intended to speak to the Home Secretary. I then told Newsam about the case of the Hungarian, NAGY, for whom asylum in this country had been promised by Maxwell. Newsam agreed and asked me to arrange details with Paice. Charles, Harry Allen, Dick and I saw GOVE to-day. His experience after he left us was largely with Trera Security Sections in Germany and he seems to have moved about all over the country.. He refused an offer to g0 to C.C.G. on demobilisation, because most of his friends had then left that organisation. He was offered a job in P.C.D., which took him first of all to Paris for about six months and then to Frankfurt, where he has been ever for since. wishing to go to Kenya is that she should be with her mother, He has recently married a girl in P.C.D. and his reasons who is Somewhat failing health. We made it quite clear to GOVE that if he joined the Security Service there could be no a rantee that he would go 193 to Kenya, although, in SO far as it was consistent with the interests of the office, attempts were made to send people to station abroad to which they particularly wanted to go. He wo old in any case have to do roughly a year at Head Office and Would not necessarily get the next vacancy in Kenya. It was also made clear to him that tours abroad were usually for a period of two years, with a possibility OT a ther.extensiin, but that the general practice was to move officers around either at home or abroad, SO that even if he were sent to Kenya, he would not be there for more than two or three years. He wa told that the rate of pay would be E650, with yearly increments of S30 up to E750, and that after a year's probation he might be eligible for a jump to the next grade. He would also, a fter his year's probation, become eligible for the established staff as and When a vacancy occurred. GOVE said thet he was to have an interview with the Colonial Office on Monday, and that he would call here at +.30 and let us know the result. Meanwhile, he expressed the view that he liked our kind of work and was anxious, if possible, to join the Department. We thought, however, that his wife was likely to play a considerable pant if the Colonial Office offered him prospects of getting to Kenya. I spoke to Jeffes after the meeting and asked him why GOVE was leaving P.C.D. He said tha GOVE had not resigned and that, from his point of view, he very much hoped that he would not. He had, however, told Jeffes about his mother.in-law and had asked his assistance in finding him a job which would take him to Kenya . Jeffes regarded him as quite one of his best P.C.D. officers. He had gone to Frankfurt at a time when the office was in a serious muddle and complaints were being. received. Not only had GOVE straightened out all the difficulties, but he had got round the Consul, who had been difficult and obstructive, and had established Pinstwclass relations with the Americans. Jeffes said that he had plenty of iniative and that he had even sueceeded in getting a motorcar Out of the Americans to assist him in his duties. 12th November. The D.G. has seen Bridges and we have prepared a memorandum, drawing attention to the ambiguities in our Charter and asking for it to be rectified in such ammanner as to make countermespionage the sole responsibility of the D.G. who 194. should have the right, where necessary, to place his representatives abroad in a liaison capacity with his opposite numbers. Bill Magan has written an extremely good note on the whole subject. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED 3 IN (4) DEPARTMENT OF THE PUBLIC UNDER RECORDS SECTION ACT 1958 OcH 2ou 15th November. Hill and I went to see Sir Percivale Leisching of the Ministry of Food about a man called who had been giving information on linseed prices to the Argentinians. He fetched down a man called Wall, who is dealing with his establishment side and whom he regards as being of the highest integrity. We are investigating the case of and will communicate with Wall. I told Leisbhing that we had recently bee approached by Murphy for assistance, but that unfortunately we were prohibited from dealing with Black Market cases. We had bee n able to operate in the case of since here was clear evidence of a leakage of Government information to a foreign power. He said that he quite understood our position. l6th November. For Minutes of D.G. meeting held to-day, see folder in D.G's sec's cupboard I lunched with Van Moyland today and told him that Felix Johnstone was to visit PhiTlips of Einthoven. I explained to him that as Mullands went a branch of Phillips, there were certain secrets that we wished to safeguard. He said that if it were of any use Gooseh would be ghad to help. I told him that I would let him know, but that I thought this was purely a security question ffecting a particular firm. George McClelland came to say good-bye. He is off to Canada tomorrow. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 20(1 196 Wing Commander Saundeis, came to see me to-day. He is placing on the Agenda for the hext L.C.S. meeting the question of an L.C.S. representativein the Middle East. TI said that the position Would be met if somebody on the planning sta?? in the M.E. were made the L.C.S. representative. Saundeng then talked to me about the proposal by Montgomery to set up a small deception staff at his Headquarters, and to acquaint his Benelux colleagues with the general terms. I said I felt the most that would be required would be one officer at Montgomery' Headquarters, who would act as a Liaison Officer with L.C.S. and that it would be inadvisable to say anyth ing to the other countries of the Western Union, unless and until it was evident that to keep them in ignorance might lead to difficulties in the implementatior of the plan, or to repercussions which might make them unnecessarily apprehensive. John Marriott, who was present, drew attention to the fact that the French were running a large number of double-agents who were probably uncontrolled in SO far as any deceptionnv concerned. They might become an embarrassment if any plans of ours ever got going. Burt telephoned to say that he would be sending me a copy of the S.B. report on WATOS made in 1940, and that he had made enquiries about the origin of the recent report. He did not tell me the name of the informant, but clearly the information came from the British Society of International Understanding He did not think that there was any bias in the report. One of the pointe discussed at the D.G's meeting to-day was the question of the abolition of the American visa. There were two points: (i) that the D.G. ha been given no opportunity of speaking to the P.M. about the American visa before the matter was decided in the Cabinet. Serpell saw Bavin, Sir Norman Brook's P.A., yesterday and it has been arranged that in future ve shall see all the Agendas for the Cabinet Meetings. (ii) It seems necessary that we should ask S.L.O. Washington to speak to the F.B.I. and emphasise the importance of letting us know if they hear of any characters of interest to US who are coming to the U.K. 18th November. I saw Sir Frank Newsar to-day and explained to him in detail the positior that had been reached hed.regarding Orme Sorgent' 196. Wing Commander Saundes, came to see me to-day. He is placing on the Agenda for the hext L.C.S. meeting the question of an L.C.S. representativein the Middle East. I said that the position Would be met if somebody on the planning staf? in the M.E. were made the L.C.S. representative. Saundeng then talked to me about the proposal by Montgomery to set up a small deception staff at his Headquarters, and to acquaint his Benelux colleagues with the general terms. I said I felt the most that would be required would be one officer at Montgomery's Headquarters, who would act as a Liaison Officer with L.C.S. and that it would be inadvisable to say anything to the other countries of the estern Union, unless and until it was evident that to keep them in ignorance might lead to difficulties in the implementation of the plan, on to repercussions which might make them unnecessarily apprehensive. John Marriott, who was present, drew attention to the fact that the French were running a large number of double-agents who were probably uncontrolled in SO far as any deceptionnw concerned. They might become an embarrassment if any plans of ours ever got going. Burt telephoned to say that he would be sending me a copy of the S.B. report on NATS.n made in 1940, and that he had made enquiries about the origin of the recent report. He did not tell me the name of the informant, but clearly the formation came from the British Society of Internationa. Understanding. He did not think that there was any bias in the report. One of the pointe discussed at the D.G's meeting to-day was the question of the abolition of the American visa. There were two points: (1) that the D.G. had been given no opportunity of speaking to. the P.M. about the American visa before the matter was decided in the Cabinet. Serpell saw Bavin, Sir Norman Brook' S P.A. yesterday and it has been arranged that in future VE shall see all the Agendas for the Cabinet Meetings. (ii) It seems necessary that we should ask S.L.O Washington to speak to the F.B.I. and emphasise the importance of letting us know if they hear of any characters of interest to uS who are coming to the U.K. 18th November. I saw Sir Frank Newsar to-day and explained to him in detail the position that had been reached.regarding Orme Sargent' 197. lette to Sir Raymond Birchall, suggesting that the time had now come for Gambier Parry's Maintenance Group to take over the initial imspertion and subsequent technical maintenance of our missions abroad, and that as it was important that they hould be kept abreast of all current developments, a liaison officer from the G.P.O. should be appointed. I explained to Newsam in detail the position that had been reached. I said that there appeared to be nothing that ither he or I could do until an official approach was made to the Home Office. He thinks that the G.P.O. should have acted as we suggested, that Birchall should have replied to Sargent in the sense that in view of the responsibilities carried by the Post Office in these matters, he was not prepared that they should be handled other than by his own staff and that as a result he war preared to be responsible for the provision of suitably qualified staff from the Post Office to undertake inspeetion of the missions overseas) and he is quite prepared to say that in his view it would be undesirable to spread the knowledge of these matters to Foreign Office personnel. He will let me know as soon as he receives an fficial letter and will consult me about the reply. 19th November. At the LoLnele to-day A.C.A.S. (I) mentioned that his officers had been given an opportunity of interrogating two Russian Air Force defectors who had come across to the American Zone in Germany. One of these officers indicated that up to 60,0 of his colleagues felt the same way as he did and were only deterred by the uncertainties and repereussions on their families which might result. It seemed that the American broadcasts "The Voice of America" had had a considerable e ffect. I a8v 'C' to-day, who told me that he had heand nothing more about Fourcaud. He found it hard to believe that he was in the pay of the Russians. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 22nd November. 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. Oc 201 The great trek to Leconfiebd House began to-day. 1q 8. 19 8. 23nd November. Burt brought me over a. document which had been picked up in the street in Streatham. It clearly originated in the Ministry of Transport and referred to war plans. It had written on it certain details about shopping purchases. It may well have been removed quite innocently. Burt is going to make enquiries. 2Lth November. At the J.I.C. to-day the Secretary, Gardiner, mentioned to me that he listened to certain Russian broadcasts in English which occurred daily at 7 P.m. I think he said that they were on the 40 metre wave band. Apparently names and addresses of those in this country who virite in to Moscow about Russian broadcasts ane frequently mentioned. 25th November. The D.G held a meeting onrapppintments It wa s decided to get Jack Morton back as soon as possible in order to prepare him for S.I.F.E. Ray will take over and will have to assist him. Courtenay will be offered Australia. I gather he would be glad to accept. Wagstaffe will probably go to Ceylon. We are still without a No.2 for West Africa. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS 26th November. ACT 1958 Oct 2o1 At the J.I.C. today it was decided to proceed with the recommendation of the Admiralty by getting out a list of important documents which have gone to the Dominions and Western Union. The matter will then be further considered. I drew attention to Press leakages and Press rumours, which would have to be taken into account if any assessment is possible of what the Russians consider to be our interests intentions and capabilities. I gather that one of the uses to which it is proposed to put this study is to assist the L.C.S. L. in their deception plans. 199 30th Novemben. The Ds. of I. seem to be rather anxious to conduct anti Commnunist propaganda in the Forces as part of the cold war. Harry Allen thinks that we ought to give them some guidance. Frankly, we do not think it is a good idea. As long as the Communist Party is legal, we cannot spend Government money on preaching against it without creating an awkward precedent. It might well lead to a demand for anti-Conservative or anti-Fascist speakers. Lastly, unless these speakers were extremely skilled, which the average officer would not be, a left-wing in the audience would make rings pound him. He might, moreo'ver, be drawn on to embarrassing ground owing to the prograrmes of the Second and Thind International being almost identical, except for the method by which they ane to be achieved. I saw Air Commodore Paynter about a request by the U.S. Force in this country to re-establish their own Post Office. As a result of this talk I wrote to Burley of the Home Office, informing that we had no 'grounds for serious objection. We have established contact with the ounter-ihbelligence unit of the United States Air Force, and hope to make satisfactory arrangements to cover our requirements if it is finally decided to grant the American request. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 20( I think, however, that we ought to clear up once and for all the position of the British Society fbr International Understanding vis a vis the War Office. According to a Special Branch report, the Society i.s engaged in reparing lectures for the Armay Education Department. It may be that they proposed to employ WATTS on this work and that AE.21 Mar Office, had said something to them regardi WATTS? record. 200 0.1. could perhaps find out exactly what happened and the exte t to wh.ch the War Office ane interested in Of financing the Society. I took the opportunity of talking about Freddie KUH. I said that we had been somewhat embarrassed when Cimperman asked us for information. Carey, Foster said he had mentioned the matter to the American Embassy Security Officer in a rather casual way. I explained to him the dangers of this since Freddie KUH is probably known to most people in the Embassyand is doubtless "served" by a good many. If it got back to him that he was a target of this department, there might be awkward repercussions. It might equally be dangerous to try and get rid of him, as if he were returned to store he would certainly make as much mischief for this country as he possibly could. There was quite a lot he could do if he really got going. I attended a meeting of the L.C.S. today. There was general agreement that whereas the activiuie of L.C.S. had up to now been more o1 less on a cane and maintenance basis, they should now proceed to adopt a more ctive policy. It was felt that two kinds of deception should be practised. I (1) OVERALL DECEPTION. The main object of this would be to persuade the Russians that for certain reasons it would be unwise to start a major war. This would be sub-divided into: (a) Weapons Deception. L.C.S. stated that they had already proceeded to some extent to explore the ground. They had a plan for exaggerating the performance of our long-range bomber, P.345, which is to come out next year. They were in consultation with the Americans about a Biological Warfare deception plan, and they were also discussing with the Services the possibility of deception regarding the order of battle in certain theatres. (b) Political Deception. Hayter suggested that as the strength of Western Union was in itself, at the moment, largely a deception, some steps might be taken to build it up. A further suggeetion was made that the Russians might be persuaded to believe that in the event of wan there were effective measures for dealing with Fifth Columns. (2) THEATRE DECEEPTION. It was agreed that Theatre Conmanders should be invited to state how they would wish 201. the Russians to act within the range of probability SO as to give our plans the best chance of success. It was thought preferable that the cover plans for Theatre Commandens should be made first in London and then submitted for criticism, om alternative suggestions, to Theatre Commanders. II As regards the sugestion that L.C.S. should have some ouganisatior i.n the Middle East, it was agreed that for the time being the Chief of Staff should be asked to act on their behalf. III There was unanimous agreement that at this stage it would be unwise to consult with Western Union powers about deception. The matter should be kept to ourselves and the Amenicans IV It was agreed that L.C.S. should have another officer. lst December. We are arranging with the Foreign Office to get bag and cipher communicatior between Consuls (?) in Went Africa and our S. S.1.0. The Foreign Office are being co-operative in this matter. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 201\ At Howe's party he showed a S.B. report to the D.N.I. and myself, from which it was clear that LANG Permanent Under- Secretary at the Admiralty, was in the habit of studying Top Secre papers in the train when coming up to town. One of his fellow passengers had read the documents over his shoulder, made notes up IANG and traced him into the Admiralty. N. of ther and reported the ma tter to the Police took S.B have picked a copy of the report and said that he would deal with the matter. 202. 2nd December. Lentonr late of Censorship in South Africa, came to see me. He is on a visit here. He obviously did not like the present Government; he agreed that on the matter of Communism they would certainy see eye to eye with ourselves. He offered to help, but I said that We wene in close touch with Palmer. TI asked him why Smuts had not used the information that he had about Van Rensburg and others, and he said that Smuts' party was altogether too confident about the result of the elections; they did not think it would be necessary to throw any mud. I discussed with Malcom Cumming, Charles and Horrocks the question of Briscoe' position vis a vis Hedger. For a long time Hedger has hotly resented Briscoe's appointment; his line is that Briscoe never comes near him, etc. In fact Briscoe keeps away because he realises that Hedger does not want him. If Hedger were sensible he would make use of Briscoe's superior knowledge. Briscoe' value to the organisation lies in the fact that as an eminent chemist he is in touch with all sorts of developments which Hedger may well not hear about at all. Briscoe is also of use to us outside the chemical field. In wartime his appointmer is essential, as the various labs of S.O.E., M.I.9., etc.. would have to be co-ordinated with out own in order to give proper protection to censorship. THIS webgreed agreed that the present arrangement, by which we should continue. ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 I saw Herbert morrison to-day and showed him the intercepted letter to WUCKEERMAN regarding his supposed membership of the C.P. I told him that we had certain reservations about - the document, as it was typewrittenand not signed. It seemed to us just possible that it might constitute an attempt to provoke action under the "purge" prodedure and then ridicule the authorities for relying upon a document, the authenticity of which would be denied. Mr. Moriison was seriously perturbed, but agreed to do nothing pending further enquiries. He said that ZUEKERMAN wa.s employed as number two to Tizard on the civil side. He was also usi.ng him to explore the position with regard to the development of substitute materials which might prevent the necessity of im- porting certain naw materials from the United States. Before taking on ZUCKERMAN, Mr. Morrison said to him "I suppose you are not by any chance foohing around with these Communists?', to which LUCKERMAN replied, with every appearance of 203, sincerity that of house he knew some of these people, but that he was really too busy to engage i. in n politics. I think we ought to say something to the Ministry of Supply, provided we can be sure that they will not go off the deep end. Meanwhile, we must do all we: can to probe the matter further. When I was talking to Morrison about ZUTCKERMAN, he said that he had some job which he would like BLACKETT to take on, but that he had been given to understand that we had certain reservations. I told him that in our view BLACKETT was not consciously disloyal, but that he was in the habit of surrounding himself with people who were prepared to betray overnment secrets to the Communist Party; in particular I mentioned ASTBURY. For this reason we were bound to regard him as a considerable security risk. We believed that his son had recently joined the Party and that his wife, if not a Panty member, was SO close to the Party as to make no difference. Morrison seemed to agree with our assessment of the case and was quite conscious that, politically, BLACKETT was a muddled thinker. Presumably he had had his a'ttention drawn to BLACKETT'S recent work on1 the use of the atomic bomb. 3rd December Toumy Harris came to discuss with us the future of GARBO.. who is anxious to start working again. It is to be hoped that GARBO' original letter was not censored, as it would be somewhat compromising. 6th December. For minutes of the D.G, meeting held to-day, see folder in D.G Sec's cupboand. THIS IS A COPY IN ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. Oct 2o01 2o4. 7th Decemben. Sanjevi, who is over here for a couple of weels, saw the D.Go yesterday. and had a talk with me today. He has brought his wife with him. As, finstly, she is a vegetanian and lives largely on eggs, and secondly, she likes entertainment, the whole of I.P.I. female staff and wives have been mobilised and black market eegs are coming up from the country. Unless all these things are provided for her, Santjevi wont come to the office. Sanjevi is obviously appalled by the size of his task. He told me pathetically that the Indian Government expected him to know evenyiing well in advances I explained to him the working of oU.R office and the extent to which countermespionage and security work was decentralised on to the Police and on to Government Departments. He explained, however, that this was far from what the Indian Government wanted him to do; they wanted a highly centralised service. He said that he had officers of D.I.B. in every province, and that co-operation with the provincial Police varied. At the moment al] the Governments were Congress Party Governments; if, however, in any particular province they chose to have another party in power, the central Government would as likely as not get no cO-moperation at all and its own activities would be aabotaged. Sanjevi is, therefore, seeking what will have to be almost dictatorial powers. He asked me how we controlled the railway operators in this country. I said that I presumed what he had in mind was the possibility of sabotage. He said that a good many of the Unions in India were penetrated and it was quite possible that in certain circumstances acts of sabotage might take place. I told him that in this country the Trade Unions were dealing with Communist| who held influential positions in the Unions, that we had a general picture of the situation, but that local Police Forces were responsible for sabotage o1 rioting. It is quite clear that if Sanjevi is to do what the Indian Government want him to do, he will have to have an enormous Gestapo, which will cost the country a great deal of money and may well be corrupt and ineficient. I asked Sanjevi about Communists in the Forces and the Civil Service. He said he did not think there were many in the Forces. There were, however, certain number in the Police and also in the Civil Service. This is, in fact, borne out by a recent report that we have had from D.I.B. For minutes of the D.G. Mtg. held tomday, see folder in D.GSec. S cupboard. I discussed with Hollis a paper which we ane putting forwand on the "old" and "new' Dominions security. We ane trying 20S. to make it clear for the J.I.C. and the Chiefs of Staff that a proper assessment of security in any country is extremely difficult to make, but that, subject to these reservations, we are prepared to put Canada and New Zealand into Category I., and the remainder into Category II. Colonel MeNally, the Deputy Provost Marshal, came to pay a courtesy call. His elephone number is Sloane 3477, Ext. 430. 8th December. The J.I.C. J. 9 according to the Confidential Annex of last Friday's meeting, have been going in for a certain amount of self- criticism. It was thought that somebody ought to give more guidance to the J.I.S. The final proposal was that when a paper was asked for, some member of the J.I.C. or the Deputies' Committee should be appointed ad hoc to give guidance. D.N.I. also thought that sufficient thought was not being given to long-term studies of the planning of Intelligence as laid down by the Evill Report. Hayter replied that he had tried to give the matter as much thought as possible, but that in fact the Foreign Office were the only people who had put any long-term projects down for discussion. The whole proceedings read to me rather like an attack on Hayter instigated by Captain Drake, R.N. of the J.I.C. though the D.N.I. 9th December. D I had a talk with J'ren about his work in Delhi. He thought there would be a considerable improvement as a result of 0 Sanjevi' visit. A good deal had already been discussed in India and there was no doubt that Sanjevi was generally impressed. U'ren thinks that Sanjevi has set himself an almost D impossible task in the Provinces, not only has he got an office in D.I.B., but he runs agents into the Provinces from Delhi unknown to his local officer. The co-operation from the provincial police varies; it depends to some extent upon local jealousies. If there happened to be a change of government n.one of the provinces, it is quite probable that the provincial police Would cease to co-operate at all. 266. loth December. Sanjevi came back to see me again. He wanted to know about the structure and functions of the J.I.C. It was clear from what he said that the J.I.C. in India, which I understand is very low grade, has been trying to interfere in the internal affairs of India. I told him that the J.I.C. had no jurisdiction over ourselves or the Police. In the matter of subversive movements we dealt with the Home Secretary or the Prime Minister. The J.I.C. were only concerned in SO far as subversive activities in the U.K. had a bearing on military security or the use of troops in an emergency. Sanjevi then asked about the control of aliens. I told him about registration, visas, Traffic Index, etc. 13th December. For Minutes of D.G. Meeting held to-day, see folder in D.G. Sec's cupboard. lLth December. For Minutes of D.G. Meeting held today, see folder in D.G.. Sec's cupboard. We had a telegram in from Malcom MacDonald to the C.R.O. He complains, after a meeting with the Governors of Sarawak and Borneo, that S.I.F.E. leaves much to be desired in that it is not staffed by people with local knowledge. This was why he was SO anxious to retain Dalley's services. The whole telegram is based on a nisconception of S.I.F.E'S functions. He clearly feels the draught and realises that he is not getting much inside information: this is because Dalley's organisation, which was primarily responsible, produced only a very small amount. It is now divided into two Special Branches - one in Kuala Lumpur and the other in Singapore - and comes directly under the Commissioners of Police. It is unlikely to be producing any more than it did before, but in the course of time it is to be hoped that an effective organisation will be in being. The idea that such a thing can be built up overnight is, of course, quite fallacious. It may, moreover, be far more difficult o-get in on the ground floow now than it would have been a few years ago. The D.G has been over to see Lloyd and has offered, if necessary, to go out again to Singapore back here shortly after Christmas for consultation, expecting at his owI Kellar request. 2a7 Le Man came to see the D.G. with whom he wished to make his number. He had been in slight difficulty in Paris, when he had to admit that he had not even shaken hands with the D.G. Malcom Cumming came in about two new defectors from Trieste, one, I think, a Jugo-Slav, and the other a Soviet citizen. We are looking after them. Vickery and Dick White discussed certain matters relating to Sanjevi's visit. We are going to give him something about the Bridges Panel and suggest to him that he should try and put that one across when he gets back. Once he has got a policy laid down and Security Officers appointed in Government Departments, we would be prepared to give these officers a course here in physical security. This seems to us to be a better way of handling the situation than sending out an officer to India, as suggested by Admiral Parry. T suggested that U' ren might see some of the Ds. of I. while he is over here, owing to a somewhat prevalent notion in the J. J.I.C. I. that there was no source of information in India and now that 'C' had been ordered to "keep off the course' 15th December. The D.G. gave a cocktail party to senior Government officials. 16th December. U'ren had a satisfactory meeting with the D.M.I. who questioned him quite losely on a number of matters. 17th December. Perfect came to see me after his first liaison visit to the Police. He has managed to arrange for the setting up of periodical Special Branch conferences. These have not existed since the war and it is certainly a move in the right direction. 208 Kirby Green came to seer about his future. He does not seem to think that there is very much prospect for him. I told him that I had always realised that the field of promotion was small here, and I thought that this had been made very clear to him before he became a permanent member of the office. I believed that he had even gone SO far as to say that he was prepared to forego his police pension, but' this he denied. I suggested that he should &0 and see Horrocks. 18th December. I had a meeting with Tommy Harris, James Robertson, Mark Oliver, and a representative of S.I.S. about GARBO'E future plans. Mark Oliver, who is. visiting Guetamala is going to try and arrange suitable channels for communication. 20th December. For Minutes of the D.G's meeting held to-day, see folder in D.G Sec's cupboard. Anderson, D.D.M.I. (O. & S) is leaving. His successor isr Colonel Harding-Newman, who ame to see me. We discussed with Hollis the lecture on security which we have been asked to give in May. to all those taking part in the manoeuvres. What is wanted is some statement on how we are likely to be organised in time of war and what action will be taken at the outset. Perfect has returhed from a visit to the provinces. He has succeeded in reviving S.B. meetings in two areas, which should go a long way towards stimulating police activity. Certain of the Boroughs that he visited seem to have only a very vague idea of what the Communist are doing in their areas, or indeed about the subject at all. In Lancashire there is a C.P. member with a knowledge of RADAR who is suspected of setting up a wireless transmitter. IT seems doubtful whether we should have heard anything about this if Perfect had not visited the area. The great things is that no precipitate action should be taken, since if any transmissions are going on we may get the signals. a09 Cnetalles te have 2.1t YinehL 1111*S in tat.ir' and also a liat ul "o:tont.f lotrg geuet WOPi is Entit on. I have discussed Wit Purnive. Jenes. It SaG tatr at'they realready told IeVE: Cot'truC is ilased, since leca1 enquiries are made about the Taotony and these worling in it. The eculd, therefore, compile such list frorn their Own records. I think, howvever, that we should let tier have a list and possibly review it once evny six mnth. It wo:ld be duty of the A.L.O.S to see that the Police rerertea te *the presence of any Conmunist in any V.F. O2 secre't factory, in on'der that we. can ksen our records up to date 21st December. The D.G. Vickery, Ronnie Howe and I had lunch with Sanjevi E.t the Savoy. He seems to be very pleased with his pistaa and iB going back full of ideaa. How far he will be able to put ther into practice is another mattei! This NCOPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAIN IN DEPARTMENT SECTIO THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT'1958 Oct 204 Newsam handed back to me the wamant the Disthiot Panty Committees of the C.P., which had been turned down by the Home secretany cn the Enounde that he"did not want any general prying into the affairs of the Comriunist Paltyl. I told Newsam that if Ve were not te pry into the affairs of the C.P., it was difficult to see how we could capny out our comnitments. We had been charged by the P.M. with providing information about Communists in the Civil Selvic and in industry where secret work was going on. Membership applications continued to EO into District Party ,Q. and these checks would, therefore, provide a valuable source of information In aditinn, w.C wished to know about personalities and activities in the Districts which Chief Constables found it difficilt, if not imposeible, to obtain. Newsam soid that if I would write him a letter on these 11)20, he .yovld take the ma't+en up again with the Home Seeretary. Malcor Cimning, efert, aand Dick carse to tall to me about taPaaklghainns der.and, thr'ough Orme Sargent, 210, C.10. i: ': .A' : Cey's inint . #o So. ..0 th].:' :33 ireie Ehaoy hot wit lor 1.8011 OTi Offitil, MU3 hesosihilit tis enidet wloig the extmun Video tntemd the mbassy D'sisS. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 2Lo( D 22nd Decemnber. At the LeI.C. to-day. Mr. Wilson Chaiman of.8 Cormittee set by the Treasury to enguire int: th:e cont of intelligence, explained that his Committee, vihich W2S concemed OI behalf of the Ministry of Dfence with hu.shape a: size -of the Armed Forces had E700,000,000 to spend. (I understand that the Seeret Service wote is doductad from this total figure and thet S.8. expenditure on intelligenoe is thereone relevant t.o the present enquiry). Th 17e10 anmious to get some rough estimate an t ho such of this mney shiid be swen on intelligence, and te du this it W eentil to line much WAS bi C spent now tiiid Whthei Gily increuse i anS dinotie might enhrie the usefulnes. of shy perticula veapon. For example, the uestio of an incoencort bomber Fore i.d been under discussion, but it ayould be ne use having such force if Intlligence VaG not in oitio tu di C:I the most fReobive targets, om to estitite !..l 2.r tie bomking of tete Would afeot the eney': teatesy. Itwulil from the above thert Mr. iilson's Gommittae we 0ll hole, mon inteestnd in espicnsae thon countare eionas In fact le atatd St onO moment tit He WRP mt concerned with money sent on the deninl of information to an enemy. It so1r emerged during the disous ion that it would be nrelistit to confine an estimate of exenditure to areas behind the Iron Cuntain, since perhaps the most potent Russian weapon was a wold-wide international movement and that if the Coln War' wan at any time to be vigourously pursued, an intimat knovledd'e Df, say, the personalities and organisnt tion of the French Communis Party would be an important intelligence target In other words, a certain amount of money might be better spent in disrupting Communis regimes by propaganda than in buying guns, aeroplsnes and ships. MT'. lilson had not been indoetrinated and no discussion on SICIITT matters, therfore, took place until after he had left. The general feeling of the meeting was that it would be an extremely difficult taks to provide anything like an accurate asserment of the money spent on ntelligence. For example, it might be held that a Military, Naval, or Air Attache would in any case adorn the Embassy whether they peru formed intelligence functions or not. This would apply in some places and not in others. The same arguments would apply to soie extent to the Foreign Office, who are certainly collectors of intelligence. The Air Ministry felt unce tain as to how far aerial reconaissance and mapping might be regarded as intelligence. The Army and Navy stated that the cost of their Attaches and their H.O. Intelligence staffs amounted to 2260,00( and E90, 000 respectively. As far ar we ourselves ane concerned, I would recommend the following: 1. After consultation with the Treasury and subject to their agreement ve ought to try and assess our expenditure on the basis of B. Division activities, and exclude C. Division although it is difficult to soe how we can arrive at even a moderately accurate figure. However, Mr. WIilson's committee seem to be thinking i. millions, SO I do not think that We need worny too much about oun thousands. 2. Since there appears to be an opportunity of obtaining dditional funds if we have a target which is really worth while, it would scem to be for consiceration whether the oocasin| would be a suitable one for tressing our claim to owership under SIGINT of sufficient wireless euipment to canny out our tasks in time of wan. 3. We should, I think, consult with S.I.S. about the basis on which they ane intending to compute thed A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN 3 (4) DEPARTMENT OF THE PUBLIC UNDER RECORDS SECTION ACT 1958 OcH 20 T s0le to Miss Chenhalte and Magor about the instructions which the Home office ane sending ou't to Immigration Officer on the subject of nheralded anivals. T said that it was particular] important that they should understand that the stionnaire was only for the information of the Immigration officer and was designed to hel him in his interrogation; on no account should it he got out as or ferma and handed to the alien to fill in thie might have disaotrous conseuencos. 29th Decomber. Jack Marton and Kellar are both back. We had a long conference with the D.G. and Dick White, when Kellar explained all his difficulties. It appears that Malcom MacDonald was considerably worried by the fact that his telegram criticising S.I.F.E. had been passed on to S.I.S. and had resulted in a demand by the local S.I.S. representative to see a copy of the telegram. MacDonald maintained that it was confidential, and that he was only thinking aloud. The Commanders-in-Chief, Wh1 had subsequently heard of the telegram and had taken serious umbrage at the criticisms of an organisation which they regarded as being in part responsible to them. Kellar has made it abundantly clear that the criticisms which MacDonald has made should be directed to his own Special Branches which are primarily responsible for collecting the information which he requires. Appreciations can only be made on the basis of good information. MacDonald's other criticism is that S.I.F.E. contains no South East Asia experts. Kellar has, I think, persuaded him that such qualifications are not necessary in the Head of S.I.F.E. and that intelligence experience and powers of organisation are more important. MacDonald had clearly got a wrong idea as to the role of S.I.F.E. which is concerned with the collation of intelligence over a much wider area. There is a meeting about to take place of the Defence Committee as to whether any review of Intelligence organisations in the Far East is necessary. If so, a further meeting will be held on the 20th January, which the D.G. may have to attend. Meanwhile we are consulting vith S.I.S. in order to obtain their agreement to the secondment of one of their officers to S.I.F.E. in order that all reports on security intelligence can be 2/3 co-ordinated on the same basis as those in the Middle East. It is also proposed that the Head of S.I.F.E. should speak for S.I.S. in security intelligence matters only. It will be for consideration in our discussions with S.I.S., which onncern our relations generally, whether we should not be allowed to have representation in places like Bangkok,if we think such an arrangement might give valuable results. Morton will establish himself in London and work at Head Office for a couple of months. He will then go out and visit the while of his parish before he takes over from Kellar. There is no doubt that MacDonald has lost his head about Dalley, as he now has nobody who comes and whispers things intohis ear. The basic fact is that M.S.S. had no concrete facts to guide them and that Dalley's advice might will have been extremely misleading. Until the S.B.S get on their feet- this may take some time o MacDonald is not likely to get the information he requires. What is certain is that Dalley's presence in the area would constitute a serious menace to the building up of any solid intelligence organisation. He is far too much of an intriguer and his judgement is faulty. I told the D.G. that in my view it would be a good thing if it were made clear to Valley, and to everyone in the Far East, that there was no intention of re-employing him in that area. Kellar agrees with. this, since it is clear that certain elements in M.S.S. are being unco-operative and pro- Dalley, as they feel that if Dalley returns they would have an opportunity of joining his staff. There is no doubt that Livett and Blades are being extremely petty and obstructive. Gray is wholly co-operative. There is no doubt that Kellar has done an extremely good job in very difficult circumstances. He thinks that while there are some extremely good officers in .I.F.E. there is a tendency to make stupid criticisms of Head Office and to isolationism in a small European community. There seems to be a reluctance to get out and meet local Malays and Chinese. This is understandable, as most of our officers live together and many of them have families while the single officers have to entertain the female staff. Kellar takes a poor view of who is inclined to sit in his office and wait for M.S.S. reports to fall into his tray instead of going out to get them. In Hong King and Rangoon he thinks e.situation is entirely satisfactory. The Ambassador is extremely pleased with John Harrison, and both Alan Roger and Carrell are doing very well in Hong Kong. I had a long talk with Jack Morton about Iaa.A There is no doubt that he has got a very good orgARsatiDn has the respect of everyone in the area. IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. OcH 2OM 214. He thinks that Philip Ray will do well, but he has urged him to take a greater part in the social life of Baghdad. His paper work is excellent, but he ought to meet more people. Morton thinks that he will do this now that he is head of the station, and that his wife will be a great help to him. The Iraquis have brought off an excellent coup in arresting some 160 members of the Communist Party, including the Executive ir Commi ttee while in session. They were able to do this owing to a denunciation by a dissident Arab group. The activities of the Party were more widespread than was expected and the Russian Legation is definitely involved. It was working through a small group of Armenians and had lines in most directions, including Kurdish circles. 3lst December. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Oc 201 dis I had a talk with Skardon about the MEREDITH case. On information that we obtained from WEISS some time ago, we knew that MEREDITH was associated with Major VERNON and Flora WOODMAN in giving information to the Russians. It was decided to ask MEREDITH to come to the Police Station and then request him to tell us whether his loyalties lay. At the outset x& the interview was extremely sticky. MEREDITH questioned our right to summon him to a Police Station or to ask him about his loyalties. It was only then that Skardon outlined to him his association with WEISS over a period of four years. He began by denials, but when shown a photograph and further details, said that he did not wish to talk except in the presence of a solicitor. Skardon told him that he had a perfect right to demand a solicitor, and they by various means induced him to think that it might be better if he gave a free and frank account of his association with WEISS. At the outset he did not wish to implicate others, but when it became apparent to him that their names might well be known to Skardon, he came entirely clean. MEREDITH'S story confirmed in every detail what we already knew. He said tha t he had given such information as was naturally in his possession to the Russians, as he disliked our vascillating policy towards the Nazis. Moreover, he had faith in the Russian system. He was horrified when told that WEISS was a German, and he said: "Do you mean to say I was giving information to the Germans?" Skardon confined himself to pointing out that once you gave information to a foreigner who had not got the interests of this country at heart,yo might be giving it to anybody. Skardon then asked him whereehiniloyaltieselay in the event of that he would feel bound to be a war with Russia. He said conscientious objector, although he felt entirely patriatic to his own country. The reason for this enquiry at the moment is that MEREDITH, who is a highly qualified technician, is required by his form to work on some secret project. Skardon takes the view that, in view of his unique qualifications, he should elallowed to do the work. He is not a member of the Communist Party, according to his own statement, and our records, and has never been one. He is deeply interested in his work and does not normally engage in politics. Skardon thinks that in the event of war, he would get a perfectly frank statement from MEREDITH as to whereehehstood. We shall have to put the facts to the Ministry of Supply and let them make up their own minds. On the whole I think I should be prepared to take a chance, although it is difficult to say without actually having seen the man himself. 216 I have been reviewing the War Book. There are various points which need amendment. The Foreign Office are put down as directing and financing R.S.S. 9 and there is no mention of the department responsible for seeing that wireless in Embassies is dismantled and that Embassy staffs are isolated. When this book has been finalised, we shall have to get out our own book and N then consider the expansion of each section and the individuals by name whom we intend to fill the various posts. oefods 80009os e o Lolloes 11801o5 9003 af o ad .066.0 o 3 rei analnet areanad olanue 1970000 otlo ont asei 3 3 Con 103 a card toteia bed 1311 e To3e one 90 on arceo o oe one d oo g buecen, 1005. at o ca .soo10 aanse a adona arad anool o s home son tho ONAS