AThe National Archives(c) crown copyrightCatalogue Reference:kv/4/473Image Reference:1POL F53-24-90SAV20LIDDELL DIARTESFILE GLOSEDS Form 924SEE ALSU LIST INSIDE COVErSimrStnStorSorat Na.Data -Sunal No.DntoSer nl N4.DutyDaslunotianDusrunoikoDosigoatonloDik 07.62.01.00S Form 960or DA1S b )rtris Ss $0327 AOWTwi2NOTE,For numbers with the letters A. or B. af'ter themplease see envelope at the back of the diary. Theseare copies of the D.G's Tuesday Meetings.talaco Dofocoeel 1,aol.1951.lst January.I cannot remember what I said last year about the prospects for1950, but I am sure that I did not onsider that they were too bright.We have since become embroiled in a war in Korea, clearly provoked byMoscow and possibly designed to weaken our powers Df defending the West.The effect has been to intensify feeling both here and in America andindeed to some extent in Europe, as to the dangers of the Russian menace.In Amemica, as usual, the dangers of another world war have beenpitched, I shoud say, somewhat higher than the situation really meriits,but in some ways this is all to the goog, since it has roused everyoneto an appreciation of the urgeney of adequate defence measures. Anextensive programme of rearmament and increased mobilisation is going on,on the basis that only when we reach panity with the Russians shall we bein a position to talk to them with any possibility of finding a reasonablesolution of the present state of affairs. This has had the curious effectof bridging the dollar gap, owing to the rapid increase of prices of rawmaterials within the sterling area. The Government, of course, are takingcredit for this fortuitous situation, which has been achieved mainly onaccount of rearmament and, to some extent,0 the hand work and privationswhich the British publi have endured. Meanwhile, a gradual inflationis going on and the value of our E in purchasing power is probably somewherearound B/6d. My last new suit cost me Ell; before the war it would havebeen E15.In Konen the initial quick reaotion of the Americans was obviouslyright, but, difficult as the decision was, the U.N. were I think wrong ingoing beyond the 38th Paralle. Slessor, Chief of eAilr Staff here,was the only high-ranking personality who definitely opposed the move; heargued that whether you stopped on the 38th, 39th, or 4oth Parallel, or theManchurian border, you Would alweye have a guerilla force on the other sideoftheline,andthatthegreatertheareayoucoveredthemoretroopsyouwould require to maintain order. Had we remained at the 38th Parallel, Idonot think that the Chinese would have intervened, although they wouldhave obviously assisted the North Koreans to rebuild their force andpossibly to engage later in further hostilities. The major blunder was, Ithink, taken by the United States, when, without consultation they undertookto defent Formosa and refused to recognise the Chinese Government. even defacto. It is now difficult to find any solution in Korea until the U.N.Forces have driven the Chinese back at least to the other side of the 38thParallel - anything else would involve us in considerablle lo88 of face.At the moment we are supposed to be making an ordered retreat to a bridge-headround Pusan. All through these operations we have been dependentflor information almost entirely on MacArthur'a H.Q., which keeps on makingirresponsible and inaccurate statements. The Liaison officer there,Air Vice Marshal Boncher, appears to get no more than the Press hand-out,which we read in the papers and receive in Top Secret form the followingday from the J.I.C. No information comes from our officers commandingthe British contingent.The position in Indo-China is none too good, but the French areshowing a rather more ofrensive Bpirit. If, however, Vietminh arereinforced by Chinese Divisions, anything might happen.In Malaya the position has certainly deteriorated, Shaw thinksthat this 18 TO some extent due to Guenry being unable,o unwiling, toregard himself aa a Military Governor with his Colony in a state of war. He2.confines himself to administration and political policy and does not givethe Military the support they need. A demand has been made of UB torelease some of our ex-Indian political officers, but this is being resistedon the grounds that they would not provide the reall solution.In Western Europe Eisenhower has been appointed Commander-in-Chief,and an increased armament programme is being put into effect here and inWestern European countries. The French do not feel that they can do anymore in Indo-China without detriment to their commitment in Western Europe.In the Middle Eaat. things are more or 1e88 quiet at the moment, butthere are certain omninous signs in Persia.I saw Newsam about S.F. on HAREKIN, a jeweller, whose house isbeing used as a rendezvous for high-ranking memberg of the Communist Party,including Bob STEIVART and Harry POLLITT. It is Just possible thatHAFFKIN may pay some part in the Party'e finances.2nd January.For the minutes of the D.G. (Tuesday) meeting held to-day, seeenvelope at the back of the dlary.I went to see the D. of P.P. about a chapter on the RUCHS casewhich Rebecca Weat is publishing in her revised edition of Famous Trials.Hill had heard that she had been given a copy of FUCHS! statement, in whichhe had mentioned that the worst thing he ever did Was to give theplutonium bomb to the Russians. It would obviously be extremelyundesirable if this particular passage, which had been ommitted from alnthe proceedings, were to reawaken American hostility over the whole incident.The D. of P.P. told me that Rebeeca West had asked the Attorneyfor a copy of this statement, but that the Attorney had passed the matterto the D. of P.P. He had blue-pencilled the offending passage and alsoone which referred to FUCHS' contacts and returned the papers to theAttorney' office. Unless, therefore, they had slipped up, all shouldbe well. He undertook to get the manuscript from Rebecea West before itwent to the publishers.Jackson of the Foreign Office telephoned about Otto JOHN. the newhead of the Federal Security Service in Western Germany.JOHN had beenover here and had met the D.G. and Dfck White. This fact had reached theears of Kinkman, who is taking over Intelligence Division from CharlesHayaon. Kirkman wanted to know what advice we had given Otto JOHN, as hewould be seeing him shortly and was anxious to speak with the voice.After checking wi'th Dick White, Jackson was told that hemeetinghad been a purely social one, arranged by Wheeler-Bennett and KennethStrong, and that in fact no advice had been given. otto JOHN had beentold that he could re-establish contact here if he came to England, andthat we should be glad to help him in any way we could.33rd Januany.Wild, Charles Cholmondeley andgame to talk to me abouttheir mission to the Far East.It is purely exploratory and designed tosee whether they can implement any purely tactical deception in the area, orengage in wider forms of deception.I told them as best I could what the difficulties were, namely, thatthare was not sufficient information coming in from the ground forces, andthat channels to the Chinese, as farya I knew, were non-existent. Idoubt myself whether they will be able to do anything effective, but CharlesCholmondeley, the author of Plan MINCEMEAT. is a resourceful chap and maythink of something. His handle-bar moustache is not quite 80 long as itSince he lef't us he has been pursuing locusts in the Middle East andin Kenya.VIALLACE came to see me. He was recommended by Herbert Hart), whose pupilis.Dick and I both thought he was a useful candidate, but he is atesent doing the Foreign Office examination. He seemed quite anxious tocome to us, but he will not be available untill June.THISSACOPY THIS S A COPYORIGINAI DOOUMERIINDEPARTVEN TNFEI INHEBUELIC HEORDSl2es2 2195th Januany.I saw Pugh, the Assistant Commissioner of Police, Gold Coast. Heigoing on leave and will come in again in March.I gave him my generalimpressions, with -which he seemed to agree.I attended a meeting at the Home Office, on the subject of E.V.Ws,with Thisille.15,000 cases have been dealt with so far, but it has only beenpossible to type 4,000 of the more important reports. Steps are beingtaken to get extra typing assistance.The major question to decide was shiwhether. the operation should goonthroughout the year. We were all in fav.our of this and a recommendais to be made that 5.extra hands should be recruited for the purpose.There might then be a chance of completing the work by April, 1952.There is no doubt that the efforts made 8O far have been wellworth while. It is already possible to give some assessment of thepotentialities of this 5th Column. The position is fairly reassuring,although there may be a small category for internment.It was thought that Chief Constables ought to be instructed topass on these basic reports to other Chief Constables if the alien lefttheir area. Newsam will take this up at the next Chief Constablesconference. It was allso necessary that Chief Constables should look atthe Suspect aliens (?) from time to time. It had been rather a shockto Lancashire to find that a certain number of people. had emerged who heeither not geen registered at all or were wrongly registered. Thesame situation appears to exist in the Me.tropolitan area.Cumming and Yinterborn came to talk to me about the Censorship:meeting.Right at the end Des Graz put over rather a fast one aboutsending Montgomeny Hvde to the Middle East to look into censorshipproblems.Winterborrsaid quite rightly, that it might be well toascertain first the views of the Chiefs of Staff on whereeouruH.a. waslikely to be. Montgomery Hyde was to proceed on the assumption thatthe Suez Canal and the Mediterranean would be open. This seemed atlleast doubtful from the Naval reports. Des Graz then announced thatMontgomery Hyde had booked his passage andwould be leaving at the endof the week! I rather gathemthat the Foreign Office were likely trintervene.I should not be altogether surprised if Montgomery Hyde, late ofSecurity Co-Ordination, were not writing another book and needed localcolour from the Midaile East.5.I had a meeting withs.I.Sanmyself, onvisit to the Belgian Cofo.The purpose wasassess whether S.I.8. needed representation in West Africa.I gave some account of the position in West Afriga I saw it ansaid that I did not think thatwould learn very much fromconversations with Humblet, the Belgian Security Officer at Leopoldvilwho was unco-operative, either because he disliked us or on structiofromhis superiors. I disliked, too, the idea that he should go as arepresentative of the Security Service, which would obviously provokequestion as to why Stephens had not made the visit. If, however, heVasked if he knew Stephens, there would be no objection to his saying the did.Personally I think the whole question could have been decidedin the negative in London, and that the net result may be to increaseBelgian suspicions of ourselves and the Americans, whom they alreadythink have designs on their uranium mines.will be carryrecommendations m Brussels, but as the Congo are extremely independeand dislike Brussels. I do not think they are likely to help him.HeS.I.S. seem committed to make this reconnaissance for better or for WCThe D. of P.P. telephoned to say that he had sean Rebecca West'smanuscript and that it contained nothing to which exception could beThere.wa a slight dig at ourselves and the Americans: she said thatTailed to collect information and that the Americans, who had it, hadfailed to appreciate it. This, of course, is inaccurate, but probabharmless.6th January.THIS IS A COPYINDEPARTMENT ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED3 ACT (4) OF 1968 THE PUBLIC UNDER RECORDS SECTION8th January.I sawand told him that I had seenman in West Africe. I mentioned that Liberia was rather a gap in olWest African intelligence and that I had suggested that possiblycould obtain the required inforation through a suitable contact inif C.I.A. in Washington could arrange this.said thahad lready ritten about this, but would take the matter up again.thought that the Consul could very well pass all information toforStephens' information. He did not mind Stephens maintaining corwith the Consul, but hoped that by degrees most of the information Wocanalised throughI tad him that I had sensed a certainhostility to his organisation in West Africa, but that I had made it CStanton, the Consul, that we were prepared to co-operate with any Ameand that it was for the American Government to decide who this indieishould be. It is, of course, a question for D.I.A. and the State DeTHIS IS A COPY6.ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDto iron out their difficulties.IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958Julu2009Kennedy has obtained some quite useful correspondence retweerKWWAKYE andwhich he is sending out to West Alnica alwhich may possible rorIn the basis of a prosecution, or at least furtherenquiries.in regard to the importation of steel tubing.Isaw Johnson of the Colonial Office. I told him that S.BsinAccraand Lagos were both very hard worked and that if they could each He receive promisedtwoofficersitwouldundoubtedlybeagoodthing.replacing Court Messengers in Sierra Leone by white officers. Thisone to see or what more he could do. He told me that he was still pursuing the matter wasanother point which Stephens had mentioned me.9th January.For the minutes of the D.G Thesday) ne.eting held to-day, seeenvelope at the back of the diary.is Murrie for naturalisation. telephoned to me He about was interned the case during of one WALLRAFE the war andour.opinion a German opinion whoat up the time was. that although he liked the English and English llife andhad benefited considerably from the hospitality in this country he was if hestill at heart a German and would have been prepared to assist themcould. It is possible, however, that in recent years there has been to achange of heart. I got the impressior that the Home office intend herather tough in cases of this sort in future.I presided at the S.I.C luncheon, I gathereifromthat4was now in charge of S.EID. thathad been thrown out,and that some attempt was going to be to reconcile the difficultiesmadebetween S.E.D. and the State.S.E.D. was only represent.ed bywho clearly resentedBerthaux's statement.I had a talk ith Pat Reilly. about the meeting which is to take place raisto-morrow about t he future position of the JIS. and also on would point beby Reilly, that Service Departments cnntinuity might to the empipy work. civilians I told who Rllly thatpermanent while sympathy I had with and no so the particular give idea some of a wish permanent to attend civiliar the mee'ting, nucleus to propagate I in had each very Service this considerat ideaIntelligence for years, but Department; without success. I had in My fact ideas been had trying even further, in a board suggestithat that there people should within be some this Inter-Intelligeng circle should be Service around apppintmenta from I thought one d epar tmeand to in this another way in order to have gain a different better trained types nucleus of experience of Intelligence officer thatin time of war.Reilly seemed to like the idea,an I gathered that he was going +eair it at the meeting.two Governors on the proposed would appointment arrange an early of an meeting SAED. with the Colonial inI also told Reilly about West Afriga, and about the representatyee views of theOfficeAccra. and He his said own that West he African Department., in order to try and get thematter settled.5.IT had R meeting withs.I.S.anmyself, onvisit to the Belgian Cohto.The purpose wasassess whether S.I.S. needed representation in West Africa.I gave some account of the position in West Africa. as I saw it ansaid that I did not think thatwould learn very much fromconversations with Humblet, the Belgian Securit Officer at Leopoldvi]who was unco-operative, either because he disliked us or on ins tructicfrom his superiors. I disliked, too, the idea that he should go as 8representative of the Security Service, which woulld obviously provokequestion as to why Stephens had not made the visit. If, however, he Vasked if he knew Stephens, there would be no objection to his saying the did.Personally I think the whole question could have been decidedin the negative in London, and that the net result may be to increaseBelgian suspicions of ourselves and the Americans, whom they alreadythink have designs on their uranium mines.will be carryirecommendations erBrussels, but as the Congo are extremely independeand dislike Brussels. r do not think they are likely to help him. HcS.I.S. seem committed to make this reconnaissance for better or for WOThe D. of P.P telephoned to say that he had seen Rebecca West'smanuscript and that it contained nothing to which exception could beThereawas a slight dig at ourselves and the Anericans: she said thatfailed to collect information and that the Americans, who had it, hadfailed to appreciate it. This, of course, is inaccurate, but probabharmless.6th January.THIS IS A COPYIN ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 19682o0c8th January.I sawand told him that I had seenman in West Africa. I mentioned that Liberia was rather a gap in DUWest African intelligence and that I had suggested that possiblycould obtain the required inforation through a suitable contact inif C.I.A. in Washington could arrange this.said thehad alr eady written about this, but would take the matter up again.thought that the Consul could very well pass all information tofor Stephens' information. He did not mind Stephens maintaining corwith the Consul, but hoped that by degrees most of the information Wecanalised throughI tad him that I had sensed a certainhostility to his organisation in West Africa, but that I had made it cStanton, the Consul, that we were prepared to co-operate with any Ameand that it was for the American Government to decide who this indieishould be. It is, of course, a question for D.I.A. and the State DeTHIS IS A COPY6.ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDto iron out their difficulties.IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958Julu 20o9Kennedy has obtained some quite useful corresponaenve etweer:KWAKYE andwhich he is sending out to West Anica alwhich may possible TOFm the basis of a prosecution, or at Least furtherenquiries.in regard to the importation of steel tubing.I saw Johnson of the Colonial Office. I told him that S. .Bs in Accraand Lagos. were both very hard worked and that if they could each receiveone to see or what two more he could do. He told me that he was still pnrsuing the matterofficersitwouldundoubtedly-beagoodthing.He promisedreplacing Court Messengers in Sierra Leone by white officers.This wasanother point which Stephens d-mentioned t.o me.9th January.For the minutes of the D.G (Thesday) ne.eting held to-day, seeenvelope at the back of the diary.Murrie telephoned to me about the case of one WALLRAFE. a German whoisup for naturalisation He was interned during the war and our life opinion andhad at the benefited time was, considerably that although from he the liked hospitality the English in and this English country, he wasstill at heart a German and would have been in recent prepared to there assist has been a hecould. change of It heart. is possible, I got however, the impression that the Home Office intend to hethatyearsrather tough in cases of this sort in future?I presided at the S.I.C Co luncheon, I gatheredfromthatdwas now in charge of ED. 9 thathad been thrown out,and that some attempt was going to be made reconcile the difficultiestobetween S.E.D. and the Suete.S.E.D. was only represent.ed by.who clearly resentedBerthaux's statement.T had a talk ith Pat Reilly. about the meeting which is to take place raisto-morrow about t he future position of the JTs. and also on would point beby Reilly, that Service Departments might to the erpipy work. civilians I told who Really thatpermanent and S0 particular give some wish enntinuity to attend the meeting, I had very considerabIntelligence Department; I had in fact ideas been had trying even further, propagate in a suggesti ideawhile sympathy I had with no the idea of a permanent civilian nucleus to in each Service thisfor that years, but without be some success. Inter-Intelligenge My Service appointments boandand that there people should within thing circle Shoua be of moved experience: around from I one thought d eparto thatto in this another in order should to have gain a different better trained types nucleus of Intelligence officerin time of war.Reilly seemed to like the idea,an I gathered that he was goingair it at the meeting.two Governors o that the proposed he would appointment arrange an early meeting with the Colonial inI also told Reilly about Wes.t Afriga, of and an about SED. the representatve views of theOfficeAccra. and Hersaid his own West African Departme in order to try and get thematter settled.7.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1968Julu2009loth January.and David Haldane PorI had a meeting with Dick, Roger, Shaw. and Kellar when we agreedto write to S.I.S. expressing the view that the course we gave to thewas valueless From their point ofview and ingurned a certain Security risk, We thought that If anyfurther courses were to be given, we should be given a better ideaabout the organisation we were trying to improve and the practicabilityof any measures we might suggest. Merely to give a recitation of whatwe do here did not seem to us to be very much good.I saw one ELIAS. who is a lawyer in Singapore and has already, triedto join S.I.F.E. on the recommendation of Shears. a Magistrate inSingapore who was formerly in the Malayan Security Service.While ELIAS may be all right, I cannot possibly see him in ourService.I had a meeting with Dick, Hill, Graham Mitchell, John Marriottand Thisele about the internment of aliens in war. We came totheconclusion that it would be better, if possible, to avoid any form ofcategory internment, and that if we thought that Russians who had servedin the Soviet Armies during the last war would be a danger in any futurewar, we should include them in our lists. We should also warn theHome Office: that whatever we did in this regard there might still bepressure from the Military for category internment if the Russiansreached the Channel Ports.l11th January.At the J.I.0. Directors meeting to-day I raised the question ofabolition of the Vise, I said that this piece of counter-intelligencemrethirrery wageeinig gradually whittled down by the Foreign Office, whowere now asking for agreement in ithe cases of the Argentine, Cuba andSpain. These countries were not asking us for the abolition of the vis:system, it was the Foreign Office who were pressing them to do SO ratheragainst their will. We wondered whether this was wise in the presentcircums tances.I was strongly supported by 'c', and in fact by the whole CommitteReilly asked me to let him have a letter D on n the subject.8.I asked Ine Snencer whether he was prepared to accepttheappointment of Deputy Head of S. .I.M.E. He told me that he wasdefinitely unwilling to do this for family reasons.Ferguson looked in to see me. Hehas just returned fromGreece, where he has been working under Wickham. Wickham'e missioto reorganise the Gendarmeris is known locally as "Wickham's Follies"With the exceptio of a few Irish stalwarts, his whole staff arecleared out about once a year. Wickham is the mission and it isquite useless for anyone to suggest anything: he has resolutely turneddown the idea of the Greeks having a Security Service, which apparentlythey sorely need.Fergie is once more looking for a job.Desmond orr rang up to say that on the assumption that we hadnojob for him, he had offered his services to Jeffes in the presentemergency. He asked me to say a word on his behalf if Jeffes referredto me. I said I would certainly speak to Jeffes if he rang me up.I could only feel that, emergency or no emergency, Desmond Orris the last person I should wish to see back in this organisation.12th January.I had a neting, about the intercentian of West African mails,with Allan. It was agreed that we should give Allan the namesof suppliers of Communist literature in this country, and also thenames and addresses of recipients in West Africa, and that armedwith this information he could conduct a survey of the Rest Africanmails with a view to seeing whethe we could assist the West Africanin the interception of Communist literature in the Colonies. Wewere agreed that it would be a waste of time to try and get theHome Office to stop the literature here.cametoseeme. I told him the state of the game inregard to the posting of a S.E.D. officer to Accra. I said that Ihoped that I had cleared a good deal of gound and that in a very shorttime the appointment would be agreed.told me abouthaving taken over the S.E.D.and the fact tha twas no longer employed. He did notknowwhat the implications of this might be; he could only wait and see.He had not seenhimself, but doubtless would be summonedto Paris before long.15th January.I gave my usual talk to a number of Colonial police officers,who are attending a course here.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION.(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958July2009THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMEMT RETAINED9.NDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION16th January.OF THE E PUBLIC RECORDSulu2000For the minutes of the D.G. (Tuesday) meeting heid seeenvelope at the back of the diaryThree Australians came to see me. They form the embryo. AustralianS.I.S. which Menzies has decided to set up. They are doing a coursewithS.I.S. S.I.S.I explained to them what thi organisation did and how importantit was for them to work in the closest possible touch with the A.s.I,ounder Colonel Spry: this was for their own protectio and for theavoidance o1 overllapping. I urged them that,i if they possibly could, toget into the same building as Colonel Spry. This might appear tothema small administrative matter, but I assured them that it was thecrux of the whole problem. It was no good even having an office onthe other side of the street; it must be in the same building, and ifpossible, there should be common access to records.I had a meeting with Cooper of the Nigerian Police, Dick, Alee,and members of O.S. Division, B.1.B. etc. on the question of running.an Afrian agent inMax Knight, who was present, at firstseemed diffident about handling an African, but Cooper was, I think, ableto reassure him that it was not in fact really necessary for us to knowa great deal about his background in Africa, althoug, of course, themore knowledge we could acquire on that subject and on the man'spersonality the better. We should be judging him largely nn the materialhe produced in this country, which will be checkable against our ownrecords.Cooper had a particular character in view, and steps are to betaken to get him over here before Cooper returns to West Africa inApril. This would enable the latter to effect the introduction.The object of the exercise is tvo-fold: firstly, to get informationabout the intentions of the Communist Party and its contacts with anyother West African students, but, more important perhaps to get a linein on Paris and Prague.De Quehen. came to say good-bye.He is replacing Simkins inSalisbury.17th January.I gave a talk to a number of Detective Superintendents who aredoing a course here.I lunehed withI am impressed by his senseof balance and his ability to see both sides of the picture in regardto Korea and China.I had a meeting with Goresuch of the Colonial Office, to tell himwhatIhaddoneinwestAfrica. Very tentatively I gave him my viewsabout the general situation, making it clear that T was only a "new boy"and had spent two weeks in the country, and so therefore not qualifiedto speak at all! He seemed to agree with my estimate of the dangers10.of the present situation; he was inclined to think, however, tha't eventhough NKRUMA might sweep the board in the elections, his Ministers wouldfind the diificultiee of running the country s0 great that they wouldneither have the time nor the inclinationnto press for further concessioninthe matter of self-government. He admitted, however, that this wassomething of a gamble.told me that Colonel Hubert MARTINEAU wasanxious to talk to a representative of our Service and would I get intotouch with him.I had a L.U. and found that MARTINEAU had causedconsiderablle trouble to Security Co-ordination, New York, during thewar, and, amongst other things, had posed as a representative of theSecret Service. I told 'c' that for these reasons I thought it would bebetter if MARTINEAU put his information on paper and sent it in to theU.S. of S. at the Home Office. I asked 'C' to pass this on to Peter.18th January.We had a long session at the J.I.C, (Directors) meeting to-aay, whenthe likelihood of war with Russia was discussed.While it was agreed that ultimately Russia wished to dominate theworld to the creation of f Soviet Socialist Republics in all countries,we did not think that she would deliberately embark upon a world warduring the next two years, for a variety of reasons. This did not,however, mean that she would not continue here policy of war by proxyand cold war. If war came in the interim, it would be due either tothe domination by cold war or war by proxy means on some area, the los8of which woulld seriously embarrass the Allles if they were called uponlater to fight a world war; or it would be due to American action, haviregard to the war pBychosis 8o prevalent in the United States.The purpose of this memorandum is to brief the Chiefs of Staff intheir demands to the Cabinet for increased rearmament.Roger and I called on the D.N.I. at his request. D.N.I had receivedan anonymous letter addressed to c.-in-C., Portsmouth, indicating troubleover food in certain units of the Fleet, which were going on exercises.On seeing the message which was typed on a signals machine, we cameto the conclusion that the writer was a rating of some sort, who ratherlightheartedly thought that his action would lead to some improvementin the diet of board his ship, since the authorities would be particularlyanxious to avoid trouble.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT1968200911.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION13 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1968.Julu2009We gave a party to the Police Superintendents which seemed to beSuperintendent a great success. for Lancashire I was particularly County. impressed He told me by Lindsay, that after the hearing new thecoursehere he e-realised how futile it was for provincial Forces to thinkthey could embark on agent operations within the Communist Party withoutclosest possible consultation with ourselves. He felt that the work wewere doing was far above the heads of the Police, and as about as differe]to crime work as anything could be. He had been immensely impressed byaln the speakers that he had heard and felt that the value of getting ourpoint of view over to Superintendents could not be overestimated.I got12.similar expressions of appreciation from almost all the other SuperintendentsThe only criticism was that the seats were a bit hard and not quite broadenough for some of the students!19th January.I went to see Newsam aboutI talked to himabout the possibility of a very large influx of refugees from the Continentof Europe in the event of a future war.e It seemed to that on any showingtmS 1S likely to happen, since Europe was still more than conscious ofrigours of the German occupation, which they would not wish to endure a seondtime from a nation whom they feared even more. We had been reinforcedinthiview by a conversation with Einthoven of Dutch Security, who ha'd said thatthere was already a tariff for bringing people over and that some of them hadalready made reservations. He estimated that we might etanything up tohalf a million from Holland alone.Newsam said that he did not know what had been done about this problemin the event of a future war. He seemed to recollect that there was a campat Southampton dnring the last war. I told him that refugees had arrived atports all over the country and had ultimately been collected at various hoste]where we had endeavoured to screen them. In any future war the Dutch hadundertaken to let us have a team of interrogators, plus all their records,during the "yellow light period", but to my mind by far the most seriousaspect of the problem was the possibility that such an influx would gum upthe whole works and be a serious embarrassment to the defending forces.Newsam took the point and said he would make enquiries.THIS IS A COPYVivian came to see me about the case ofIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION13 (4) OF RECORDStelephoned to me to say that the D. Haa8 already nominatedrepresentative forfor whom they had applied for a Visa:thatI would endeavour to get into touch withwho was going to Paris onSunday, and ask him to suggest tothat this application should bewithdrawn for the time being. He could assurethat we were doingeverything possible to arrange matters, and that 1t looked as if we would besuccessful in the course of a few days.The action in appointing a man now might just spoil all our efforts.We had a post mortem on the Superintendent courser There were veryfew criticisms, and they were all full of praise for what they had heard andfor the hospitality which had been extended to them.I attended a meeting with Carless, A.D.N.I. about the charter ofS.0. (I) Simonstown. Carless said that (I) was adviser on air securitymatters in the area to the C.-in-C. He thought that if .0. (I) could besupplied with general information, and possibly basic papers, plus themonthly report, his equirements would be met. He thought, too, thatitwould be quite simple to arrange that if (I) wished to approach the Frenc)or the Belgians he could do So through S.L.0 West Africa.Carless rang me later to confirm that this arrangement was approvedthe D.N.I. I said that I thought Stephens would be able to iron this oulocally, which would probably be praferable. Carless said that if there asany difficulty the Admiralty woulld send a signal to (I)13..22nd January.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 19582009Reilly held a meeting with Barton of the Colonial Office, andrepresentatives of the West African Department of the Foreign office,about the appointment of a D.E.C. representative inBarton put forward his former obstructive arguments, which I thinkwere fairly successfully demollished. He was asked to submit the minutesofthediscussion to hin West African Department, in the hope that they Cagree to the appointment being made. If not, it is to be submitted tothe J.I.C. Reilly hoped that this could be avoided..44.23rd January.at the back of the diary.For the minutes of the D.G (Tuesday) meeting held to-day, see envelope24th January.Intelligence in Austria and is now at a loose end. IT occurred to me -I lunched with Vigkery, who has completedthis task of reorganisingealthough I did not say So - that We might employ him on a charter basisleave. to hold the fort in one-man stations abroad while our Lofficer took histelephoned to say that he had just heard that by some accident,Passport Control had granted a visa to the D.E.C. representative toVe agreed that he should consullt the Foreign Office. Herangbackratertosay that he was telling Passport Control in Paris to approach D.E.C. andpersuade them to refrain from taking advantage of the visa for the time being.this was successfully achieved.CI25th January.Clifton who worked for us in the Bahamas during the war, came toisk whethe we had anything for him to do. He went back into the exportusiness but has not made good. He wants to feel that at the age of 41e is on firm ground I had to tell him that we had nothing for him.Incidentally, he told me that a great many firms here could exportts much as 25% more than they were doing already; they were anxioushowever, not to lose their markets in this country for something theyregarded as transitory.Carless telephoned to say that the D.N.I. agreed with the proposalsabout the charter of S.O. (I) Simonstown.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN-DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1968July200915.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSMT 1968.fly200926th January.I have read an extremely interesting account of an interview betweenAir Vice Marshal Boucher. our representative in Tokyo, and General MacArthMacArthur's view is that any form of appeasement in regard to Chinacan only lead to further trouble. He thinks that we should hold our posivulnerable, since she only lives on a shoestring. He does not believein Korea and bomb China into submission. He thinks that she is extremely thiRussia would live up to her obligations. under the Sino-Soviet Treaty. Ifcome to terms ith China on the basis of her admission to the United Natio.and the cession of Formosa, we are only laying up trouble for ourselves inIndo-China, Siam, Burma, Malaya and Hong Kong.While disagreeing fundamentally with Britain on Far Eastern policy,apparently has a great admiration of the resistance put bp by this countryduring the war. He doubts at the moment whether any of the other Western16.European countries will fight if put to the test, and he recommends thatBritain should retain her Forces in England un'til she sees whether there isgoing to be any resistance on the Continent, since he does not believe thatwe should be able to carry out another Dunkirk.There may be something in what MacArthun says, but it is perhapsquestionable whether China can be brought to her knees by strategic bombinsand, what is more doubtful, is that Russia Would refuse to honour herobligations under the Sino-Soyiet Treaty: she certainly could not do sowithout very serious loss of face, although she might try and limit herassistance to the supply of war material and military advice.MacArthur has been wrong in calling Chinese bluff. and he may wellbe wrong in the idea that he can call Russian bluff. His remarks toBoucher wene given in the strictest confidence- so much SO that Boucherwondered whether he ought to report them.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDINDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS1958.Julu2009We had a long discussion about the case of SHAGSHAG has beenasked byIto recruitThey believe thatis financially embarrassed and thereforeapproachable The Russians would offeras much as 5800 for arealy valuable document.We are inclined to go ahead with this, as we think it will reallyput SHAG on his feet, but before doing S0 we shall have to have someguarantee fromthat the supply of chickenfood does not. dry up. Moreover, the food has got to be something prettysubstantial. We then hope to persuade the Russians that we cannot anylonger conduct operations through a member of the Embassy: this we hopemay lead us to some unknown resident agent.Ve are considering the possibility of walking in onata meeting between him, SHAG andand then trying to blackmail himinto working for us or defecting. We came to the conclusion that such anoperation was not likely to succeed in the case of a man who was a dyed-in-the-wool Communist. Money would mean very little to him unless he haddecided to. burn his boats completely, and we frankly did not see why heshould.27th January.Victor came in. I gave him the list of scientists and explainedits contents. He will show it to Hans.I also showed him the report on the'curiousaphenomena" detectedby our Air Attache in Moscow several months ago. My ownViewonhearingofthegeneral state of insecurity at our Embassy in Moscow, was that theRussians probably inserted microphones. in the room above, or in the lamprecently fixed to the wall outside.17..Kellar talked to me for a long time about the tasks of Africanstations. He was particularly concerned about what he constantetyrefers to as the regional focus" on such problems as African nationalisthe Afrikaan problem and the Indian problem.I said that as far as I knew there was very little tie-up in Africton these matters; that it was the duty of any S.L.0. to know what wasgoing on in his area; that he would mention it in his monthly report,which he would circulate to his colleagues, and if there seemed to beany Inter-Eolony tie-upuof any significance, we could call for a reporton the subject.31st Januany.Desmond On came in to pass me some information about a Communistbus driver called WARMAN, and to offer his services in what he describeasthe "present emergency". He appeared to be anxious to go abroadand had already communicated with Jeffes, 80 far ithout result.Idid not encourage him to think that there would be any opening forhim here - such a thing would, of course, be quite impossible.John Shaw says that he is worried about war planning. He seemsto have got a long letter from Jack Morton, in which he ants us toconsider the provision of malle clerks, if all women have: to beevacuated from the area as a result of a state of war existing withChina.I think the answer is that they will just have to get on asbest they can. Certainly the idea of a team of male clerks standingby to take over is quite out of the question.I had a word withwho leaves for Australia to-morrto take over from Courtenay I told hin toe press both the AustraliaS.S. and Colonel Spry to get themselves housed in the same building.He might also mention this point to Dick Casey. He should make itclear that it was not just a small administrative matter, but one offundamental importance, which if tackled now may: save an infinity oftrouble later on. It is just as important to Colonel Spry as it isto the Australian S.S.I gather that the Australian case is more or less at a dead end -atanyrate for the moment. The only possible course is to try andget a defector.lst February.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.2.00918.3rd February.Thistle, Mrs. Towndrow&: Kenneth Mills came to see me about the caseofwho was shown by an intercept on King Street to be a member ofthe Monmouth Police Force, who joined the Party from the Army of the Rhinein 1945. He was reporting his new position and saying that it was somewhironical that he should be seeing M.I.5 enquiries about Communiste inordnance factories. We put a check onin case King Street sent hiany reply, which we thought was most unlikely. If no reply was sent weshould then have to invite the Chief Constable to exercise some controlover his action to safeguard the source.5th February.I saw Miss Weldsmith and told her about the female staff and theirconditions, actoritfrouatron, eto. in West Africa.Miss Weldsmith had just got back from her tour of the Middle and FarEast.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDINDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.Julu2009Colonel Gardinery Squadron-Leadel Bryant-Fenn and Major Willson ofthe J.I.C.. Secretariat visite ted this office. I explained to them itsgeneral tructure, and passed them on to Dick White, Roger Hollis and19.This IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 195820096th February.came to see me with two requests. He wanted us toreview a report which we had made previously about industrial activity bythe Communist Panty, particularly in connection with the rearmamentprogramme. Were there any further developments? Secondly,whethertheGovernor of Cyprus was indoctrinated. as the American Consul would like totalk to him abbut SIGINT matters. I ascertained that he was and soinformedFor the minutes of the .G. (Tuesday) meeting held to-day, seeenvelope at the back of the drary.I lunched withWe had a long discussion about the organisaticof counter-espionage, with particular reference tohad toldthat he Would have to make up "his mind prettyquickly on what the relations should be between the Sureterand in particularthe Surveillance du Territorre- and the D.E.C.seems tothink that the D.E.C. should carny more or less analagous functions toexcept, of course, that it would have the additional advantageof the control of foreign stations- and that the Surete should supplyall information relating to espionage and accept direction. I said thatthis seemed to me logical. The great thing, however, was to decidewhereer the focal point was to be - either in S.E.D. or in the Surete -since a't present they were obviously overlapping functions.7th February.I had a meeting with D.B., D.6. D.o.s0 and O.S.I to discuss theline we should take with the Cold War Committe in connection with thebuilding up of foreign Police Forces in securit ty matters.. We had receiveda draft mnemorandum from the C. Committee, which we thought was unrealisticin its approach to the whole problem. We wished to point out, first ofall, that we were bound to look at the problem to some extent from thepoint of view of defence priorities. This caused us to feel that in thematter of building up foreign security organisations we should do moreprofitable work with the Western European countries, who thought, at leastto some extent, on the same lines as ourselves. We appreciated, however,that there was a problem both in the Far East and in the Middle East, andthat while S.I.S. woulld obtain a more profitable exchange and goodwillfor any operations that they might wish to mount from the territoriesconcerned, there was little chance of improvingnhational security services20.in the Midde Eastern and Far Eastern countries except through localliaisonbySecurityServicetrainedpersonnelorbyPolliceadvisers.It was agreed to draft a memorandum on these lines.Brigadier Johnstone, (I) asked me to lunch after the J.I.C.I told him that 1 was rather worried by the attitude of the Chiefs of Staff,the Cold War Committee. and, to some extent, the Ds. of To, on the questionof Communism Very broadly, I thought they had the impression of awidespread underground organisation directing strikes and sabotage all overthe country.Johnstone said that what I said was roughtly true; he himself had hadquestions directed to him of this kind. While there was not exactlycriticism of it was felt that they had an enormous job Which wasoverwhelming them.I explained to Johnstone that the views held by the Chiefs of Staffwere not our views and the views of other departments on the working level.It seemed to me, therefore, somewhat dangerous that they should be somisguided at the top. I would welcome any suggestions from him as to howthings could be adjusted. The only way really to inspire confidence wouldbe to get those concerned to attend a course of lectures or to visit thisoffice and talk to people on the working level who were immersed in theseaffairs. Obviously they had no time for this. If, however, Johnstonehimself would care to come round, T was sure that everybody would bedelighted to answer any questions he liked to ask. Broadly, our view wasthat the disturbances in the country were due to a lack of trust by therank and file in their T.U. leaders, whom they regarded as too muchidentified with the policy of the Government; they therefore took mattersinto their own hands. The Communists were generally a bit slow off themark, but of course always tried to exploit any situation which arose - thiswas common form. They hardly ever initiated anything. We had consider-ablle coverage and, ,Ialthough we were in no way complacent, we did think thatif there was anything in the nature of a widespread plot we should at leasthave a sniff of it - in fact we had not. Moreover, we knew that theCommunists were extremely anxdous to keep their hands clean, both in mattersof espionage and sabotage, since it wa's clearly not in their interests tobe tarred with either brush. We had positive evidence in two cases thatCommunists had been dismissed from the Party for engaging in espionage, and,with regard to sabotage, it woulld clearly be folly for them to disclosetheir organisation and methods until a real crisis arose. This did not,however, rule out the possibility that disgruntled elements, or evenindividual Communists, might not commit acts of sabotage contrary to theadvice of King Street.I had a meeting with Easton, Fulton, Cope, D.B., D.C. and D.0.S.when we discussed our proposed paper to the C. Committee, They agreedWith our views and we undertook to let them nave a copy of the memorandumwhich we propose to discuss with the Secretariat of the C. Committee, andto suggest that the Committee's own memorandum should be recast.8th February.Hill and I went to a meeting at the Home Office, with the Murrie internment inthe Chair, to discuss various problems in connection withof aliens and the preparation of lists.21.I saw Newsam, at the D.G's suggestion, about the case ofNewsam sent for Baker, and asked him to get O.C. Mommoutishire up UO Londonnext week.yun repruary.We received a note from the Colonial Office. saying they agreed tothe appointment of a D.E.C.. representative. inprovided he had nowireless set, and provided the D.E.C. undertook to give us similarfacilities in French territory. Bothe these provisos are of coursenonsensical and we shall have to get them wiped out.John Marriott. has taken over B.. He seems to think that the sectionhas been spending too much time on writing reports on arty.policy based onpublic statements in the Daily Worker, and that they ought to concentratemore in pursuing Communists who are in places where they may do harm.Graham Mitchell is going to South Africa to irretrte-t AfnicanPolice at their request, on how to set up a Becurlity SIilSeA COreYebesashead of 0.3 on his return.ORIGINAL LDOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION12th February.13 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSAOT 1968Jula2009I had a meeting with Mackenzie of the C. Committee Fulton, Cope,Dick and Roger. Mackenzie accepted our memorandum and is going to recasthis own to the C. Committee.At the Directors Meeting.. I told the D.G. that in accordance with hisinstructions we had thrown all the names back into the melting pot andendeavoured to recommend four more officers to fill the remaining SeniorOfficer posts, for which sanction had been obtained from the Treasury.I said that while we had managed to reach agreement by compromise onI felt bound to regord that, vith the possibleception ofI was apprehensive about the capabilities of theHer two to hold down a Senior Officer's job. I should further like himUO hear the views of the other Directors. I then told him that we hadfailed to agree on the fourth yacancy, as betweenandThe D.G. said that he could not understand whyname was being22.considered at all. I told him that, with his approval, sovfarsassenioritywasconcerned9weweretreatingeveryonewhojoineduptothelst January, 1946 as of equal seniority, owing to the circums tances. thewar, but that since our primary consideration was merit and our secondaryconsiderations were seniority and age, any other officer was eligibleforconsiderabiong - in factonly joined May, but throughoutwar had been performing a task which was primarily in aid of this departmentThe D.G , however, encouraged by Horrocks, decided to ruleout.He wondered, however, whether we had consideredand alsoI said that we had Considered both, and a number of others as weland 11 gave him the short list. While we thoughthad done anextreme good job in Washington, we did not think on our experience of himhere that he was a particularly good desk officer; his strength lay in hispublic relations qualifications. We were all agreed that n-meritwas probably the pick of the bunch: we felt, however, that he was young anuwould have his chance, with other people, such asatalater date.We then tried to establish whether we were selecting these people onmerit, or on seniority.The-] said on 1-merit. Dick wouldlike to vote forand Hollis and I agreed - if in fact we wereselecting personnel solely on merit. Shaw objected, and it was clear thatonly by reconsidering all the names and having a ther-Appointments Boardwhich would probably lead to the same impasse - could we meet Shaw's objectiThe D.G thereupon decided that it should be eitherorandasked each of us to give our views. With some hesitation T voted foras I thought that in fairness to him he should be given his chance.Hollisvoted forShaw and Dick forI am no wiser than I was before as to the basis on which theseselections have been made.13th February.Hutson telephoned about the naturalisation of Andrew REVAI. He saidthat Anthony Blunt had spoken to him in the Club; he had told Blunt thatthe case rested solely on the advice of M.I.5. I -toldHutsonthattha'twasnot strictly true; my recollection was that we had given nd firm opinion,hut that I would look at the papers and let him know.I mentioned that Blunt, who was one of REVAI'S sponsors, had neverin fact been interviewed by the Police. Hutson said that in the Londonarea the Police did not interview sponsors.T elephone Hutson later to tell him that while we had pointed outcertain inconsistencies in -statemen't by REVAI, we thought it fair to saythat in the opinion of one whose judgement we respected, REVAT was no longeraf security risk. Further, that while we were not entirely happy about hisnaturalisation- we did not wish to pressth Home office to withhold it.Hutson, who pparently knew. REVAI personally, thought the only thing to dowas to let the case rest and consider it again in six months time, whenREVAI should make a further applicati on.For the minutes of the D.G. (Tuesday) meeting held to-day, seeenvelope at the back of the drarycame to see me about his failure to get promotion to SeniorOfficer rank.He thought it must be due to some dissatisfaction over theway he was carrying out this job. I said that in 8o far as his work for me23.was concerned, I thought that the Police Liaison Section had done a good jobin building up relations with the Police, and that probably these relationswere better now than they had ever been. On theotherhand,hehadtorealise that we were selecting officers on the basis of merit and ability,tempered by age and seniority, and that he was up against pretty keencompetition. We were trying to select people for Senior Officer jobs whomthought could control a group of sections in any of the Divisions. We hadgiven the whole question much time and thought and, frankly, if he asked meI did not think that he -would-| be competent to -carry such a position anywherein the office, or at any rate his claims to do so were not anything like asstrong as those who had been selected, and indeed others. His chance wouldprobably come later: the fact that he had not been selected this time didnot necessarily mean that he would ever be selected, but if he were askingme about his chances, I thought he had some pretty formidable rivals. Hesaid that this was a great blow to him, since he was getting on in age andhe did not wish to remain in his present grade for the next seven years - COI giv him any advice as to what he should do. I said that I found it verydifficult, but that I would always adiise anybody who came to me and said thhe had a better job outside to take it. He then referred to conversationsthat he had had with Harker about an Assistant Chief Constable's job that waoffered to him at the end of the war. Harker had persuaded him tosayon,although he had given him no definite assurance that he would become a membeof the peacetime a/taff. Finally,had made representations to the Dwho had established him as an officer of the department, I said that had hcome to me, I should certainly have advised him to take the Police job.Norman Brook rang up to ask whether he was correct in stating that morethan half the staf'f in London were employed upon investigations into the.activities of the Gommunistoi Party. I said that to the best of my knowledgethatwouldcertainlybeacorrectstatement.Hethenwentontosaythathwas of course qualifying this statement by rawing attention to the fact thathis work was in aid of all branches of this department, including the espiodepartment. I informed the D.G. about this telephone call.I saw Alderson, Chief Constable of Monmouthshire, in Baker's room thHomeoffice. I showed the intercept onHe is quite determined toget rid of the man, but thinks that it may take Some time before he can finda suitable opportunity which will not endanger the source.He will only betaking one officer at Bedwar into his confidence.Alderson was obviously a little disturbed that a uniformed policeconstable should have been able to see enauiries from but he will belooking into this. If he finds a pretext for getting rid of RUFFLE, he wilunless it is a very straightforward one - consult the Home Office before tak:action.)66THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1968.200924.14th February.I had a meeting with Dick, Thistle and Mantin about E.V.Ws to readhcertain conclusions about internment policy. We agreed to put up a note onthe subject. It seemed that we nad read enough of these ImmigrationOfficers' reports to formulate certain views. Out of the reports seen therewere some thirty odd which were of interest, and roughly about 160 who hadformerly been members of the Red Army aho whould be included in our generallist.15th February.Burtcame to see me. He told me about his various exploits inconnection with the arrest of members of the Doclworkens. Committee. Hedthat he had run considerable risks in obtaining information and asked wheherwe thought our various technical devices could assist him from time to time,since he realised that our equipment was probably far superior to his own.I showed him the piece of telecheck onLwhich suggested thatsorebody had been leaking from S.B. B. about the arrests. Burt said he was alittle worried about this and would look into it. He mentioned thatalthougC.I.D. officers could not get S.B. B. files without reference to himself orThompson, the S.B. Registry was of course open to all members of his branch -some 200 in all. He of course did all he could to check up on their bonafides, but he could not be certain of the loyalty of eveny one. I then askehim whether he had anything on the lines of our Y. Box system. He said thathe had not, but he thought that it might be a very good thing to establishsomethingof the kind. He intended to look into this matter, with particulareference to his recent operations in connection with the Dockworkers' CommitTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS401958.700925.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 19682009It was agreed that at the meeting on Thursday next, considerationwould be given to war planning.I talked to hill about the reference in De COUROY's Digest to analleged private statement by the C.I.G.S. to the effect that the Russianswere likely t.o make waar 19.51. Hiliaid did not think there was anythingthat could be done about this. I said that as far as official documentswent it did not represent the G sis point of view; I thought that heaccepted the .I.cIs view that the Russians were not deliberately seekinga major war at the moment, but that it was always possible that they mightthink that if Germany was going to be rearmed, time was not altogether onheir side. Certainly Sir Gerald Kelly, our Ambasador in Moscow, hadexpressed this view to the Chiefs of Staff when he Baw them about ten daysago. Kelly clearly thought that we had made a mistake in deciding torearmGermany. The C.I.G.S. had replied that the United States had madethis a condition of the assistance they were giving to European rearmament.The alternative, therefore, was either no rearmament in Western Europe orrearmament with German assistance.Hill thought that any move against De COURCY by the C.I.G.S. wouldonly give the latter undesirable publicity.16th February.Murrie telephoned to say that in regard to my letter to Newsam on theEuropean refugee problem in time of war. this matter was being referred toa sub-committee of the Defence Transition Committee and that when the metingwas called we should be asked to attend.I lunched withand met a Captain Fabian. who is AdmiralCarney's assistant over nere. Also present was a captain Carey (R.NTI WIUis attached to C.-in-o's staff, Mddle East. The conversation was general.26.The D.G. had a visit from Sin Norman Brook, who outlined to him wha t hewas going to say in his report Firstly, he was going to express himselfas entirely satisfied with the work that was going on here and the way it wasbeing handled. He was going to be somewhat critical of S.I.S. He had,however,cometotheconclusionthatourpositionunderthePrimeMinisterwas wrong, and that the department should really be placed under the HomeSecretary. The D.G drew his attention to various matters in which the P.was interested, such as the case of Shinwellls son, who had leaked to theIsraeli Intelligence. In such cases it would obviously be ifficult if theD.G. had to go through the Home Secretary. In general the D.G. did, not agreewith the proposal.Norman Brook seemed to think that Findater Stewart. in his report hadexaggerated the defence of the realm side or our Work, and that it was moreappropriate for us to have our roots in the Home Office. These were his viewsand were going forward, but we should of course have an opportunity of statingour bjeections before a final decision was reached on a Ministerial level. Hwould be sending us a copy of the report but would be glad if we would limitthe circulation to Directors only, owing to the criticisms that have been madeof S.I.S.Brook appeared to be in favour of the measure of integration that had beengoing on in S.I.M.E. and .I.F.E. and woulld ultimately be extended to thiscountry when an appropriate building could be found. He did not, however,believe in a single head for S.I.S. and the Security Service. He thought thatwhere the Securit Service found it profitable to station a man bn foreignterritory for liaison purposes, they should be allowed to do SO as a right.In discussing Brook's views about Ministerial responsibility,wit theD.G we alll of us made it clear that we thought that while there might besomething to be said for our being rooted in some permanent GovernmentDepartment, there were grave objections to the Home Office. our work wasprimarily defence work in preparation for a future war and would be appropriateplaced under the Ministry of Defence. We were not studying the Communist Parthere primarily because we thought it was likely to create a revolution or resorto acts of violence in peace time: the basic reason was that the Party was avehiclle for espionage to Russia. It followed, therefore, that B.1 activitieswere mainly directed towards identifying Communists and Fellow Travellers andkeeping them away from places where they might do harm. They were alsoconcerned with the more important members who were likely to be running anrespionage network or laying plans for sabotage in time of war. The whole ofC. Division work of protective security could be classified as defence planningThesamepppliedeventoagreaterdegreeinS.I.M.E.andS.I.F.E.whereweare partially integrated with S.I.S. and form part of the defence forces.Itwould, in our view, disastrous if when speaking a't the J.I.C we had torepresent the views of the Home Office; we should certainlly close the confidenceof the fighting services whd woulld feel that we. could no longer give animpartial view.I find it difficult to understand how a man of Brook's intelligencecould make such a recommendation. Quite apart from New.samwill never have time to deall with our problems.fntthereport and put in our written criticisms.RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION17th February.3 ACT (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS1968rang me up about a letter which de COURCY hae'c'.DeCOURCYiscomplainingthathiscousin,(Ornephew)Michaelwithwhom he has had a rovi, was interviewed in the United States by certainindividuals who have not been named. They apparently disclosed to him27.correspondence about the differences of opinionthat he had had withhiscousin(nephew?).andendeavouredtopersuadehimtodivulgeinformationThey had also told him that his cousin (uncle?) was not what he made himeel:out to be and that his grandfather was called Rosenbaum. de COURCYapparently intends to ask for an enquiry.I toldand subsequentlythat as far as wewere concerned we knew that heehad been a difference of opinion betweende COURCY and Michaeles but that we had certainly never passed any of thatinformation to the Americans.'o' intends to tell de COURCY that the story conveys nothing to himand tha if he wants it looked into he will have to give a good deal offactual information.It seems to me quite possible that the Americans may have been gettingaccess to correspondence between de COURCY and Michael in the United States.We have been particularly guarded in anything we have ld-the-Americansabout de COURCY.fHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENTIN EPARTMENT UNDER SECTIi9th February.3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORII lectured to the Police course at present going HCT 1968 Julo 2009'c' telephoned to say that he had told de COURCY that he knew nothingabout the alleged interview with Michael de COURCY. Kenneth then saidthait was odd that 'c''s name should have been mentioned under the pseudonymof'c' did in fact use his pseudonym at the time of the alllegedatomicbomb explosions. This, of course, would all be consistent withMichael having blown the gaff, wishing to cover up his tracks. Michael, whknows all de COUROY'S informante would ndoubtedly have known about 'c' usinthe name ofwhich I gather he has only done in connection with hisrelations with de COURCY,2oth February.For the minutes of the D.G (Tuesday.) meeting, held to-day, see envelopeat the back of the diary.I lunched with Shaw,al and Johnson of the Colonial Office. Johnsonobviously suffers a good deal of frustration; he shares whole-heartedly weaktheviewsofmostColoniallPoliceForcesthattheirAdministrationsareand are merely layThg up trouble for the forces of law and order; e.g. they thatthought that the Governor should not have released NKRUMAH. Shaw feltin the circumstances the Governor acted-rightly. ersonally I think he didalthough in principle he was wrong. To my mind it only goes to show theextent to which the Gold Coast is on the slippery slope.Shaw feels that before the new Constitution had power withoutresponsibility; they now had a mixture of poser and responbibility. Itseems to me, however, that the Governor is left with responsibility butvery little power to prevent situations arising which may have to be dealtwith by force.22nd February.At the LIC. Directors. meeting, Kenneth Strong gave the office an account of ofhis visit to America, where It is he to O.N.E. studied that the the orkings J.I.C. of have bee emasked to serNational Estimates.28.a representative by General Bedell-Smith O.N.E. is a team of experts,headed by Dr. Langer, and a number of working teams. A paper is tobeput up to Langer S committee of experts at Princeton University headedhy George Kennan, late of the State Department. It then goes back toLanger and may possibly recast it before putting it to the AdvisoryCouncil. Here it is again examined before it goes into its final draftIt is thought that our respresentative should be of the rank dColonel, who should sit in on Dn] banger's first draft Committee.C.I.A.are sendinghere to work,a and when necessary vith the J.l.S.will be Head of but in fact will leave all the Work outsidethe J.I.C. toWe had another meeting of the Appointments Board to-day, when wearrived at the following decisions1.Var planning.(a) Directors Would prepare outline sohemes of the organisationof their Divisions in the event of war together wiith an estima te of thenumber of officers required for the manning of each section.In this connection, it was recognised that no exact estimationof the requirements of overseas stations could be given at this stage.(b) It was decided to recommend to the D.G the formation of aWar Planning Section, to work in A. Division, and to nominateto this Section upon his return to the U.K. The Seotion would beconcerned with the planning of war-time organisatione at home andoverseas, where ecessary in relation with the Service Departmentsadministrative problems and the personnel problems whic ch would arise.It was anticipated that it might be necessary for Mr.to beoccupied in this work for about six months.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSAOT 19682009I met the Superintendents for their criticisms of the ecounse.They all seemed to have enjoyed it and found it extremely useful.Someof them thought that on the whole they Would like to start with theRegistry and then 8o on to the Divisions.29.23rd February.De COURCY'S olicitors., Churchil Clanham &: Co. have written incomplaining that Michael has been interviewed by an Amerisan and threeother officers, who showed him files from Sir Vernon Kell's office. Thesedocuments purport to be either originals or copies of letters concerningae COURCY'S family affairs. The solicitors suggest that if the War Officeknow nothing of this matter, the Police shoulld be asked to conduct aninvestigation.It looks rather to us as if Michael had blown the gaff to theAmericans, but the Americans say that they know nothing about the incident.We are putting up a draft reply to the War Office, in which they deny anyknowledge but draw attention to the fact that it is not uncommon for peopleto represent themselves as being from M.I.5., and that we should thereforelike to know when and where the meeting took place and the names of thosepresent.Highett is back here on leave from West Afnicae owing to his father'edeath. I asked him about the work of compiling basic papers.He tellsme that he is getting on with this but that the prerequisite is to get thefiles in order; for example, on subjects such as the R.D.A. a good deal ofthe information is to be found on DARBOUSSIERIS personal file. He hopesto get things in order before very rong.It looks to me as if nobody had really thought out the Registryproblem on sensible lines.Tommy Lascelles asked me to go and see him to discuss the proposalthat Princess Eizaheth should visit West Africa and possibly also Kenya.Michael Dean and Martin Charteris, who is the Princess's Controller, wereaso present.I said that any comments that I might make must be completely offthe record, since the question was really one for the Colonial Office.Apart from this, I was not really very welll qualified to do more thantake a generall common-sense view of the proposal. I had, of course,talked with a number of people in West Africa, but I had only been in thecountry a couple of weeks. It seemed to me that in principle the ideawas a good one. It also seemed likely that the visit would be met withenthusiasm by the local population. I thought, however, that it might bevise to wait and see whether NKRUMAH was going to take office before anyannouncement was made. If he coud not get all the seats on the Councilthat he wanted he might prefer to remain in opposition. It is possiblethat in such circumstances he might wish to stage demonstrations, but onthe chances of this the Governor was the only person who could express aview.Tommy then said that the Governor had welcomed the proposal, butdid not wish to commit himself until March when he woulld have a betteridea as to how the new Constitution was likely to settle down.I explained the extent of Communist influence, which was reallyconfined to the distribution of literature, since there was no CommunisitPartyandnoindividualCommunists,inthenormalacceptedsenseoftheword. The risks, therefore, of any sort of incident would be much thesame as they are anywhere; it yas never possible to be certain that somelunatic or Ju-Ju man might do/something stupid.30.26th February.At the Dinectone Meeting. put forward oun proposals about planning,which were accepted by the D.G.telephoned to me again about Acera, He is going to Parisover the weekend and would certainly like to have an answer if possible.I tried again to get on to Jackson, but without result.Johnny Cimperman came to tell me that after exhaustive enquiriesin alll American offices, he could find no trace of any interview betweenMichael de COUR.CY and the American authorities.27th Februany.For the minutes of the D.G. (Tuesday) meeting held to-day, seeenvelope at the back of the diary.I saw 'C', who showed me a copy of a letter that he had receivedfrom America from de COURCY in which he alleged tha t he had heard througha contact of ROMER'S tha't M. M.I.5 I. were trying to spike bhe guns of the Digestby extracting information from Michael de COURCY. He mentions three peoplewho he believed attended the interview: Philip FARRER, an American calledHenry MAY. and the Duke of RICHELIEU, also alegeu TU e an Arnerican.I told 'c' what We were doing and that in the proposed reply tothe Var Office we had asked for some facts. At present the whole caseseemed to rest on a statement made by Michael, which is almost certain tobe untrue. 'c' told me that de COURCY had asked him a short time ao tospend ten days at his villa in Nice, since it was probably the last holidaythat he was likely to get before the next world war. C' replied ratherstuffily! 'c' knows through a contact, that de COURCY is very anxiousto ascertain what 'c''s views are. de COURCY would offer him almost anythinghe liked if on retirement he would join the Digest, which shows clearlyenough what kind of a man de COURCY is. I gather that the villa he nursin Nice is extremely luxurious and was formerly occupied by the Duke ofWindsor. de COURCY has about five men servants, all dressed in dove-coloured. uniforms!THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958July200928th Februnry.I saw Sir George Turner P.U.S. War Office, and got his approvalto our suggesteora once reply to the letter from de CCUROYIS solicitorHe is going to send it in the official form "Sir, I am directed, etcI had not me Turner before: he is of the tough variety and struck me asbeing thorougholy allive and sensible.31.Mantin Forrest rang me up Say that he vas applying for the job ofHeadmas UITC Academy School in Edinburgh - could I give him atestimonial?I said that I thought our usual practice was not togivetestimonials "to whom it may concern", but merely to answer enquiriesby a prespective employer: I would, however, see what could be done.lst March.I saw Buster Mimo last night who told me that he had been asked. torepresent man cared SILLARS.. of the A.E.U. in Glasgow, who was bringingan action against the Union in connection with his recent election to theCouncil which had been declared null and void. The Union allow thecirculation of onetmanifesto for each of the applicants, but it wasascertained subsequently tha't SILLARS had done a good deal of localpropaganda in addition, and for this reason the Union were disqualifyinghim.Busten think that SILLARS is a Comrounist. If this is 80, it isinteresting that, as a matter of tactics, he is not employing eithersOlicitors or Counsel who have ever represented Communist before, in factin briefing Buster they are briefing a Catholic!I spoke to ab bout SILLARS. He tells me that SILLARS camedown to see ALLISON. of the Industrial Department of the C.P. recentlyabout some Ectton, the details of which he does not know. This seems toestablish fairly clearly that SILLARS is a Communist and that the actionbeing fought by the Party, who clearly ish to strengthen their represen-tation in the A.E.U U.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1968.July200932.9.Dick reported briefly on his negotiations on the Joint PlanningCommittee with S.L.S. at which D.0.S. was also present, nehatS.1..concepuionoftheCommitteseemedtobethattheyshoulddealwith general and permanent as well as with war pllanning. It was feltthat we had no objection to this point of view provided that we had thepower to co-opt other senior members of the staff as might be necessary.10. Horrocks reported that Spencer had examined premises in PrincesGardens which the Ministry of Works had offered for our overflowaccommodation, The Board felt that the premises were reasonablysatisfactory as to location and space, and that we should not turn downthe offer, but we should support Spencer in his attempt to get somethingbetter It was-agreed that Horrocks and Shaw would visit the premisesby arrangement wit th the Ministry of Works.Jackson of the Foreign 6ffice telephoned to say that the ColonialOffice had agreed to send a telegram to Governors, asking them whether drafted theywould agree to D.E.C. representative inusingwireless.Iatelegram to Tinseye, informing him of this and suggesting that he shouldget into touch with the West African Council, with a view to seeing that aspeedy and satisfactory reply sent from Governors to the ColonialOffice. I gave him three points: (i) the idea that a vireless set denotesinister clandestine activity is out of date; (i1) the D.E.C. representativwould communicate in cipher, and matters little his telegramsgo through the Consulate by land line or over the air by wireless; (iii)2nd March.I discussed with Hill and Dick the position of the leakage sectionin time of war. It seemed to me that leakage was a matter wttiB. Division did not wish be concerned, unless there was- a deliberateattempt at espiorge Leakage took various forms it might be that animportant document had been left in a railway carriage and that the Chiefsof Staff wanted Police enquiries made to the document waslikely to have been compromised. I might resuatvergm a censorship productindicating careless talk; the police would then again be required to intersthe individual and anyone else to had -spoken. Thirdly, it mightof the Freddie KUH variety, where the dividing line between high-gradejournalism and espionage was difficult to define.Dick seemed to agree that this function should remain in S.L.B.Admiral Godirey.. came to see me about a note which he had written ondecepton OF une with L.C.S. concurrence. He wanted to knowwhrether It was factually correct and to have my views about it generally.THIS IS A COPYIN ORIGINAL DEPARTMENT DOCUMENT UNDER RETAINED SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1968200933.I told Godfrey that I would read his memorandum and let him have mycommente. He will come and see me again in about three weeks time.I had a word with Mary Lachlan. impressed upon her the importancof getting the files in Acora intowsaden. Much depended on the productof the basic papers, after which the task of carding and filing shouldbe considerably reduced.I sawabout the case of SILLARS and arranged for him to seeMilmo.3rd March.rang me up about the agenda fon the next S.I.0.It seems tthe Surete are trying to forcehand on the question-ofwar pllanning. He was mther anxious to know what I thought. T said thI would look into the matter and let him know.I had a talk with Hollis about our wartime oRganisation. I said Ithought that the clutter of the D.G. staff, with the exception of theSecretariat, should Form part of another Division. There should, inother words, be a Legal Division carrying leakage of information, interment under 18B, prosecutions and general legal advice While RegionalControl should be under A. Division,a it was in the last war. Hollisthought that O.S. should also be in A. Division, since, like RegionalControl, it was largely a matter for the Administration. So far asintelligence is concerned, both organisationsarnine..Ops. would go into C.3.THiS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDiN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION5th March.13 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT1968Jule2009At the Directors Meeting the D.G. told us that he had a vak withNorman Bropk; TIrstiy, about Air Vice Marshal Slessor's request forfurther information about the act Of eakage to Chapman PINCHER Of the"Express" about Class 2 reservists. Brook had agreed UO the D. telliSlessor that he could not give him any further particulars except througthe P.M.has apparently denied the whole incident and Slessoris rather worried about the accuracy of our information.It is TABLEand quite unimpeachable.The D.G. a sked Brook about his report. Brook said that he would bsending over a copy in the course of a day or So and that he ould ensurthat before the Prime Minister made any decision he would hear Dur viewsA copy of the report is also going to Bridges and to 'o'.I saw Air Vice Marsha] Graham of the Scottish Police College who Wius to lectteColtete has only recently been set up.6th March.Pugh. Deputy Commissioner of Police Golld Ceast, came to see me.He is very gloomy about the recent turn of events and seemed to thinkthat there was no future for any Britisher in the Gold Coast. He told Ithat he had to live on E25 a month keeping his wife and children in thicountry. He did not wish to be a'Brat leaving the sinking ship" but34.frankly he did not think that there was any sort of objective that wasworth while.I think that he was to ome extent fishing for a job here. Heevidently does not see eve to eye with the Commissioner of Police.For the minutes of the D.G. (Tuesday) meeting held to-day, seeenvelope at the back of the diary.Shaw has been round to Princes Gardens. He said the accommodationis frightful. Clearly we SHsII nave UO tur'n down the offer and askMinistry of Vorks to think again.T went to see Burt about the case ofwho wants to join theOfficers Emergency Reserve and was the subject of a vetting ennuiry bySpecial Branch. Apparently his landlord had been approached,an fromwhat had been said to him aboutearly paste in the InternationalBrigade, had decided that he would not renew his lease. Moreover, someoneseems to have had a look at his despatch cases in the basement, but whetherthis was Special Branch or the landlord II do not know.I also talked to Burt-about-therease-of onewho had allegedthat were at the back of Police enquiries which had led to his beingrefused a job in E.M.I. This was pure surmise onpart,although in fact we were indirectly responsible.7th March.THIS IS A COPYORiGINAt DOCUMENT RETAINEDINDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONACT FTHE PUBLIC RECORDS19682009T attended a meeting of the Dixon (Cold War) Committee. and came' awaywith my usual impression of its futility. we were discussing a paper onassistance to foreigh Security Services in combatting Communism. The pape:was by no means a good one, and one had the impression that nobody ondtheCommittee had formulated any very sensible views: they rather took theattitude that S.I.S. and ourselves wanted them to give us their assistanceand blessing, and that we in fact were responsible for the originalproposals. Eventually, Maurice Dean, ,representing the Ministry o1 Defence,asked what we hoped to get out of this. This gave me an opening toexplain that.i SD far as attempting to teachin London how to setup an efficient Security Service in their own country was concerned, it wasto a large extent a waste of time: in fact M.I.5 did not stand to benefitat all, directly; the only percentage lay with S.I.S. who might acquire acertain amount of goodwill which would enable them to operate from bases ilThe only people we could teach profitably here were these fromWestern European countries whose conditions were in some measure comparableto our own; we regarded them as a first priority, since many of them wefmembers of the Atlantic Pact and in receipt of important defence nforma-tion. It was ther fore vital importance to our defence planning thatthey should have an efficient Security Service. Some sort of listofpriorities was eventually agreed.35.had a long talk with Potter about the filing system in our stationsoverseassn I showed him the pro forma that I had drawn up for West Africa,with which he was in entire agreement. He thought that all they neeaeawas a limited number of organisation and subject files, plus a certainamount of carding of leading personalities.Ronnie Howe rang me up to say that on reading de comRayts latest numberof the Digest, in which he alleged that there were tW.o more agents likePONTECORVO at Harwell giving information to the Russians, he wondered whetherit might not be worth while sending a Police officer down to see de COURCY.The officer woulld draw attention to the statement in the Digest, refer tode COURCY as a patriotic Englishman, and ask him for details. I said thatI would consider this and let him know.I subsequently discussed the matter with Hill; who seemed to think thatSpecial Branch might find the connection somewhat tiresome once it had beenestablished. On the other hand, he saw my point, that if na enquiry wasmade and subsegnently there was another defector from Harwell, everyone wouldsay that the authorities had been extremely lax in not asking-d COURCY'assistance in view of the statement made in his Digest. I thought we mightreconsider the matter when we got the reply from de COURCY'S Solicitors, viathe War Office, to pur request for further information about the allegedtheft of his private correspondence.8th March.Burt rang to say that Carroi (of the Garda) had asked him to go over.He would let me know in due course what Carrol had to say. Burt seemed tothink that there might be S cmething cooking in the I.R.A.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONACT (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS1958200936.THIS IS A COPYIN ORIGINAL DOCUMENT BETAINEDDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 July 2009I had a talk with Shaw about his DOSition in wartime. It seemed tme tha t he should have the his care both overseasenc Regi onal Control.Both organisations had primarily an administrative function and acted a'sa kind of conduit pipe for information todand from outstations.I said,however, that in my view both these functions ought to go into A. Division.He entirely agreed with this view, but did. not see how in the presentcircumstances we could put it forward.9th Manch.Sir A. Gascoigne, British representative in Tokyo. has forwardeda personal impressior of General MacAnthur by Mr. CLutton: presumablya British official-who has been working with MadArthur for six or eightmonths.The tremendous force of the General's personality struck Mr.Clutton in the same way as it has done so many others. He felt thathere, beyond question, was a great man who still had greatness in him.The General's charm, though patently turned off and on like a tap andinsome respects (for instance, the hand-clasp) grating, was difficult toresist, and his plausibility and persuasiveness in stating his case wasS0 great as,at times, to make his argument well-nigh convincing.Physically, the general appeared a much slighter and frailerfigure than he seemed in his photographs or on the parade ground.Mr. Olutton was also struck by the generall's physical vigour hisyouthful appearance and the clearnesa and brightness of the byes ina face comparatively little lined. At the same time Mr. Clutton felt37.that he was meeting someone slightly unreal and that. within thesurprisingly youthful body there was a mind no longer as young asthe body ana which was beginning to indulge in those searchings ofconscience and the memory that occupy the old during the wakefulperiods of the night. While the general'e argument was lucid enough,his refusal to allow Mr. Clutton to get a word in edgeways, hisinsistence Dn remaining in his chair and continuing to talk despitethefact that his visitor had four times risen to his feet to take hisleave, and his use in argument of faotsan figures which he must haverealised we knew to be untruthfull or exaggerated, all Seemed toMr. Clutton essentially to be the habits of an old man. Again,throughout the interview, the general was on the defensive, exxplaininghis actions and rebutting his critics; but here Mr. Clutton felt thathe was not defending his actions in the context of the politicaland military Situation of the day 80 much as defending his place inhistory, which was the only thing that now mattered to him.Gascoigne more Or less endoraes- these views. He recognisesMacAnthuris shortcomings, but say s that he cannot but feel deep respectTor this man who has, it must be remembered, performed valuable workfor the Allies both in the war and generally in his administrationof Japan during the period of occupation. That he has made seriousmistakes, both in Japan itself and in his recent conduct of the Koreanwar, and in his attitude towards. Chaangknimshek, there can be no doubtthat this is due in great measure to his jealous nature and hisoverweening conceit and confidence in his own judgement. Nevertheless,when the dust sattles upon this Far Eastern scene, Gascoigne believesthat it w1ll become clear that in the main, MacArthurts suacessesoutweigh his Fallures. One thing is certain, namely, that MacArthusthat MacArthir recognises the overriding necessity for Anglo/U.Sco-operation.] despite his sensi tiveness to British criticism to hispolicy, and the fact that by many of his actions he has tended to bringabout uneasiness in Anglo/u.S. relations in Asia.I lunched with Mr. Pugh. Assistant Commissioner of Police GoldCoaste He gave me an interesting account of how graft penetrated thewhole Administration, and also commercial cingles.In the schools a child is not likely to get ts promotion fromone form to another unless XXX iB paid to the school teachea. TheCustoms are hopelessly corrupt, as has been deonstrated frequentlyand in particular in regard to the importation of steel tubing. Tmentioned to Pugh the proposal I made to Stephens, that an ordinanceshould be promulgated which Nould make it obligatory on all holdersof steel tubing to declare the amount to the Police. He Baid thatthitubing would be all over the country in the hands of the bush blackami thswho had no authority to make guns at all, and that by imposing thisregulation you would only be giving the Police a further opportunity Dfgraft, Already the Police took money in overy direction the trafficgop8, who are supposed to bring charges for overloading mammy wagons,are almoat invariably bribed not to prefer a charge. The ariver, rer,quiteblatantly, takes out his S, and if the policeman std1l goes an writingdown particulars, he takes out another E. and SD on until the policemanstops writing in his notebook. This may proviide a deterrent, but itcertainly undermines the morale of the Force. Mammy tradero, amongstwhom are wives dofficials and police officers, buy goods from theUnited ATrica Corporation, If they went a box of biscuits, they mayweuu be told that they can only have them if they take certain other38.goods which have not been found particularly saleable. They generallyaccept this, dispose of the biscuits at a conaiderable profit, and sellthe other goods at a sight 1088. this is how your boy can sometimesobtain certain types of good at a cheaper rate than the market ppice.The Courts are corrupt to some degree, as also is the Administration -both black and white.I discussed Irish censorship with Winterborn. It seems to me thatwe must either have censorship against the whole of Ireland, or the Northmust impose a srict censorship as between North and South. We could onlyconsider abandoning cansorship on Southern Ireland if we could get aGuarantee that their ships would call at British ports, and that theirContinental aineratt would touch down aomewhere in Allied territory wherecensorship could be carried out. Cables will, aa in the last war, berouted thugh this country. The Home office are consulting(?) with NorthernIreland.I saw Group Captain Meane, who is Bucceeding Brodie on the J.I.C. 0. & SIHaldane Porter tells me that Rasmera. had set up a committee toenquire into the techhical possibilltesof nationalising all the Ango-Iranian oil well icnowing fun well that. for financial and admaatrativereasons., the project would be quite unworkable. The ommittee had prodneedtheir findings, which concurred with Razmara'e views, and in another18 hours the matter might have beenbytheMajlis.Now,ofcourse,the hole question is once more in the melting pot.We want private share arrangement with the Persians on a 50/50basis and, pending a Settlement ve hold E48, 000, due to the Persians.They sorely need this money to back their new currency.An interesting side-line was that the Persian Minister here, whohad been mentioned as a possible Buccessor to Raziara, sought an earlyappointment with the Foreign Office in order to inform them that he waslikely to have to undengp a severe operation. He has IIo intentionwhatever of becoming Prime Minister, a post which he regards ab altogethertoo precarious.At his monthly meeting on Middle Eastern affairs at the ForeignOffice, Haldane Ponter was told by the Foreign office repreeentativethat after visiting Palestine, General Robertson, on his tour bf theMiddle East, had been called back for another interview with Ben Gurion.The latter had proposed that Pallestine should join the British Commonwealtof Nations, vith a status similar to that of New Zealand.It would be interesting to know exactly what is behind this.The idea may have started from the suggestion made by Shinwel aCabinet meeting, that Palestine could provide an alterna tive Bise forBritishforcestotheCanalone.Thispieceofinformationweknowleaked from Shinweli to his sone, and through another intermediary toIsraeli Intelligence in this country. The Arabs, of course, want stabilityanid Pallestine, finaneially and from the point of view DI resettlement, iscertainly in a very bad way. They would derive certain obvious benefitfrom coming into the British Commonwealth and the safety of their ownfronitiers would be assured. Ve should, of course, incur the displeanof the Arnb Stites, but we might be able to mitigate thig by imposingconditions upon Iarael. It will be interesting to see what materialises,39.Dick tells me that there is a Foreign Office telegram in fromMoscow, announcing that at a sewing bee run by Mrs. Krapp of the SwedishLegation, a story was told and overheard by a member of the British Emtbassy,that a member of the Finnish Legation had told Mrs. Krapp tha t PONTECORVOhad called at the Finnish Legation in connection with his passport. Hehad been told that there was nothing doing and had gone away.12th March.I spoke to Hill about an announcement in the Daily Maill that M.I.5and Special Branch office S were going to interview de COUHCY on his arrivalat the airport from America. He was going to be asked about the statementin his Digest, that twosscientists at Harwell were giving information to theRussians. The D.G. had rung up about this on Saturday and had seemedrather perturbed about the Yard butting in. Hill told the D.G. aboutmy conversation with Ronnie Howe, which had ended by our agreeding to thinkthe matter over.I rang Howe who told me that he had done nothing, and infact did notintend to do anything without our agreement. He thought the Daily Mailwere simply guessing.I spoke to the D.G. later, when I told him about my talk with Howe.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1968200913th March.I had lunch with Bernand Machelll. He is now diplomatic correspondentfor the Empire News and is doing a weekly broadcast about foreign affairsto overseas stations. He thinks, however, that, owing to the nevsprintshortage, Empire News may one day terminate his engagement. He wonderedwhether he might be able to gett some employment with S.I.S. (and, I supposealso with us, although he did not say so). I suggested that he should getinto touch with Vivian.Hill has successfully got through the STRAUSS denaturalisation case,although there has not yet been any verdict. There was a slightcontretemps owing to STRAUSS maintaining that he had worked for M.I.5. Hewrote down the name of KLOPSTOCK. In fact we did receive some informatifrom KLOPSTOCK, at second ot thura hand, in 1949, but this does not justifySTRAUSS in saying that he was working for the British Government. In anycase it does not seem to improve his case.40.14th March.After the J.I.C. meeting to-day I discussed with Johnstone, RoBs andaker-Cresswell the case of the Pakistani high-ranking officers who hayebeen arrested. one of them has attended a Joint Services Staf'f Collegecourse and, another the I.D.C. This would seem to raise quite a gravesecurity issue. It seemed to us that the only solution was to run aspecial "milk and water" course for members of the Commonwealth. Otherwisethe information supplied w.ould have to be so downgraded as to render thecourse vallueless to our own officers.Holderness telephoned to say that a man called Charles Eric PATERSONwas anxious to give information about STRAUSS. PATERSON was in BrixtonPrison awaiting a charge of obtaining money by false pretences. I passedthis on to Dick and Hill.S.1.S. brought me over some copies of letters relatingtodecomReY'Efinances. He evidently is short of funds here and wants totransfer some of his dollars from the U.S. without paying income tax.Thiscan be done by a dubious bank in Tangier. De COURCY has already had acertain sum of money converted into French francs, which were sent itomhimat Cap d Antibes, where he has an expensive villa, formerly occupied bythe Duke of Windsor, and to which he recently invited both 'c' andto spend the "ast holiday they were to get before the next world war"!This in itself is an infringement of the British currency regulations.15th March.I have read a report by "George" Jenkin on his proposed build-upof the Malayan Police. He wants 257 more Inspectors it and 207 Sub-Inspectors. to useHisreasonthatofficersinhisForcedonotfindpossibleanyone below that rank for C.I.D. or S.B. purposes. He also ha's extensiveplans for improving the quality of intelligence, but he does not see howalll this is to get going for at least another two years.At the Appointments Board to-day we considered our war organisation.We have created Six Divisions in all, although personally I think that got the theO.S. Division could well be absorbed by A. Division. once we haveranks amd the approximate numbers - which we are now at last on the way todoing - we shall have to consider personalities and the effect of makingappointments to the new Divisions of existing staff.Dick is rather against creating a large number of Assistant Directors,and prerers themdemocratic system that we employed during the last war.I sympathise with this view, since,: in B. Division at any rate, one had tobe extremely flexible and the creation of a largnumber of ranks and gradescan be extremely embarrassing.MacDonald has refused the position of Deputy Head of S.LFE. We beoome havetherefore, to consider posting a Deputy from here who This wilI is ultimately going to beHead of when Morton comes home next year.a real facer.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 4T (4) OF THE PUBLIC BECORDS1968200941.19th March.I lectured to the Police course. John Marriott is sitting inthroughth whole course to see whether there is any overlapping.At the Directors Meeting we discussed Sar Norman Brook's reponte,We had only received an extract from that part of the r eport which dealtwith Ministerial responsibility.The D.G had a note in front of him, prepared by Dick, which gaveananswer to Brook's proposals that we should come under the Home Office.The main argument is that Findlater Stewart placed us under the PrimeMinister, in his capacity of Chairman of the Defence Committee pending theappointment of a Minister of Defence, because he felt that bothitutionally and factually any work carried out by the Security Servilin a democracy should be justifiable on defence grounds. Otherwiseit was open to the accusation of Gestapo'. Factually, practicallyeverything we do can be justified on defence grounds. Forcexample, weinvestigated the Commtunist Party and its membership in order to preventleakage of defence secrets.Ourprotectivesecurityworkisentirelydefence work, as also is our work overseas, where in many places we formpart of the local defence forces.As regards beingg under the P.M., Dick arggued that Findlater Stewarthad had in mind that the Prime Minister would be called in in any questionor debate where the Security Service was criticised, to give that personalassurance that the special powers under which it worked were in no waybeing abused. We did not, as Sin Norman Brook suggested, wish to be undethe Prime Minister in order to enhance our prestige, or to use him as astick with which to beat other Ministers. In fact we were responsibleindividually to any Minister for whom we were carrying out any particularwork, and that the Minister answered any question tha might arise froaction that he had taken on our advice.The D.G. intends to see the P.M. when the latter comes out ofhospital. I suggested that he should hand him a reasoned answer toNorman Brook's query, and that this should be circulated to otherMinisters attending the Cabinet meeting when the subject was discussed.The D.G. said that he did no wish to circulate a memorandum before hehad seen the P.M if the P.M said that he wished the Department to theremain under himself, that would be an end of the matter. If, onother hand, he thought that it should be the subject of a Cabinetdiscussion, the D.G. would then suggest to him that our memorandumshould be circulsted to those concerned so that they would not come intothe meeting with a purely one-sided view based on Norman Brook's memorandur20th March.I had a meeting with James Robertson, John Irvine and Leggatt with Theregard to a possibledefector from the Legation Englara.messThe in Holland.man's son a interview British's shrsubject the maony living and persuade him toisnaturalisedinDutchthought communicate that with if they his could father, the man in Holland might be induced to defectI said I could see no objection to the Dutch interviewing thisindividual, provided we were also present.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1968 Julu 200942.I lunched at the Travellers with Ross, Deputy Chairman of the J.I.O.He told me that the situation in Persia Was causing the Foreign Officea certain amount of anxiety and that the Americans, on the whole, werenot being particularly helpful. He thought that ultimately things Yoube smoothed out. There was no evidence as far as He AvePYintrigues, although of course they were jubilant DORUSININ DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION21st March.(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT1968JuluJames RobertsonNicholas Elliott todiscuss the case of an agent whom they had been using who had been in touchwith thethe agent was owed T,000 and wondered what action he should take.S.I.S. were inclined to suggest that he should visit the Soviet authorities.telling them bI his difficulties and his reluetance to go back to the CzechEmbasny in view of the cases of STRAUSS. and RAIDL and the insecurity ofCzech operations. The hope was that the Russians would take him on.I said that I did not think the Russians would touch him with theend of a barge pole, and that his normal course would really be to lie low.The Russians would know the extent to which we had penetrated thexczechespionage and would either regard the agent as "blown" or as a "plant".The only possible course seemed to be a suggestion that somehow theagent's past career and achi evements should be brought to the notice ofthe Russians by a sideline. We could then wait and see whether an approacwas made.I went to see Sir Frank NewsamHe asked me whetheI had read Sir Norman Brook's report. I said that I had only seen anextract which referred to the question of Ministerial responsibility.Newsam seemed surprised that L had not seen the whole report. I toldhim that I understood that an abridged edition was coming out, since itwas considered desirable that we should see the report on S.I.S. which, offthe record, I believe to be somewhat critical.Newsam then asked me what I thought about the question of Ministerialresponsibility. I told him our views about the constitutional question,and I said that factually almost everything we did was in the interesteofdefence. Newsam did not seem to agree with this: he thought the HomeSecretary shoulld be the person who should say whether we were devoting toomuch time to the Communist Party and not enough to other matters. I saidthat our activities in onnection with the Commuriist Party were primarilyin the interests of defence and that many other Departments were concerned.We wished to prevent Communists from getting Government secrets. Therevolutionary aspect of the Communist Party was much more a matter for theHome Secretary and the Police, although, of course, owing to our carefulstudy of the movement we could make a contribution. Nobody, however, woulsuggest that we were on the brink of a revolution in this country.I then explained that we had many commitments overseas, where we formepart of the defence machine and had responsibility to Defence Committees,the Chief's of Staff and others. Would the Home Secretary acceptresponsibilityforouractivitiesinthisconnection?New.samthensaidthat the Home Secretary would do nothing of the kind; what he had in mindwas that we should go back to our former status, where we were moreresponsible to everybody and nobody; he thought that there was much toomuch publicit given to M.I.5, which was a secret service, and that ifquestions were asked the affairs of the Department could not be discussedin Parliament any more than those of the Secret Service. The Home Secretawould dany knowledge of our activities and suggest that if we had infringedthe law in any way the appropriate remedy was to bring an action against us43.I said I did not feel that this was very satisfactory we had a pretdifficult time as it was and there were occasions when we Wished to havesomeone to get up and defend us. If the idea was to disown us, there wonnot be much encouragement to the staff to take the initiative. If wewere to play a purely safety first game, there would not be much informatforthcoming.Newsam then said that Brook had an idea that we might receive policydirection and financial control from a committee of Under-Secretaries ofState from the departments with which we were most concerned.It is difficult to reconcile these views of Newsam's with the verycategorical Statement by Norman Brook that we should be responsible to theHome Secretary.22nd Manch.Mrs. Keene came to talk to me about a leakage from The Observer,in an article for which Alistair BUCHAN was wrersponsible. The leakagegave nformation about the various personalities who were to take commandunder Eisenhower and was three days ahead of official publication.Hewison talked to me about this case and was suggesting to Brookthat a letter should be circullated to all those in possession of theinformation, asking tem whether they knew BUCHAN and when they last sawhim. Brook turned this down. We were asked to follow the case up ifwe could.James Robertson talked to me about a Georgian who had been approachedby a Russian woman called LIUBA (surname not known). This Woman hadreminded the Georgian about his relatives and had told him that the Sovietauthorities were not al all satisfied with him and suggested that they shohave a meeting to talk things over. The meeting was covered and the womaidentified as the wife of some member of the Soviet Trade (?) Delegation,I attended a post mortem on the Police cAlRSLre A certain numberof suggestions were put forward, but these have been put on record by P.L.on the appropriate file.27th March.I had a talk with Skardon aboutwho is deeply involved inour guided missile projects and has apparently, unknown to us, visited theUnited States:o some semi-official mission. Skardon had a long talkwithhim.qui te understood his rather delicate position in view ofthe FUCHS. and PONTECORVO disclosures: he said, however, that his attitudewas exactly the same as it was when Skardon last saw him. He liked hiswork and his employer; he did not wish to embarrass his family or hisemployer or, indeed, the Security Service. He did not know what hisattitude would be to a future war; it would depend entirely on how it aroseIf he thought that he had a conflict of loyalties, he would resign hispresent position.I asked Skardon whether in that eventuality he would still feel thathe did not wish to embarrass the Security Service. Skardon thought thathe woulld not wish to do S.0 and tha on the whole he was grateful to theSecurity Service for the way they had handled his case on becoming aware thihe had been engaged in espionage.44.The difficulty of the whole case lies in the fact thatis acquainted with our latest developments and, to some extent. ThtegratedAmnerican developments.THIS COHYORJGINAL ETTAINEDLNTI.UEICREOCRDSQoblPatrick Reilly telephoned to say that the Foreign Secretary hadreceived an application from ZILLIACUS for readmission to the LabourParty. The Foreign Secretary wished to know what ZILLIACUS had beendoing since he was expelled from the Labour Party, and the extent ofhis connectior with the Communist Party before his expulsion. This,of course, raises an issue of some importance - is the Security Serviceto be used to vet prospective candidates for the Labour Party?'c' telephoned to say that de COURCY had sent him a copy of a longmemorandum which he had addressed to Chief Inspector Jones of SpecialBranch, who visited him the other day. Jones presumably asked de COUNas a patriotic citizen to divulge the names of the two people at Harwellwhom he alleged were giving away information to the Russians. de COURCYhas neither confirmed nor denied that he knows the names of these people,but has made a reply conditional on the redressment of a whole number ofpast grievances. These include the: actiom against Colonel Pilcherand a warning to Queen Mary, but in particular an enquiry into theallegations of Michaeimde COURCY.I shall doubthess be hearing about all this from the Yard in duecourse,Baker-Cresswell brought his successor, Captain Hilken, to see me."Tin-Eye" has sent in a rather characteristic letter about the situationin the Gold Coast. which need not be taken at its face vallue but may wellindicate what a good many of the British residents think about thenew Constitution. He says the chaos in Accra must be seen to be believedAt one moment 'Krumah. is necromancing in Kan Kan, but the next he isfunctioning as leader of Government business within the Secretariat itselfIn one room His Excellency the Governor is handing out seals of office,in another the lackadaisical gentlemen of the Secretariat are playingliar dice while they await introductions to their new masters. OutsiGovernment House, which haa fallen down, there is much coming and goingno man can tell whether it is a bricklayer, a houseboy or a Minister wheis crossing his path. Here and there coal black mammies appear, seemingfrom the bowlls of the earth; one is pedalling insanitaryi" 'chop" to theclerks in the office: another, the P.A. to the Minister of Health, is45.filching a file for corruption. Only Mrs. Speaker is sane (2) shecontinues to seal her confectionery, well knowing there is no futurein the impartiality of her husband.It is indeed a terriblle picture of unnecessary, if not wantonsurrender. My guess, for what is worth, is that there will be littledisaster in the near future because the extremists, now Ministers,willbetoo tmmersed in corruption to attend to anything else. Certainly froma security point of view one is left with the speculation that there isLittle of Empire interest tha remains to be protected.28th March.Iasked Burt about de COURCY.He said that Jones had telephonedtrying to make an appointit tntent Last week, but had been put off by de COURCY'Ssecretary until he announced that he was from+ the Special Branch of ScotlandYard. de COURCY then wanted to see him at once and, in fact, came downto the Yard in person. He assumed that the reason for the interview wasthe Michael de COURCYsincident and proceeded to pour forth his woes, pastand present. Jones let him talk and then explained that what he reallywanted to know about was the identity of the two scientists at Ha rwelllwhom Mr. de COURCY alleged in his Digest vere giving information to theRussians. de COURCY immediately began to hedge and said that if he gavethe information, he would jeopardise his source, that abortiwe enquirieswould be made and that these would be followed by a statement in Hhe Houseof Commons that there was thing in the allegations; this Duld beseriously detrimental to the Digest. Until, therefore, his pastgrievances were cleared up and apologies made, he did not feel inclinedto colllaborate with the authorities. He followedtheinterviewupbytalong memorandum, which Burt is letting me see.General Craig.of the Marines, a wartime A.D.N.I.. came to see meto-dayt He 18 a Director of the Air Survey Company, which is a subsidiaryof Fairey Aviation. In this connection he has come into touch with a firm,FOTOGRAMATRIE (?) of Munich, Which has been taking aerial photographs ofthe Amrerican Zone in Western Germany - I presume with the approval ofthe American authorities. Connected with this firm is a certainBaron E.G. (or F.G.) von TCHIRSKY ( or TSCHIRSCHKY) who has an addressin America, one in Paris at the Hotel Continentare, 3 Rue de Castiglione,and another in London at 26 Upper Cheyne Row, S.W.3., telephone numberFLAxman 9948.General Craig, who is in negotiation with von TCHIRSKY - who claimsto be an American citizen - in connection with a nine-lens camerafoaerial phot ography at low altitudes which it is thought will be ofconsiderable interest to British airmen, has been warned by an Americanthat von TCHIRSKY is not really an American citizen and has a considerablepast.Craig 8s address is 4, The Gateways, Chelsea, S.W.3, telephone numberKENsington 7722.I told Craig that we were bound here by very strict rules as regardscommunicating information to outside persons unless there was a Governmentsecurity intereat, but that of course I was always very grateful to knowabout any alien who was misbehaving himself in this country. Craig saddhe quite understood the position, and it was left that I might, or might nottelephone to him as a result of any enquiries that we might make.46.Dick has done a draft reply to Sir Norman Brook' memorandum, whichseems to me on the right lines although there are one ortwowotherthoughts that I should like to see introduced. I think we want toindicate a little more strongly the extent to which we are linked withthe activities of Defence Committees and Commanders-in-Chief abroad throughJ.I.s, etc. We should also counter the argument that if we were underthe Home Office Frank Newsam would be able to give us advice on policymatters. In point of fact our policy is framed by consultation with eachindividual P. U. Whose department we may be working. If several P. P.U.SSare concerned, Bridges calls a meeting and the policy is framed on an agreedbasis.Dick in his memorandum had suggested the possibility of our not havinga Minister at all, as in prerwar days. I think this would be a mistakefitly, we should not receive all sorts of papers which concerned us, andsecondly, we should have no-one to defend us if we were seriously attackedeither from within or from without. We are therefore concentrating onsaying that the Ministerial control should be of an interdeparrtmental kindratherthat departmental. The possible Ministers Which suggest themselvesare the Ministers of Defence or the Lond President of the Council. Itisof the greatest importance that we should not be fobbed off to a Ministerwithout Portfolio.29th March.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDJDIFARTMENT SEGTON3 (4) OX TFE PUELIU DSACT195S.Qoooy47.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.Cumming has produced a gadget from America. It is a small wirelessset which can g0 easily into the inside breast pocket with an aerial up thearm. We have tried it out and can hear speech quite distinctly rom someorwalking in the Park or in the streets, on anywhere in the building.Patterson seems to have procured this from the F.B.I. The job hasbeen pronounced a good one by McMillan.who is to be the C.I.A. chief representative here formatters affecting the J.I.0., has arrived. He used to be atand I think has been with C.I.A. for some time. As far as Dick's and myrecollections go, he might have been hewn out of solid oak! It seems thahe is going to have the agendas of the Wednesday and Thursday meetings ofthe J.I e. with the right to attend their sessions. He will also recedipapers. Such items as are not suitable for discussion when he is presentwill be kept 66f the agenda.We are to have a high-grade individual working in C.I.A.group - where all C.I.A. appreciations are formulated and produced in findraft form to the Advisory Countil. The idea is to narrow the margin beour J.I.C. and American Intelligence appreciations.Taking a long view, this may be a good thing, but it will certainly Ea considerable embarrassment to the U.I.C. and probably prolong theirdiscussions which will take the form of integrated crystal gazing!I do not think that Betts intends to interfere with de Bardeleben'sactivities, although nominally he will be his chief.30th March.I had a meeting with D.B. D.C. C.2, B.2 and B.2.C. 2. about the conton aliens in war. Irvine explained that the Home Office more or lessagreed that the Immigration authorities should only send to us such postreports as seemed to them to be of security significance. We would bethemsomeguidanceinthismatter.Thereportswould,however,gofirsthe Police for any comments that they might care to make, and in order tit might be impressed upon them that they had a responsibility for exercsome sort of supervision over the aliens' activities.48.A number of other points were discussed and agreed upon andthese will be considered later at a me eting at the Home Office.Dick has written what we feel is an extremely good memorandumon the question of Ministerial responsibility for thie department.I have passed a copy of this to the D.G. The idea is that he shouldhand it to the P.M. It treats the whole subject in somewhat generalterms and does not take Norman Brook up on every point of detail; wefelt that to do SD might be a tactical mistake, lthough we agreed thatthe D.( should have the previous memorandum which gives an answer toto every specific point raised. We have oncentrated on the major issueof the defence aspect of our work and the extent to which it is tiedupwith that of all Government epartment, with I.Cs, Defence Committeesand Colonial Governors.5th April.I came back to the office to-day, having been sick for three days.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS1968.Julu2009Handey came to see me about a visit he is paying to Germany, incompany with a representative of S. S.I.S. I. S. He is toavise on the policyof Security Wing in Int. Div.I said it was difficult to see that there could be a let-up in anydirection: Russian espionage and penetration of the German Securiits Serviceby Left Wing elements was obviously of great importance, but SD also wasany attempt at penetration by the Right. It seemed to me there was alwaysthe possibility that the Right might get a foot in the door and one dayattempt to do a deal with the Russians: it was certainly a matter whichwould always have to be watched.49.Burt telephoned to say that he had had a letter from Cornishof the Home Office about the Syrians. He was proposing to tell Cornishthat he would make suitable arrangements with ourselves for their instruction.66h April.7th April.Dick Butler came to talk about MONTAGU, who just wont lie downon the question of MINCEMEAT. I am afraid it shows his character at htsworst. Incensed by Duff Cooper's publication "operathon Heartbreak" he finiapproached the Attorney General with the suggestion that Duff should beprosecuted. In some ways he should have been, although the case might haveinvolved us all in a certain amount of ridicule. It wouldhavebeenratherlike the prosectuion of Compton Mackenzie after the first word war, which theended in his writing nother book on the Secret Service called "Water onBrain", Having got the Attorney General'e dedision, it was obviouslydifficult for the authoritiea to resist MONTAGU'E request that he be permitteto publish the true story. The Attorney General told him, apparently, thathe had better see the Minister of Defence. This he has done and obtaineda sympathetic hearing. The Minister did not insist that MONTAGU should showhis script and get it approved, but suggested tha: such action would beappeeciated. MONTAGU had now gone to "Life"', who had offered him severalSunday Express and on the B.B.C. series "Now It an Be Told". This is.thousand dolllars for the story. and he talks of getting it reproduced in of thecourse all contrary to the decisions reached a at the J.I.C.Rather belatedly, I think, MONTAGU has communicated withCharles CHOLMONDELEY, whon] he thinks is entitled to his rake-off. Charles isat present in the Far East on behalf of E.C.S. He is endeavouring toseewhether there are any opportunities for deception in the area. I shallthink the worse of him if he does not write to MONTAGU in some disgustand say that he does not wish to have anything to do with the presentproposals.Dick Butler has been brought into this through confidences (2)from MONTAGU, and apparently because he represents Charles CHOLMONDELEY.I suggested that he should talk the matter over with Drew, who may not beaware of the most recent developments.Howard rang up to say that Murrie was to have a meeting nextweek on the control of alliens intime, of war. Newsam apparently objects tothe Chief Constables being given any discretional powers in the matter ofimposing restrictions upon alliens. I said to Howard that if it was proposeto centralise restrictions on alliens through London, we should create the mo:appalling bottle-neck. Surelly Chief Constables coulld be given some measureof discretion which did not even involve internment.50.RIGINADOCUNEENTEEETACNTEDTHISISCOPY00oc9th April.I talked to Marriott about Godfrey's memorandum on deception. We bothagreed that it contains a good deal of relevant matter and we neither of usare very sure that it will achieve its purpose, namely, to convince seniorofficers in time of war that deception is a good thing. Nor are we whollycertain that, in view of the existence of L.C.S. 9 that senior officers willneed too much encouragement; it might result in their pressiing us to run everyagent that ve can lay our hands on as a double. In answer to Godfrey'sQuestion as to whether we can operate as successfully against the Russiansas we did against the Germans, we are apt to doubt this possibility, unles:and until any existing organisation has been mppped up here after the outbreakof war and the Russisns are forced to improvise de novo.Burt telephoned to me about the Syrians. Cornish apparently thinkstheHome Secretary may be alarmed if they ane given instruction from SpecialBranch. I said that I found this difficult to believe: everybody. knew whatSpecial Branch did - that they publicly attended Comraunist meetings and tookdown notes, and they prosecuted in cases of espionage. It wa's quite naturalthat representatives of foreign Police Forces, with analagous interests, shouivisit them. Burt said he would EO back to Cornish and let meuknow theresult.At the Directors Meeting to-day D.0.S. gave details about the proposedCommonwealth Security Conference, with particular regard to entertainmentI asked the D.G. about our memorandum for the P.M. on Ministerialresponsibility. He said that he had altered it very considerably and putmore punch into it, and that ultimatel, he would let us see a copy. The P.Mwas still in hospital and not apparently likely to come out for some days.51.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1968.2009both April.For the minutes of the D.G. (Tuesday) meeting heldtomday, see envelopeat the back of the diary.I attended the S.I.C. luncheon. I had quite a long conversation withwho had not come over during the last year. He seemed bleased theagreement had finally been reached on the question of the D.E.C. representatdinHe told me that for some little time he. had had a rather vaguecommitment for protective security, but that this work was likely to assumegreat importance inthe r-future (Whether this is due to the securityinspection by the Standing Cormittee of N.A.T.O. which is about to take placeI do not know).is, however, attending the conference in WashingtIn the past the work of protective security has been very much hampered by thlarge number of Communiste who still remain in the various Ministries.told me that some months ago, when he asked for security. representatives fromepartments to attend a course with the D.E.C., quite a number of Communistsvere nominated. I rather gathered that the work of protective security hadrather foundered on this rock and that up to now not very much progress hadmade.thought that his commitment Would become a more definite onein the cours of the next month or 80, and he hoped tha he might rely onour assistance in planning his Work. He referred to a note which he hadreceived about a year or more ago from Irvine on C. Division functions, whichhe had found extremely valuable. An illustration of the extent to hichMinistries are penetratedishe told me, the extent to which documents from theQuai d 'orsay, the Ministry of Defence, Ministry of the Interion, the Sureteand ,thndeede Ibhe.D.E.C. periodically get published in toto in the Humanite,without any legal action being taken. He said that the powers exist underFrench law, but that the fact that the Communists have one-third of theseats in the Chambre des Deputes, makes it dirficult,f for political reasons,dany Government to stage a prosecution. He told me that he had veryconsiderably tightened up physical security in D.E.C.. which in many wayswas far from satisfactory. The postion is not yet ironed out as betweenD.E.C. and the Surete, but he seemed to hope for some improvement. He wasincensed at the idea of the Surete publishing a brochure on the RussiansIntelligence Service. He said: "What do they know about the RussianIntelligence Service? They have never daught a single spy, whereas I have"In fact this spy is his one and only "cheval de bataille", a rather feeblecase which occurred in Austria, I think a good deal more than a year ago!I am firlly convinced that neither the D.E.C. nor the Surete know verymuch about what is going on in their midst, or tha if they do they are notsufficiently skilled to exploit the situation, or are prohibited from doing80 for political reasons.I saw Ronnie Howe and Bunt about de COURCY. It was agreed tha SpecialBranch would interview Michaell de COUROY, and possibly Philip FARRER and otheon the basis that a complaint had been made involving the purloining ofdocuments. I referred to Count ROMER'S affidavit and said that we hadreceived casual information from an individual who had known ROMER for eleveryears and had been associated with him at Polish H.Q during the war. It wapossible, therefore, that ROMER was referring to this individual, whose namein fact, T could not recollect. There was, however, nothing in the suggesti52.suggestion that the Security Service had the idea of using Michael de COURCYinordertodiscredittheDigest.Inanycaee,itseemedtomethatitW oldbe better not to pursue the ROMER side of the story; but allow it to becotswamped by the investigations into the allegations made by Michael.After the meeting Burt asked-me-whether I had heard anything aboutcertain changesrover our way. I said that I had not and it was unlikelythat if anything of the kind was contemplated I should know about it. Iwas not at all clear to what he referred: it may have been to the Norman Brorenghiry, which I clearly could not discuss with him.I dined withwere there from the D.E.C.was in goodform, relating his past experiences. He finally got on to the question ofthe "Spotted Dicki whom we have all known for a long time andexploited.The French, for some reason, have refused to alllow him to ge bactoFrance;Ithinkthey6uspectthaS.I.S.makesomeuseofhiminFrance,but there was no mystery about his having been employed by us in the pastand possibly by 8.I.S. as a casual informant.seemed to think thathe and Ivan POPOV were getting together and were likely to embarrass theFrench.said that POPOV andwere not on speaking termsand that he could not see any real harm in either. He felt he owed a debtof honour toto protest to the French about the treatment thathewas now receiving. The whole conversation was taken in good part, butT had the feeling that the French, while they thoughtwas anamusing card - a's indeed he is - were not inclined wholly to trust him.This conversations was followed bytrotting out the namesDf Gordon CANNING and Miss HOPE, who he said were intriguing in Tangier.Everybody believed that they were British agents. I said that of courseI had known about Gordon CANNING for years; he is an intriguer, has beena friend of ABDEL ELIKRIM, and during the war was a Fascist and was internedby US. Certainly he had never been an agents of ourselves, nor aid Iknow anything about Miss HOPE.equally denied any knowledge of either of these people.Thincident, however, served to show that the French are obviously verysensitive and inclined to think that if they find a British subject anywherewhoisdoingsomethingthattheydonotlike.heisboundtobeanagentofBritish Intelligence.of course, affeeted to believe that thiswas only a thing people were saying, although I think that he had a lurkingsuspicion at the back of his mind that CANNING and Miss HOPE were agents ofS.I.S.There was good deal of conversation about agents-double, which theFrench have on the brain.seemed to think that if we pooled allour questionnaires and information received. we should know when the RussianWere trying to practice deception upon us. He instanced a case where he hareceived reports about tank platrorms going back to Russia from theEastern Zone of Germany, from which the inference to be drawn was that theRussians were bringing forward tanks to the area.said that he,too, had had these reports, and that the Americans had also had them, but thverification on the ground had not substantiated the allquite sure that any scheme of the kind would be a waste ISACOPYORIGRALDOCUMENTRETUNDER SEOFTHEPUBLICl1th April.RECOR1958Dick told me about the case of a Soviet agent that wefor who leaked from the British Embassy: in 191 or 1945. It is now thought53.that this individual may be identical with the Foreign Office agent reportedby KRIVITSKY as supplying information on Imperial Policy back in 1937.KRIVITSKY said that he was the son of some titled individual. Recent ACORNaterial served to narrow the field; this materiall has been in the possessionof the Americans for a long time, but for some unknown reason has only justreached us. There are two people who might possibly fill the bill; one,Donald MACLEAN and the other. John RUSSELL. MACLEAN is now head of theAmterican Department in the Foreign Office and is the brotherof Nancy Macleanwho was formerly in this office.12th April.West Africa and Lagos. D.E./A. reported that he was concernedat the number of women staff in the West Africa station, which indicated thatthe suggestions put forward by D.D.G. for the limitati on of carding had notbeen fully implemented. It was decided to recommend to the D.G. that aRegistry expert should be sent out to West Africa to look at the records andtD attempt to bring about a reduction in the amount of clerical staff onthe Station. At subsequent discussion it was decided that Mr. Potter shouldEo to West Africa, and this proposal has been approved by the D.G.D.E./A. stated that he waat very kceen for action to be taken toassimilate the 0.8.4 reconds entirely into those of the Security Service.He proposed to provide another secretary for 0.S.4, liberating Miss Stewartto carny out this work, and asked D.B. if he woulld consider liberatingMr. V.W. Smith from B.1.G. to continue this task. It was agreed in principlehat this was desirable.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958Aua2009At the suggestion of Mr. Morrison, Mr. Nicholson, Secretary to theLord President of the Council, called here last night accompanied by Mr. Lobb,the Architect on the Festival site. Mr. Lobb had apparently received areport frorn Special Branch to the effect that some act of sabotage was likelyto be committed if and when the dockers at present on trial were sentencedto a term of imprisonment. Mr. Lobb said that there had already been a54.number of minor acts committed over a considerable period of time: theseincluded the cutting of wires, the filling up of pipes with concrete, andthe slashing of pictures. ID ha'd been suggested to Special Branch tha'tthey should put in some agents on the site; this they declined to do ecthe grounds that theirmen-w be bound to become known and furthertrouble might ensue. Mr. Lobb wondered whether w'e could put in an agentin order to find out exactly what was going on.I said that even if this were possible, I doubted whether it wouldbe a profitable line of enquiry, since it seemed probable that the actsbeing committed were those of individually disgruntled people, and, althoug!two or three might get together, the probabilit was that there was noorganised plan behind it. It seemed to me that the only appropriatemeasure was to increase the number of protective guards.Mr. Lobb toldme that they already had a security force of 70 ex-Police Officers of theirown, but the area was a very wide one and close supervision was ifficult.I undertook to get into touch wit th Special Branch and discuss withthem whether it was possible to do anything further, but I made it Clearthat, as far as I could see, the job was primarily a Police one.I spoke to Burt about this this morning. He told me thatMr. Nicholson and Mr. Lobb were over at the Yard. He had discussed thecase with them and had come to the same conclusion as ourselves, namellythat it was primarily a job for the Police Division concerned.I gather that Mr. Nicholson and Mr. Lobb wadiscussing thematter with Sir Harold Scott.16th April.I gave a lecture to the Police course which is at present going on.Chief Inspector Jones of Special Branch came to see me. He hadcalled on Michael de COUROY, who had more or less given him a repetitionof the information contained in John de COUROY's affidavit, and had refusedto state the names of those who were present at the meeting. Jones didnot seem to me to have a very clear idea of the purpose of his enquiry.I told him that it must obviously be confined to enquiring into whatamounted to an allegation that certain private documents, the property ofKenneth de COURCY, had been stolen and that certain Government agencieswere implicated. It Seemed to me that we must at all costs avoid anysuggestion that we were making a private enquiry on behalf of de COURCY.The position was that de COUROY had made these allegations on the second-hand evidence of Michael de COURCY. Michael had told John de COURCY, andthe latter had made an affidavit. No proof or evidence of any sortexisted. The only course, therefore, was to go to Micheel de COURCY, geta statement from him and follow it up.Jones told me that among other things Michael had said thatde COURCY' evidence on the atomic bomb explosion had been got from aMrs. THOMPSON, living in Highgate, and from a young student at Oxford,whose name he did not give, although he said that he had in fact taken amessage from Kenneth de COURCY to this student. The student apparentlygoes in for some form of psychic research and obtains his informationby consulting planchette.At the gectorsMeeting the D.G. said that he had heard nothingfurther from Briages about salaries, and nothing about Norman Brook'sproposals in regard to Ministerial responsibility for this office.55.I told the D.G. about the latest developments in the de COURCYcase.'o' telephoned to say that de COURCY had written him a lettersaying that as the War Office had refused to investigate the group ofpersons pertaining to speak on 'o''s behalf, he was obliged to takepolitical steps; he would also have to put the facts to the Editorsof Conservative: newspapers. He then complained that the Rector ofClifton, in Galway, had informed him that a member of the group whichsays it represents S S.I.S.. and M.I.5 actually went to the extreme Westof Ireland only two weeks ago to enquire into de COURCY'! oldgrandfather's origin. He concludes: "One cannot ask for more evidenceof money, time and determination and states that he has sent thescommunications to his lawyers.c' subsequently replied to him by telephone, saying that therewasno question of any Government Department being involved in enquiriesabout his ancestry; they were all far too busy with other things. Hethought that de COURCY seemed reasonably satisfied.Edward Thornton came to see me, but really had little to say.except that AVYAKTANANDA was now striking out on his own and had refuseto appear before the Ramakrishna Vedanta Centre in order to explain hispresent position,I told Hinl about my conversation with 'c' regarding de COURCY.17th April.Jones telephoned to tell me that de COURCY had rung up to say thathe had been visited by Michael, who evidently gave a garbled account ofhis interrogatior by Jones.The view that de COURCY is unbalanced is increasing.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.Auo200918th April.I asked Vivian about the records of the interviews with KRIVITSKYand subsequent enquiries which it was alleged were made through theForeign Office in an endeavour to establish the identity of theindividual alleged by KRIVITSKY to have passed informatio fromImperial Defence sources. This information has become particularlyrelevant in conneotio with the enquiries into Donald MACLEAN.Meanwhile, there is another case of considerable importance.Aman namedin the Ministry of Defence private office, isthe hushand of a woman in another Department - I think the Ministry of- whoappears to be a secret Party member, a record56.of whose services is held by theGroup.It seems unlikely thatis not awa're of his wifele political views, and he may indeedshare them. We are turning the heat on, but Sir Harold Parker, the J.Sdoes not feel that he can allow the situation to continue for more thanabout a week or ten days without informingg the Minister. If anyactiDdis taken againstI am afraid thewill be blown.It seems to me that if are forced to take action, we ought to get asearch warrant onand obtain hercrecords of secret Partymembers in Government emptoy.I talked to Mann about a complaint made by one of the Scottishofficers attending the present course to the effect that he was oftenout of pocket in dealing with S.B. informants whom he entertained. Inpoint of fact his Chief Constable receives a grant, although what he doeswith it nobody knows.I told Mann that the officer should be. advised to put in hisexpenses and, if necessary, could say that Mann had oldwas a special grant from the Security Service toCOPY19th April.3 IN DEPARTMENT UNDER RETAINED SECTION(4) 1058 OF THE Pruas PUBLIC RECORDSGeneral Airey, Eisenhower's Chief Intelligence Officecame to see us at the J.I.C. He was formerly British G.0.0. in Trieste.Airey gave an interesting account of his difficulties. He had inall a staff of 21 officers from all the N.A.T.O. Powers, but very fewthem (and this; I think, might apply to General Airey himself) knewanything about Intelligence. He said that the only man upon whom he Corely was an American called- the British contribution being, at thmoment, totally inadequate. He was forced to make appointments to thevarious branches of his organisation in such a manner as not to giveoffence, particularly to the French who were extremely sensitive about any"ganging-up" between ourselves and the Americans. General Eisenhower hadtalked about the "Atlantic Man", but when one tried to put this intopractice the results were somewhat alarming! The head of his SecurityBranch was a Frenchman. ( This seemed a curious appointment to the Committein view of their extended deliberations on the question of French insecuritThe head of his Information Department was an Italian calledwhowas a high-ranking official of the Italian Intelligence Organisation, S.I.NHe hoped that the War Office would supply a full Colonel as No. 2 to thisItalian. He would have under him a French Capitaine de Vaisseau Added tall this, he was living in a hotel wi th liittle security the American hadgiven him a full-blooded Hawaiian as secretary, who, they told him, hadbeen "cleared for everything"! This was met with ribald laughter by theCommittee. other members of his staff were a British sergeant calledMacarthur,si swhose name, at any rate, did not inspire confidence at thismoment, and an Italian caribinieri.In spite of this lamentable state of affairs, General Eisenhower wasnurgingethatu he iIntelligence aslpossible. He waspleasedwiththe.summary,whichhevaluedparticularlysincehisown Government were sending him nothing except raw SIGINT material, whigoes to a special Box established in Paris. Nobody know what this matetiais, which is presmably unprocessed and therefore dangerous, and it seemsdoubtful to G.C.H.Q. whether in fact there is a great deal tha t hasparticular reference to S.H.A.P.E'B command. U.S.C.I.B. have suggestedthas an interim measure, this procedure should go on and that G.C.H.Q. shouldbrief General Airey. Meanwhile he, as head of Eisenhower's Intelligence,cannot see any of the USOIB material going to Paris. as the Americans allegthat he has not been properly iindoctrinated.57.The Committee felt that probably the flow of SIGINT material fromthe U.S.A. coulld be cut down if we knew exactly what was being sent, andthat the box in Paris should be a joint affair between ourselves and theAmericans with appropriate processing facilities. General Airey is takinthe line wi th his liaison officers that there may be certain inform tionwhich they do not wish to put in to the general pool but which they couldcommunicate personally to the O.-in-C., or General Airey as his representative.Airey hopes to receive oficially procesaed Intelligence fromWashington and London, processed Intelligence from Front to Rear inEurope, i.e. from all military organisations, including B.A.0.R. andlastly, processed Intelligence from all national organisations. Anadded complication is the interposition of General Juints Headquarters,which controls all the land forces for S.H.A.P.E.General Aireyha the Committee's full sympathy, and everythingpossible is being done to help him.We considered a note which stated that the Amenicans want Britishagreement to bomb Manchurian air bases if the United Nations are againattacked in force. Before giving their consent, the Chiefs of Staffwant a report on the build-up in Manchuria in order that they can assessprecisely what the threat amounts to.The view of the Air Ministry, as far as I can gather, is that,fo.the next six months at any rate, the threat cannot be very great unlessthe Russians intend to intervene with their own pilots and machines.Even iri th the assistance of Russian M.I.G 15s, it is not estimated thathe Chinese Air Force can do very much on its own, but there are signsthat intensive training is going on and that airfields are being builtin Northern Korea to take jet fighters.(I) informed.t the meeting that Type 27 twin-engined lightbombers had appeared in Poland, but not yet in Germany. They had beenseen for the first time a year ago and 544 were recently seen in Moscowduring a rehearsel for the May Day parade.Reilly said that in Persia the Communiste were definitelystimulating unrest in Abadah and Isbahan, and this might spread toTeheran There was, however, no indication of direct interventionby Moscow. The new General appointed /establish order in the 01ldistricts appeared to be a complete flop: he seems unwilling to takeany drastic action and merely says that the present disorders areentirely due to the British. The probability is that he is afraidof his own skin, like most Persians.The War Office explanation of the present reluctance of the Chinesein Korea to give battle is that they may be drawing the Allied Forcesinto a position which they feell will render them vulnerable to attack.This refers particularly to the front north west of Seoul, which formsalmost a right-angle. There is said to be a Chinese build-up here ofabout 200,000.THIS IS A COPYIN ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED(4) DEPARTMENT OF THE PUBLIC UNDER RECORDS SECTIONACT 196858.This IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIO RECORDSACT 19682009At the. "post mortem" on the Pollice course, two of those present,and I think their Views were probably acquiescent, felt that Hill'slecture and Leggett's lecture, although-good in themselves, were--not-o ofmuch value to Police officers of their standing. They argued that theywere not really concerned with the precise terms of the Official SecretsActs they merely-received-an-arder merely- received an arder from the- D. OfP.P. on the LordAdvocate to prosecute under a certain section. In regard to SatelliteIntelligence organisations, they did not seem to think that it helped thevery much to know precisely how the Czechs- or the Poles organised theirIntelligence Service. This is, of course, a rather typically narrowPolice outlook, but it may be that such information is rather remote fromtheir kind of enquinies. Personally's if I were looking-for members ofthe Czech and Polish Intelligence Services. I should like to know howthey were organised. The Police, of course, only think in terms ofan individual who is breaking the -law and are not. much concerned with theorganisation behind it. If they were, they would often act in a muchmore enlightened manner!20th April.Isaw Newsam about the oases of Donald MACLEAN andHe was rather shooked to hear thatboth of these people might be working in Russian interests.59.21st April.I received a long report from Special Branch on SuperintendentJones's interview with Micheel de COURCY, and subsequent talks withKenneth de COURCY.Jones has not got a statement out of Michael, to the effect thathe believes he was entirely nistaken in suggesting that the interview thathe had with those people,whose names he still refused to disclose, was inno way inspired from Government sources and that those present were notrepresentatives of either M.I. or M.I.6.As regards the documents themselves, there was nothing to showthat they emanated from official sources. In between the two interviewsthat he had with Jones, Michael went to de COURCY and made four statementsabout what had passed between him and Jones.Somebody is obviously lying - probably Michael, or both. D ratherfeel that we have got de COURCY where we want him.23rd April.I spoke to Hill about the case of de COURCY. He seems to thinkthat we should be fully justified in asking de COUROY to issue a denialthathistroublesareinanywayduetofficialactivitiesinthenextissue of the Digest, and if he does not intend to do this we shall haveto use other channels for giving the matter the ne'cessary publicityshowed the report to the D.G. He has oasiedoussthematter with 'c' and with Ronnie Hove.DEPARTMENT UNDER RETAINED SECTIONOF THE PUBLIC RECORDS1968Furnival Jones tells me that a man namedAugsoiehtistatHarwell, has committed suicide. There is some suggestion of Left Wingtendencies, owing to certain document found, but a more probableexplanation is that he had been having an affair with another girl, althoug.he vag already married, and she is going to have a baby.alsoappears to have been in debt to the tune of several hundred pounds, whichhardly suggeste that he has been receiving money from the RusBians.The worst feature of the case is that in September, 1950, theHampshire Police sent in a report suggesting thatwas a Communistand stating where he was employed. For some reason oD other thisreport was filed and never put up to any section by the Registry.-24th-AprileeFor the minutes of the D.G. Tuesday)meetin held today, seeenvelope at the back of the diary.Admiral Godfrey came to see me to discuss his memorandum ondeception. I gave him certain comments h-Marriott and I had agreedon. His main question was whether we should in a future war do to theRussians what we had done to the Germans. I said that in tour view wehad a completely different problem. There were three difficulties;firstly, it seemed unlikely that we should have anything comparable toISOS, which had of course been invaluable in knowing exactly where we stoodin our operation against the Germans. Secondly, we might well have animportant stay-behind organisation in this country, which of course wehad not had in the case of the Germans. Thirdly that it would beextremely difficult to maintain the same degree of security, btb thatweachieved in the last wan, since with a potential Fifth Column in this60.country', the Russians Would have far better opportunities for ascertainingwhether the facts we gave them were true and whether our agents were undercontrol. It seemed, therefore, that inless weu could liquidate fairlyeffectively the Russian stay-behind organisation and fonce the Russiansto build up a new organisation from the outside, we should find our taskavery difficult one. If, on the other hand, we could liquidate theRussian stay-behind onganisation, we might be able to Iassist them" inbuilding a new one.I sent over the Special Branch reports about de COURCY to 'o'.He telephoned back to say that he was going away for ten days that hedid not wish the enquiries pressed any further unless S.B. felt thatthey wished to complete the investigation by visiting Philip FARRER andothers.Hethoughttheresultoftheenquirywassatisfactoryandthat de COURCY should be asked to publish a denial in the Digest.25th April.THIs IS A COPYIN ORIGINAL DEPARTMENT DOCUMENT RETAINEDACT (4) 1958. OF THE PUBLIC UNDER RECORDS SECTIONAua20ooSerpell tells me that there has been a great deal of thouble about theMediterranear Naval command. When e suggested a British admiral, theAmericans turned the idea down flat, saying that under no ircumstancescould units of the American Fleet be under the command of a Britishadmiral. They suggested that our susceptibilities would be met if EBritish admiral were placed ced.directly under Eisenhower to cover the wholeofhis southerr Plank. We made a counter proposal that we should hold theappointment they proposed, and that, they should then appoint an Admiralbetween our representative on the Supreme Commander' staff and a Britishadmiral cormmanding the Mediterranean Fleet. In thi way it would alwaysbe open to the Amenicans to protect their own interests if they objectedtodecisions by the British commander in the Mediterranean. The Amehicansturned this dovn as wvell,an discussions became 80 heated that finallythe Chiefs of Staff recommended the Government to accede to the Americanproposall that they bhould command in the Mediterranean and that we shouldhave an admiral on Eisenhower's staff to be responsible for the protectionof his southern flank.The whole of this is interesting, since it vias only a short time agothat the Ame. icans were anxious to write off the Eastern Mediterraneanentirely. Since then, however, they have established very close relationswi th Turkey and kept us in the dark about what they have been doing.Meanwhile, Winston, in the House, has been prepared to vive theArnericans the Mediterranean, possibly because he thinks that if they havea firm commitment they will feel constrained to act if there is trouble,61.and that the Eastern Mediterranean powers will be stimulated to resist.He is, however, stil disagreeing abou't the Atlantic commnand, on thegrounds that it is impossible to defend these shores frorn Washingtonand that the British Navy knows more about the intrdcacies of Europeanwaters than the rest of the would put together.26th April.At the J.I.C. (Directors) meeting to-day it was nentioned that theAmericans have refused intelligence to General Airey on the lines beinggiven by us in the weekly S.H.A.P.E. summary.ItispresumedthatEisenhower wi 11 take this up in a big way, since it is quite nidiculousthat information should be refused to his Chief Intelligence officer.It was mentioned that, on the basis of a telegram received fromBoucher in Tokyo, the Chinese new offensive is on a big scale and thatthe Chinese appear to be committed in Korea in a far bigger way than wasat first anticipated I gather that fresh units and arms have beenidentified. It is thought that we may perhaps withdraw about twenty-fivemilesor SO, but that the Chinese will suffer extremely heavy losses.Thefeeling is that the more they commit themselves and pursue their presenttactics,by coming on in hordes only to be mown down, the more likely theyare to avoid committing themselves elsewhere and ultimately to beprepared for peace negotiations.elephoned to me to say thathas now beenconfirmed in his appointment. He thought this would mean thatreport about the future of D.E.0. which involves aTar greater measure of collaboration by the Surete, rather on thebasis of our own relations with the Police, has been accepted. Hecould not tell me much aboutthe new Head of the Surete,except that he did at one time work on the administrative side in theSurete and had since held an appointment as Prefect in the provinces.This IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 ACT (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS1968.Aug200962.Hanover Square. The proposals submitted by A. for the moveto Haxover Square were in general agreed with the exception that SeniorOfficer C.2 should move there as well. D.C. also drew attention totheincreased number of Officers in C.2. It was noted that pied-a-terreaccommodation in Leconfield House should be provided for the Sectionsmoving and that the Shuttle Service to and from Hanover Square should beas frequent as possible, probably every half-hour.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS1958Z00927th April.At a Directors meeting to-day the D.G. spoke to us about his interviewwith Bridges on the question of Chorley increases for directing staff, whichup to the present ha s been held up.The D.N.I. telephoned in reference to the explosion of the ammunitionship in Gibraltar harbour, which has caused widespread damage and the loss oftwelve lives. He said that the depth charges. which contained Torpex,came from the same batoh as thos which went up at Bedenham. He thoughtT should like to know this as it seemed possible to confirm our view thatthe Bedenham explosion was accidental. He said that although Pellingmight not be able to do very much, he thought it was well that he shoulldproceed to Gibraltar.28th April.I saw Howe and Burt this morning. I said that while it was satisfactorsto know that both Michael de COURCY and Kenre th de COURCY had reached theconcllusion that the alleged incidents. reported by Michael de COURCY in hisaffidavit to John de COURCY had nothing to do with any Department of theDritish Government, it seemed to me that as these false allegations had beenbroadcast in the Digest both here and in America, it should at least besuggested to Kenneth de COURCY that in fairness to the authorities he shouldpublish something in the nature of a denial in his next issue of the Digest.Secondly, it seemed to me that he should clarify his positior with regardto the case of the two scientists at Harwell who were alleged in the Digestto be communicating informatior to the Russians. He should say whetherhe knew their names or not, and if he did, whether he was or was notprepared bo pass these names to the authorities.While Howe say the desirability of this, he was a little doubtfulwhether it was for the Police to carry the matter further. The HomeOfficehad OWHrcome into the case, through an official request to the HomeSecretary for a copy of the statement made by Michael de COURCY toSuperintendent Jones of Special Branch. It seemed probable that Kennethde Mchael COUROY de wanted COURCY, this and the tatement probable for answer the purpose will be of that future such action statements, againstbased on Police enquiries, are not given to members of the public.Howe is away until next Thursday, when he proposes to have adiscussion about the case with Oakley of the Home Office. It wassuggested that meanwhile I should see Oakley and explain to him our63.point of view ab regards the whole matter.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION30th April.(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSAOT1968Aug2009Young of the Ministry of Defence telephoned about the case ofa man called HOLLIDAY, who had been somewhat indiscreet in Cyprus andseemed te have been poking his nose unneeesnarily into local politics.He said that although D.S.I. might have said that he would be interestedto hear about affairs in Cyprus, a country with which he was personallyacquainted, he is quite certain that he did not ask HOLLIDAY to make anyenquinies in Cyprus.I had a talk with Grnham, as a result of which I told Young thatthere was no apparent security interest: it merely seemed that HOILIDAYhad bee rather indiscreet and stupid. Young explained that HOLLIDAYwas a historian and probably made enquiries from personal interest.telephoned to say thatwould be coming over nextweek and Would hope to see officers of this Department. He had thoughtof trying to arrange something of a programme for him: he would of course,be going to S.I.S. as vell.also asked whether any arrangements wene being made aboutacoommodation fon the Tripartite Cosmic Committee arriving from New Yorknext week. I told him that as far as I knew none, but tha t Andre ofthe Embassy was in touch with the Foreign Office. from whom he could getafirm answer. I ascertained later that there wene no arrangements andtoldwho is at his wit's end to find accommodation.Lateraang me to know whether there would be any objectionto his attending the meetings of the Tripartit Committee. The reasonI think is thatdo not really understand English.I spoke to Hollis who had a wond with Carey Foster. Carey sees noobjection and will make the necessary arrangements.King rang me about a Cold Viar Committee meeting on Thursday which 18to discuss Cyprus. The Commi ttee are proposing that AKEL should eitherbe supressed or severely harassed. We have been asked to send arepresentative.Hollis. has talked to me about the explosion at Gibralltar. TheAdmiralty, having been eprimanded in the Bedenham case for not callingin the local Police, telegraphed to Gibraltar to ask whether the GibraltarPolice were capable 0f dealing with the case. On getting an unfavourablereply they approached the Home Office and Scotland Yard. The result isthat two Special Branch officers ane now going out. As usual the Navywhen not in theiy ships are inclined to get things a bit muddled, Thepurpose of calling In the Local Police is because they have local knowleageand responsibilities. Two policemen from Special Branch are like fishout of water in Gibraltar: they cannot in fact do any more than whatPelling is doing, namely, take statements from uitable witnesses.Itseems rather unnecessany to have three people doing this: two of them froma different organisation.64.Holllis is a little inclined to think that the Admiraltymay not altogether trust us, since we took a contrary view to theBoard of Enquiry on the Bedenham explosion. There is in fac't alwaysa tendency in the Admirality to think that everything is sabotageand to underrate our competence to judge correctly in these matters.I am inclined to think that our one concern is to cry "no sabotage"in order to cover our own yardarm!Longley-Cook, however, seems to tonbe-on our side in this case.1st May.A telegram has gone to Pelling to tell him of the arrival ofthe two Special Branch officers and to instruot him to collaboratewith them. Similar instructions have gone from the Admiralty, whowish Pelling to remain. nucting the Naval authorities to continueto give him all facilities.Meanwhile, it appears that the explosives were being off-loadedfrom the ammunition ship on to a lighter. The armunition hadbeenpiled up at each end and about 70 depth charges had been placed in thecentre. As me of the hoists came down, there was a 'woof! anda jetof flame coming from one of the depth charges. The heat generatedcaused an explosion on the lightar within six minutes and the detonatiorset off the expllosion on the ammunition ship, longside thejetty. Its rear portion sank and the bows were blown on to the quay.The ordnance department at the Admiralty received a signalto stop all filling of depth charges with Torpex for the time beingIt is, moreover, stated that newly-filled depth harges are justdangerous as the old ones.The Police, on instructions from the Admiralty, ane makingenquiries both at Plymouth and Glascoed. It does not seem likelythat they will get anywhere. Everything, in fact, points to Torpexbeing a thoroughly unsuitable explosive which should not be used infuture.Cumming and James Robertson talked to me about our Watchers.Robertson has reached the conclusion, which interests me since it isa point which I have emphasised for many years, namely, that anefficient watching service is absolutely vital if we are doing todetect a spy. In fact it is the only method in a large number ofcases. It is 6f course an immensely difficult problern: we are upagainst two difficulties one, that Storrier is not a very imaginsativeperson and very reluctant to accept any ideas. The other is thatwerequire considerably more Watchers than we have got at present. WhileHarry Hunter was here, I was always urging him to get more Watchers;the trouble was, however, that his standards were SD high that he couldnever find anyone to me et them; progress was consequently very slow.We have gone quite a long way since then, but still have not got enoughto enablle us to ring the changes. Neither are the number of peoplewe have of the right calibre. There have been a numberofcaseswherethe Watchers have been spotted. On the other hand, some progressbeen made on the technical side by the use of cars with wirelessand Iwalkie-talkies". It seems, too, that Storrier, who has beenheayily pushed from behind for the last two years, is now inclined tocontribute these advances to his own initiative!65.I said that, if necessary, I should be quite prepared to raisethe wholle matter with the D.G., but Robertson seemed to think that forthe moment at any rate, Storrier was showing a greater interest in newdevelopments and that it would be better to let things ride.We are trying to geton MACLEAN, but meanwhile we are entirelydependent upon Watchers, who in any case are an essential ingredient in anenquiry of this kind.2nd Mav.This IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1968. Aua Z00Mackenzie of the Foreign Office rang up to say there was to be anothermeeting of the Cold War Committ on Wednesday next, to discuss prioritiesand the training of foreign police officers.Apainfulandboringsubject:TI telephoned to Burt to ask him what was being done about the Syriianpolice officers who wished to come to this country. After speaking toCornish, he said that Cornish had written to the Foreign Office, indicatingto some extent that it would be undesirable for Special Branch 6ocommunicate very much about their work, although how Special Branch. whoappear in every Cormunist and espionage case, can hide their heads undera bushel, I cannot imagine! The Home Office seem to think that it is notgenerally known that they deal in these matters!3rd May.At the staff meeting to-day, we first of all discussed therepresentation at the Commonwealth Security Conference, and then Morton'stelegram about the status of S.0.0. S.I.F.E.As regards the latter, we agreed that it was wring that there shouldbe any rigid arrangement by which the head of J.I.D. attended the J.I.C.He would do s0 more often than not in the absence of H/S.. 3 but theremight be occasions when the Acting HS.I.F.E. H/S. I. D.F.E. should be there to deal withma'tters of policy or C. Division matters. Sometimes it might be necessaryfor both of them to be present. We also agreed that there was no necessityto inform S.I.S. about this arrangement at present.Wie then proceeded to discuss our wartime organisation, which can nowwould be have to be filled, either from existing staff orfinalised. D.E./A woulld prepare lists showing what from new new appointments intake..66.Lth May.Oakley came to see me about de COURCY. Hill and I explained tohim our point of view. Firstly, some apology was due for the misleadingstatements about the Michael incident, but, more important, that some-thing should be done about the allegation that there were still twoprofessors at Harwell giving information to the Russians. There wasanasty inference that left wing officials were turning a blink eye. Theeffect of this message on Anglo-American co-operation in the atomic energyfield was likely to be considerable. We felt, therefore, that the mattercould not be allowed to rest where it was. if de COURCY would not disclosethe names and the source of information. Section 6 of the O.S.A. should beinvoked.Oakley said that he was glad to have our point of view and thathe would represent it to the Home Office for any discussion that theymight be having with the Yard. It wa's agreed that, if possible, Ishould be present at such a discussion.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS1958Aua2007The D.G saw the P.M. at 5.30 in order to discuss the proposalthat we should be put ministerially under the Home Office. The D.G. saidthat on the previous Tuesday he had discussed the same matter withBridges, who had read the memorandum prepared by Serpell, which he thoughtwas too long. The D.G. asked him if he would be kind enough to make hima short draft since he had the experience of the kind of thing required.This draft has been sent over and amended by Dick. I had notinfactseen it before, but it struck me as being singularly inadequate. Itseemed to me that our original short draft really put the case much better.Bridges' view was that we should concentrate on the mahn point - that wedid not wish to be departmentalised, since we had business with allDepartments.The .G. handed the P.M. the amended Bridges note and then putover to him the various other points made in his long memorandum. Thehis intention of seeing Brook..M. seemed receptive and generally speaking, in agreement. He expressed67.5th May.Dick Butler came to see me about Operation MINCEMEAT.I toldhim that I could not possibly say to Cholmondeley that I thoughtMontagu'e proposal, to blow the whole Operation in "Life" and on theair, was a good one. My ob bjection was that - regrettable as DuffCooper's book was - it did not state the facts in black and white;in any case two wrongs did not make a right. Far the worst featureof Montagu's proposed action was the effect that it would have onothers, who might well ask why they could not publish theirreminiscences. T thought that Cholmondeley would ultimately regrethis action; my advice to him would be to have nothing to do withMontagu' proposal.Butler told me, off the record, that "Life" were now askingMontagu to give them a series of articles on decepfion generally.Montagu realised that this was impossible but 39 shaws how ane thingleads to another.IDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS8th May.ICT1968.Aua2004Burt came to see me; firstly about a purge case relating toa certainSpecial Branch had visited the EstablishmentOfficer at the outset of their enquiries. This had given an impressionof inefficinncy and caused irritation, since we had already been intouth with the Establishment Officer and obtained all the necessaryparticulars. Burt appears to have a counter-complaint, that officerswhen writing to Special Branch do not always give them the propersupporting points for their enquiries they will give a man' homeaddress but not his place of employment.Burt gave me a copy of a letter from the Home Office toCecil King of the Foreign Office, on the subject of the Syrians whovant to be given a course over here. The letter seemed to me tocontain a lot of nonsense about Special Branch not disclosing to theSyrians that they tndulged In-anti-Communist activity. As if everybodydid not know that their main activity is anti-Communist! However, weare now left to work out details with Burt.Lastly, I talked to Burt ab out the case of de COURCY and theuseofSection 6. He seemed to agree with me that action should andcould be taken.He asked me whether he could discuss the matter withHowe, and rang back subsequently to say that Howe was entirely inagreement. I acquainted 'c' with the position. He seemed to haveno objection to the course of action proposed. I thereforetookover,with the D.G'S approval, a letter to Newsam. His reaction was thatif w.e used Section 6 it woulld be tantamount to saying that we believedde COURCY' information to be accurate. I went into this pointwithHill on my return and sent Newsam a further letter, in which I pointedout that the police officer conducting the interview was only calledupontosuspectthatafelonyhadbeencommitted.There seemed tome to be a wide difference between suspecting and helieving.arrived withThe D.G. wasunable to see them as he was catching a train.aftermaking his apologies, asked quite a number of pertinent questions aboutourelations with the Police. I explained to him the Whole systemof our working with the Police. I made it clear that we had no executivepowers and no powers for ordering the Police to do anything. Ourliaison, however, was excellent and the results satisfactory I think68.he was seeking this information, since I know thet he hopes to controlcases of espionage which are now investigated by the Surete.9th May.We had a paper up to-day at the J.I.C. on "Post Report". weare endeavouring buget the J.I.C's support for the use of a Hollerithmachine by the Home Office, which would enable Departments seeking informationfrom Post Report to get an easy reply. The Home Office appear to bereluctant to undertake this work unless there is a demand for it rom otherquarters. This is rather typical of the Home Office: clearly it would bevery much to their own advantage to have the wholle of the enemy alienpopulatior on a Hollerith. They have made up their minds, however, thatthey will not go in for any form of category internment, and that theHollerith is therefore of no use to them. Experience shows, however,that in wartime they maywell have their hands forced, in which case theirmachinery will be found wanting.The Committee were in favour of the project and have given ittheir support. The Chairman is to write to the Home Office.I had lunch with the French Ambassador. 'C',were representing S.L.S.was theprincipal guest.OBIGINAL This COPYRETAINEDI attended a cocktail party atandthe Tripartite delegates.1968 THE Aus PUBLIC RECORDSasked me whether it would possible for somebody 2009 to speakto the delegates about the line of demarcatio between military and cisecurity. I told him that the line was an extremely wavy one and theubject a little complicated, but that if he asked the question Holliscould give him a rough answer at the conclusion of his lecture to-morrow.lOth May.Kazim Raza, head of the D.I.B. Pakistan, name to see me. I gavehim a bnief account of the work of the office, and thereafter he gave mehis views about the state of the world in general and the reasons fordiscontent. He touched on the Pakistan plot. He was at some pains toexplain that the Communist elements had come into the plotimther as anafterthought, as it was felt that a more popular bacling was requi redand that the Soviet system, suitablly dressed up, would have an appeal.In this the plotters had been mistaken. The real motive had been two-fold: firstly, a desire to see the departure of British officers andofficials, who it was felt were blocking the road to promotion, andsecondly a feeling that the Kashmir dispute was not being pursued withsufficient vigour.Kazim Raza did not explain why the Government, with full nowledgeof what was going on, had sent the principal figure in the plot to attenda course at the I.D.C.. and I did not think it politic to pursue thisquestion. From official communications it seems that there was an ideathat a course at the I.D.C. would get him out of the way and cause himto take a more favourable view of the British. From our point of viewthis is not very good security.69.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION$3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSAT 1968.Aug2009The D.G's note to Directors about attending Divisional meetingswas discussed.0.S have one meeting a week which lasts about an hour-and-a-half.B. Division have two meetings, one of B.. officers, which last aboutanhour, and another of B.2 officers, which also lasts about an hour.B. Division also have a monthly meeting of the whole Division. C. Divisionhave one meeting, of 0.2. officers, which lasts about an hour.It was agreed that D.D.G. should ask the D.G. the order in whichhe would like to attend these meetings and the times which would bestsui his convenience.There was a discussion, for which Spencer was present, aboutthe staffing of our overseas stations in time of war. The meetingfelt that the only obligation on Head Office would be to keep theexiating state snould Security come Seryice entirely element from to trength establishments The additiona] provided.70.In the case of S.I.M.E. the numbers had already been agreed, but, forvarious reasons, the S.I.F.E. figures were not yet available. As regardsthe other stations, it would have to be decided which of these might becomemilitarised at any particular stage. In such cases a militaryestablishment should be provided for in case it should be required.For those stations which need not be militarised, it was felt thatS.L.Os should be told to keep their eyes open for any local recruitson the basis of a war time establishment which they will have.l1th May.Mullik, D.I.B. India, came to see me. He is not such a pleasantpersonality, a's Kazim Raza; he gives the appearance of being rather shifty,but I think it is probably only nervousness. I gave him a talk on thework of the office and he appeared anxious to continue the discussion ata later date.We gave a lunch to the Tripartite Working Group at the CrippsArms.15th May.George MoClellan has turned up for the Commonwealth SecurityConference which opens this week. He told me that Geoffrey Pattersonand Kim had both witnessed, on the television, MacArthur's speech toCongress. Mickey had gathered a number of other staunch republicansfrom the F.B.I. for the occasion. When the speech came to an endwith the words "old soldiers never die.etc. Geoffrey and Kimlooked round to see tears puuring down the faces of Mickey and hissupporters. Geoffrey and Kim did not apparently find much difficultyin keeping a stiff upper lip!By contrast, a very different scene was going on in the Pentagon,where Philip Vickery and Harry Stone were witnessing the same scene.The hostility was intense and there were shouts of "Liar"! etc. rightthrough the wholle proceedings. The reference to the alleged support ofthe Chiefs of Staff produced an uproar.The opening session of the Commonwealth Security Conference theD.G. read a message from the P.M. and then an address by himself. Theproceedings did not last more than a few minutes as everybody had expresseagreement with the agenda and the meeting was adjourned. The J.I.C.and a number of officials from the C.R.0. were present. Subsequentlywe gave a cocktail party here.It seems to me that we are making a rather heavy weather over thisConference; it is really only a meeting of experts - So-called - and Ishould have thought it would have been better kept on that level with aslittle formality as possible.16th May.At the cocktail party last night Ronnie Howe said that Burtappeared to be worried about Pelling's enquiries into the explosion atGibraltar about, although I said the Admiralty that I could had not caused quit te a g0od understand deal of what Confusion he was worrying by first71.asking uB to send out Telling, and subsequently making arrangements,withoutsaying anything to us, for two S.B. officers to go out. I told Howe thatthe real reason for applying to the police was that the Admiralty had akick in the pants over the Bedenham incident, for not calling in the localpolice. On this oecasion they had telegraphed to Gibraltar to enquireabout the efficiency of the local police and bnigetting a somewhatunfavourable reply P.U.S. Admiralty had approached the Commissioner.Onhearing of all this after the event, we had telegraphed to Pellinginstructing him to collaborate with the S.B. officers.I saw Pelling this morning. He has just returned from Gibraltar.Skititery is, of course, co-ordinating the enquiries at Piymouth, Glascoedand Beith, but the S.B. officers will probably want to double-bank thenin onder to produce a gargantuan report on the whole incident, which fewpeople will read!Pelling himself sees no point in our pursuing the matter here,provided Bailey, the scientific armaments man, who is the real expert onTorpex depth charges, lets us know his findings. Pelling suggests thatSkittery, Special Branch and the Admiralty should get together and decidewhat ground each will cover.I cannot imagine what has aroused Burtis suspicione that wewish to interfere. T am afraid it is the old Jealousy that always seemsto come out when you get questions of pollice jurisdiction.I had a me eting with Fulton, Cope, Kellar and Ha aldane Porterto decide on a joint line to be taken at the Dixon Committee meetingtomorrow, which is to discuss priorities for the training of foreignpolice forces in security matters.Coveney came to say goodbye. He was surprised that hisapplication to Join the Australian Security Service had been SO quicklyaccepted, I told him that his application had been referred back here,through our S.L.0., and that I had put in a recommendation. Iexplainedto him the osition of our S.1.0.. of whom he would doubtless see a gooddeal, and I told him what T knew about Australlian security. I advisedhim to see Colonel Spry, who was how in this country. and also to have atalk with Courtenay Young.17th May.I discussed with Howe and Burt the Gibraltar sabotage case,in the light of a remark that Howe had made to me at the cocktail partyfor the Commonwealth Security Conference delegates. He had said thatBurt was rather worried about the sabotage case and certain enguiriesthat Pelling was proposing to make, and that he thought we ought to havea discussion. I said T thought it right that both he and Burt shouldknow exactly how this case had arisen.When the explosion occurred we and the Admiralty had receiveda telegram and the Admiralty had asked us to send out someone to assistin the enquiries. Pelling had arrived in Gibraltar within twenty-fourhours, carring with him of course, all his experience of the Bedenhamexplosion, and had proceeded to make enquiries. Subsequently we hadheard from the Admiralty that two Special Branch officers were on theirway to Gibraltar. We had not been consulted about this and had had no72.previous warning either from the Admiralty or from Special Branch. Wehad, however, telegraphea rediately to our representative, instructingPelling to giv Special Branch all the information that he had and toassist them in any way he could. Before we had heard of the proposalto send two Special Branch officers to Gibralltar, Ski ttery, Chief ConstablofPlymouth, had approached the C.-in-c. and asked him whether he shouldconduct investigations at Plymouth, whence the ship Bedenham had sailedfor Gibraltar. The C.-in-C. had telegraphed to the Admiralty, and ongetting a favourable reply had 8o informed Skittery. Skittery hadthen communicated with us, asking whether we could give him some of thebackground of the Bedenham case and suggesting that he should co-ordinatethe enquiries in thia country with the Chief Constables of Monmouthshireand Ayrshire, whence the depth charges had come. We put this to N.I.D.,who asked us to send down an officer to see Skittery, give him theinformation he required, and request him to COrordinate the enquiries inthis country.It was clear, therefore, that the Admirat had askedthree separate organisations to conduct enquiries, and that ifanybody had cause for complaint it might well be ourselves, seeing thatsecurity in Gibraltar was our affair and that nobody had informed ns aboutthe proposal to call in Special Branch until well after the event.Both Howe and Bur't hastened to apologise for not informingus about the visit of the Special Branch officers, and for wrongly assumingthat we had already been notified by the Admiralty. They were not in anycomplaining about Pellling's activities or about the action of M.I.5 theyme rely thought that the responsibilities were not clearly. efined and thatsomething should be done to straighten things out and to make provisionfor the future. They seemed to think that in a matter of this sort itwould be preferable if Scotland Yard were called in at the outset, as theyprobably would be in any serious criminal case. and they undertook that,if such a solutior were thought by the Aamiralty and Home Office to besatisfactory, they would keep us informed if there was any suggestion thateither a subversive organisation or a foreign Power was at the back of theinciden't.I did not comit myself in any viay as regards this proposal,but I made it quite clear that some cllarificatior of the position Seemednecessary and that we should be speaking to the Admirallty. I mentionedour circular letter, a copy of which was being sent to the Commissioner ofPolice and had already been sent to other Chief Constables, which showedprecisely where our interests lay according to the Prime Minister's charter.I gather that when the Special Branch officers returned tothis country, the sugge tio on tha t they should visit Plymouth in order tocontinue their enquiries, was somewhat coldly received when Skittery saidthat he had instrhetions from M.I.5t to Co-Dudinate all matters relating tothe explosion. This, of course, was not true: the instructions had comefrom the Adriralty,an .I.5ahad merely been the channel for conveying them.There had also, it was alleged, been a certain amount of friction betweenSkittery and the Monmouth Police.I spoke to Burt about the HORRINS case, and the notewhich Burt had passed to me on the subject, I accepted the arrangement,that in cases initiated by us Special Branch woulld in future let us knowif they wished to approach the Establishment Officer in a MinIstry.saidthat the way of informing us must be their own affair and. tha.t under-stood that in a bit office things might get out of hand 1f ant73.concerned had access to junior officers here. On the other hand, I feltit was a pity that more S.B. officers were not personally acquainted withofficers here. I pointed out that in regard to provincial Police Forcesthe liaison was now very close indeed, and covered not only ChiefConstables but also Detective Superintenents and S.B. officers. A lotof goodwill had been generated and the quality of the information receivedhad much improved. I thought that if similar arrangements existed withS.B. the resentment referred to in the S.B. note, which really had noJustification in fact, would be largely dispelled.T told Burt tha if he coulld think of any way of achieving thisend, I shou d be very glad to do anything I could to assist.Burt did not seer anxious to dig out any past cases - possiblyowing to doubts that such cases existed. TI askeahhir however, in futureto let us know immediately of any such cases in order that we could seethe officer concerned complied with our standing instructions.I attended a meeting of the Working Party of the Dixon Committee,which consisted of the heads of Foreign Office departments, S.I.S andourselves, with Mackenzie in the Chair. We should be receiviing a copyof the minutes in due course.A letter from Sterndale Benre ttiin Singapore was distribhted atthe meeting, which gave details about training courses in the Far East.I made it clear at the meeting that the training by M. in ageneral way could not last more than about four days, and in some asesnotmore than two days. It was necessary to take a realistic view ofwhat theaword "training" meant. You could explain the general principleson porganisation worked, and in some branches you could givea certain amount of detail, but in other cases it was not possible to do sowithout running the risk of our own methods being used against us.Mullik came to see me about six and remained here until eighto'clock, after which I dined with him and some representative from theIndian High Commissioner's staff, who. I understand from U'ren, haB alarge file within this office relating largely to his student daya!Before dinner Mullik aaked me a lot of questions about the workof the office. Although somewhat tedious, he is very thorough in hisapproach and wants to know the why and wherefore, but his problems are,of course, very different from our own. On some subjeets, such assubversive activities on the railways, he is engaged in feverish activityand was somewhat surprised to find that,i peacetime at any rate, we hadpractically nothing. HiD personality is not a very pleasant one, butI think this may come from the fact that as a rather young man he has beenput into a very big job and is a little conscious of his position,18th May.I had a meeting on the MACLEAN case with Dick, James Robertsonand Martin, when they outlined to me the position that had been reachedand the future programe culminating in the interrogation of Donalld MACLEAN.The only interesting development has been a visit by MACLEAN to theV. &: A. Museum, where he met Peter FLOOD, who is a known member of the74.underground Berger Group. Whether he wa8 seeing FLOOD about somethingin his own particular fielld at the Museum is not known, but apparentlyMACLEAN knew him veny well. MACLEAN is evidently drinking fairlyheavily.We discussed the points for my meeting with Barty Bouverie andit was agreed that I should tell him frankly what we were after.Barty Bouverie, late of S.0.E. and now Director of the London SouthAmerican Bank, carne to see me ab nly request. He is a wholly reliableperson and during the war, when he was the S.0.E. representative inWashington, was indoctrinated.I asked him whether I was: right in thinking that I had dined withhim at his house in Washington in July or Auguat, 1944. He said tha'the was certain I was right, and that he had in fact been living at thattime in the house of Michael Wright, who was then head of Chancery. Hesaid there were other paying guests, but he could not at the moment recollectwho they were. I then asked him if he remembered having a drink withDonald MACLEAN and myself at his house before dinner. He said he ddd notremember this but that it was highly probable, since now that I hadmentioned MACLEAN'S name, he remembered that the latter was also a P.G.with Michael Wright. There had been one other P.G., a Professor ofAgriculture - he thought from Reading - aged about 50, whose name hecould not remember.E then told him that for some years - in fact since the beginning ofthe war we had been looking for someone in Foreign Office circlleg whohad been leaking to the Russians, and that considerablle suspoion restedron Donald MACLEAN. It was important to stablish whether on certaindates, which I did not give, he had in fact been in Washington. Wasthere any way in which he, Bouverie, coulld help? He said that as faras he coulld recollect he himself spent eveny weekend while in Washingtonwith his sister, who at tha't time was living on Long Island. He left onthe Friday night and returned on the Sunday night. He seemed to rememberthat when he returned Donald KACLEAN was ometimes not present at brealfaston Monday morning, from whic he inferred that. he had been away for theweekend. He seemed allso to recollect, without any prompting, tha MACIEANhad American relations and that his wife was certainly not with him. WhenI mentioned that she was having a baby at the time, he seemed to think thathe had heard about this. He tried to recollect whether anyone else sharedMACLEAN'S room at the Embassy and was inclined to think that it may havebeen Betty Harcourt, then Betty Gibbs, who was a receptionist and waseventually given the rank of Third Secretary. She is now livingat23, Culross Street, W.l. He thought it possible that, if he rememberedrightly, she might have known something about Donald MACIEAN'E movementsat the time, but he doubted whether anybody woulld be able to give exactdates. others who might help, he thought, would be: (a) fichael Wright,who rarely went away; and especially his wife, Eather, who was muchbrighter than he was; (b) the Professor of Agriculture, who was generallyin Washington over the weekend and travelled only occassionally and (c)Michael Wright's Egyptian servant, Abbas, who valeted the whole seholdand waited at meals.Bouverie said he would turn the whole thing over in his mind andlet me know of anything that he thought might posibly have a bearing on theproblem. I impressed upon him the delicacy of the whole position, which,of course. he fully understood. I am quite sure that he will say hothingto anybody., even his wife.75.21st May.I saw the D.N.I. in order to discuss with him the Gibraltarsabotage case. I outlined the sequence of events and pointed outthat the Admiraty had in fact employed the service of three differentorganisations to carry out the same task, and that this had led toa certain amount of confusion. Had we been consulted prior to thedecision to send two Special Branch officers to Gibraltar, we mighthave pointed out that the decision to ca1l in the Police in thePortsmouth case had been based on the fact tha the Police jrould havelocal knowledge, since the incident had happened in their arearTherewas really no analogy in sending two Special Branch office ficers toGibraltar from London; they could really do little more than whatPelling was doing. The D.N.I. saw the point and apologised fornot having let us know until after the event.T also told him that since now the whole Case was being conductedby Scothand Yard, it seemed that Pelling'g missi on had been rather awaste of time and money. He had come back and made his report, butit had been considered that there was no particular point in his visitingN.I.D.D.N.I. said at once that he had not been consulted about thisand that he would very much like to see Pelling, with whom he fixedan appointment for themorrow.I then told D.N.I. that there was another point which had beenworrying Us. It seemed to us that somebody in the Admiralty, not N.I.D.,had a feeling that perhaps we were not altogether to be trusted in ourenquiries about sabotage, and that we took too complacent a view; ourmain concern was to cear our own yardarm. If this was the viewofany particular individual or section, we should very much like to beconfronted with those concerned in order to satisfy them that we wereentirely objective in these matters and in no sense complacent.D.N.T. said he was quite sure that nobody in the Admiralty heldthe news that I had described, but he knew positively that they wereheld in Portsmouth, particularly by the Chief of Staff at the time ofthe Bedenham explosion. He had doubtless nflnenced the C.-in-C.who had subseguentily misled the Prime Minister. There was no pointin our worrying about either of these individuals, since both of themhad left Portsmouth.The whole interview was most friendly and D.N.I. agreed that someconference between the parties concerned was undoubtedly necessary inorder to clarify responstbilities in any future cases that might arise.I informed the D.G., who agreed that probably some approachto Lang of the Admiralty woulld be the beat way of starting the ballrolling.E discussed this matterafterwarag with Roger, &ndxxkxakeoknfouaotxkkexexax Ehabylrxagnentatkatxpnshahiygoxayrnazknour view is that the local police in whose area the act of sabotagetakes place should co-ordinate invesi itgation with other Chief Constablesand,as in criminal cases, call in Scotland Yard if they consider itand necessary. liaison with In overseas local police, Bltations should the D.S.0. be the focal with point. his security records76,22nd May.Roger and I went over to ee Blount to try and reconcile our Viewsabout the continued employment of erman scientist, which is tD be thesubject of discussion on Thursday. 8aid that we were not in a positionto estimate the knowledge already in possession of the 64 German scientistswhicl might be imparted to their Government or to the Russians if they weresent back to Germany nor were we in a position to estimate the extent ofdislocation in our rearmament programme which might reault in theirdeparture. We could only look at the problem from the purely securitypoint of view. Nobody could tell whether in the next five to ten yearsthe Germans would be looking east oP west: we could noti, on the otherhand, wholly discredit the possibility that some future Government mightconsider a deal with the Russians if it involved the return of certainGerman lost territories. The regaining of her Bovereignty and therecovery of lost territordes must always be uppermost in the minds of anyGerman, whatever his pollitics, but in any case we must envisage thepossibility of both Right Wing and Let wing elements in future GermanGovernments - indeed, the Security of the German Goverrent today fromthat point of view was far from satisfactory.It would be wrong to assume that even if these Germans becamenaturalised they would necessarily become assimilated; the odds were thattheir old German loyalties would remain. They would be visiting theircountry of origin and their relatives, and as they saw Germany getting onher feet and building up her armaments, there would be strong urge togo to her assistance, or at least to share the knowledge that they hadacquired through their researches in this country with appropriate officialsin the German Government. What happened to the information after thatwould be difficult to estimate; it might reach Russia either through LeftWing or Right Wing elements. It was wrong, too, to assume that theseGermans would remain permanently with us.: they might at any time get a feelingof frustration, either because they had not got the soope they wanted, orbecause they did not think they were earning enough money. They mightthenoffer their services to the highest bidder.Taking the long-term view, there was the possibility that in time ofwar public opinion might demand the removal or internment of certaincategories of aliens, which would be at the time when their services weremost needed. Even if they were not removed it might be necessary torestrict the extent of their knowledge. Lastly, those concerned shouldrealise that any idea that M.I.5 could keep an eye on these people andreport to the authorities that they were going wrong waa fallacious. Oncea man was put in a positior where he had rightful access to top secretinformation, investigation into the field of procurement was denied to theSecurity authorities: there remained only the field where the nformationwas passed to an unathorised person. This might not occur more than oncein six months: the chances of detection in such cases were, therefore,extremely remnote.Blount delivered himself of certain remarks about. the loyalties ofthe Germans and about the unlikelihood of their ever being on the Russianside, which seemed Somewhat unreal, but admitted that we had made out astrong case. It was clear, however, that on balance he thought that theselentists should be allowed to remain.From a fairly long experience,- am convinced that this idea ofindispensibilits lazinesss it starts comes from from the about place ten of pereent employment truth and and gets ninety gradually percent magnifieduntil it reaches the head of the scientific research. There 1s always a77.reluctance to get rid of a good workman which bnvolves temporary dislocationand a good deal of trouble in finding a suitable successor, but wheneverremova] is enforced everything seems to go on just the same. Theembarrassment of having these people in time of war may be very greatindeed, and the effect of the retention of LACHMANN'S services by HandleyPage between the two wars was virtually to immobilise it. It didnotreceive develpiment contracts because LACHMANN was there, and it neverreally got into its stride after his removal.I attended a cocktail party for the Commonwealt delegates given byJack Easton.I dined ith Kazim Raza and Ahmed.Two points arose.Ahmed said that the plot in Palistan had not come to light throughmilitary, but through civilian channels, and that, rather fortuitously,this raised the question of security in the Army. At present the Armywas responsible for its own security, and since those concerned werehigh-ranking officers, nothing had come to light through military channels.He wanted any advice I could give him on how to tackle this problem.I said that it was a little difficult, since we did not envisage sucha situation in this country: if the D.M.I. or the Vice Chief of Staff weresecret members of the Communist Party and played their hand well, therewould be no machinery for catching them out. Most of our cases concernedthe rank and file, and just occasionallly a junior officer. In a generalway, it was we who were informing the Army about these people. No stepswere taken to prevent the Cormunists from joining the Army, but theircommanding officer were notified. Certain supervision by the militarywent on within the barracks, and for the rest, if the case was important,we chould carry out invesitgations through our own channels. At the momentwe dealt direct on these matters with the Command Security Officer: therewas practically no risk here of anyordinary soadier spreading communistideas within his unit: it would immediately come to the notice of hiscomrades or an N.C.0. Either his comrades would talk him out of it, ordisciplinary action would be taken by Court Martial.if there was the basisfor a case.I undertook to give Ahmed an account of what our procedure was and alsoto let him know, if possible, what the French and Americans did.The other pointsdiscussed was the acute embarrassment caused to us bytwo high-ranking Pakistani officers, now under arrest for sedition andassocistian with Cormuniste, who had attended the I.D.C. on a securityguarantee from the Pakistan Government. Both Kazim Raza and Ahmedexpressed their exteme regrets about this. which they said was asembarrassing to them as it was to us. They had no idea about the leaningsof these officers at the time they were nominated to attend the course; theonlything they could way in mitigation was that the Communist gide of theplot was very much dragged in by the heels,a it was thought that it mightgime the uprising more popular support.23rd May.At the J.I.0. to-day it was agreed that would in future beresponsible for the collati on of technical sabotage equipment We woulldcontinue to pass them any Information we received and anything that camefrom our links overseas would be passed through us in London to the WarOffice and not direct to Local Coinmands.78.THISISACOP THISI A COPYORIGINAL NALDOCUMENTRETAINED DOCUMENT TRETAINEDIN DEPARTMENTUNDER S SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 19582009 SurOverseas Establishment in war time.It was decided that A.1. should consult the War Office and obtainparticulars of the Army Establishments in war time to which our staff servingoverseas (with the exception of S.I.M.E. and S.I.F.E.) S. could be attached.Onreceipt of this information, consideration will be given to the strengthsrequired, with a view to getting an agreed Establishment, and subsequentlyto the selection of local Reserve Officers who could be called upon to servein our overseas stations in the event of emergency.24th May.Roger and I attended a meeting at the Ministry of Supply withSir Harry Garner, the Chief Scientist, about 64 Germans engaged in scientificresearch. It was made clear by Garner at the outset that we really faceda fait accompli and that a meeting was only called to consider any securitymeasures that might be taken to minimise the risks of their continuedemployment.I put forward the security case on the same lines as Hollis and I hadspokento Blount. I think that Garner was a bit shaken, but clearly he wasdetermined should be to keep his Germans. The only suggestion he made was that theyas confined to the narrow limits of their particular project, althougha scientist I should have thought that he might have known that this was79.almost impossible. Little by little they will know almost everything withinthe fairly wide range. Apart from this, I pointed out that the more theywere restricted to a narrow field and not taken into fhil confidence, the morethey were likely to feel f rustrated and to seek employment elsewhere.We now have to report back to the J.I.C.. who had asked us to presentthe security case to the Ministry of supply. Hollis agreed that we shouldstate our case fairlyyfully and possibly recommend that it should be broughtto the notice of the Chief's of Staff.25th May.I attended the final seesion of the Oommonwealth Security ConferencewhentheP.M.madeashortspeechandthenleft.Thereisacertaindemandto send specialists over to study techhical devices, which w.e shall probablyhave to meet, and Mullik was rather anxious to have more information aboutany special trends in Cominform policy or organisational changes.George MeClellan made a short reply to the P.M.Later I attended a lunch given by Gordon-Walker, Minister for theCommonwealth, to all the delegates and to the J.I.C. Gordon-Walker in hisspeech stressed the importance of security within the Cornmonwealth, since whenwithout it the basis of co-operation on the highest level wa's bound to berestricted. Mullik replied with an astonishingly good little speech; he said,quite frankly, that he had been iffident of the outcome of the Conferencebefore he arrived, but that he had been much moved by the spirit of Co-operation among all his colleagues and had learned much from what he had heard.He then referred to the importance of fighting Communism aon the basis of ourown moral standards, in spite of the fact that. we were at a considerabledisadsantage. To do otherwd would be to concedee precisely what we werefighting for.Iwent to see Newsam about de COURCY. He told me that thelegaladvisers to the Home Office had been inclined to turn the case down, butthat he had sent it to the D. of P.P., who had reported that in his viewthere was full justification in proceeding under Section 6, and in fact itwould be very difficult for the Security Service and: the Police,i challenged,to justify leaving the matter in its present position, when the legislaturehas provided in Section 6 another step that they can take.Newaam mentioned to me that the D.G. was, he understood, stillobjecting to his Department being placed under any Minister except the P.M.He thought that the obection was not really justifiable, since, if necessary,he could always see the P.M.. even on a matter which he did not wish tocommunicate to the Home Secretary. I said that that was not the onlybjection, and I repeated all the old arguments which have already been putforward. The impression I gained was that Brook must have gone back toNewsam after having been seen by the P.M.One thing Nevisar did say was that there vas no question of ourgoing view we were a secret service, and that nobody could be answerable for usunder the Ministry of Defence. He also made it clear that in hisin Parliament. I said that somebody had to answer for us, as was donein the FUCHS case, and it seemed to me that the P.M. was the only person.80.28th May.I lunched with Ahmed and passed him a copy of a note dealing with securi tyin the Armed Forces, which he had asked me for. The lunch party was a largone, including the Pakistani Minister, who seems a genial soul, mainlyinterested in horse racing!THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDVDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION$3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT1958.Aug200929th May.The Watchers failed to pick up MACLEAN since his departure for thecountry on Friday, and we now learn from the Foreign Office that he was givesaday's leave on Saturday. He has not apparently been seen since and T.Csindicate considerable anxiety in the familytelephoned to me at about 11.00 a.m. taking whether I hadheard about Guy BURGESS.I said that I knew he had been sent home by the81.Foreign Office on account of three motoring offences for speeding, whichhad caused the Embassy embarrassment.then said that he was not referring to that but to Guy BURGESS'uysterious lisappearnace. He had not been seen since Friday and hadtelephoned either on Thursdayor Friday to the wife of Garonway Rees. whenhe said, amongst other things, that he was not likely to see her for a longtime.Jaole HEWITT, shares an apartment wi th BURGESS at Clifford Chambers,3rd floor, 10A Bond Street (opposite Aspreys) toldthat BURGESS hadhired a car and had a good deal of money.had dined with BURGESS on Tuesday or Wednesday when thelatter had been suffering from the effects of sofneranug which he dormalhytook for insomnia. He had subsequently spoken to HUROESS tenebhoneon Friday.(4) OF HE PUBLIC RECORDSBURGESS should have dined on Monday night Berry Who was gdingto see whether he could get him a job on the Berry press, but he did not turnup.Other people whom Guy BURGESS had seen and might possibly know somethingwere Peter POLLOCK, who has a farm ar t Hemel Hemsted, with whom Footman knowsBURGESS has spent a weekend since his return, and a man called Freddie WARREN.In view of the past association between BURGESS and MACLEAN observed byWatchers, it seems pretty clear that the pair of them have gone off.Dick and I went to see Burt immediately after lunch and gave himdescriptions of MACLEAN and BURGESS. They are communicating with all theirrepresentatives at ports and airports, instacting them to notify us immediatelyif either of them turn up, and to endeavour to hold them on some pretext untilsomeone from here or from the Foreign Office can get down to see them. Theyare to be told that instructions have been given for them to return to theForeign Office immediately. It was agreed with Carey Foster that theirpassports should be impounded and that the Foreign Office woulld write to theHome Office authorising this to be done. We got Ruck of he ImmigrationService to join us in Burt's room. He said that he would first of all ascertainthat MACLEAN and BURGESS had left and, provided we could et the necessaryauthority from the Home Office, he would impound passports if they were handedto one of his officers. He would also warn the Company that these twopassengers had no documents. This shoulld lead to the Company refusing tocarry them. Dick and I and Ruck then went over to see Murrie, who said thathe could not giwe authority without consulting the Secretary of State. Hearranged to see the latter at the House of Commons at 5.45 p.m. and subsequentlytelephoned to say that the Home Secretary had agreed to the action suggested.Later,i in the evening I spoke to Anthony Blunt, who had been may allday until about 6 P.m. I asked him what he knew about Guy BURGESS! disappearancHe said that on Saturday last Jack HEWITT rang up to say that BURGESS had notreturned the previous evening as expected, and that an American friend ofBURGESS had been to the flat and found the latter packing. He had been out tobuy a mackintosh. He had hired a car and had excused himself fror spending aweekend with his American friend on the grounds, firstly, that he was goingJay for a holiday, and secondly, that he had to help a friend who was indifficulties.Aceorfing to a Club servant, sometime between 5.30 p.m. and 7.00 p.m.enrrigay Lo of about 55, whose identity coulld not be established.BURGESS was. in the Reform Club It was allaged that he was seenHe had82.also talked to a Club waiter about getting a mpa, as he was intending to80 north.BURGESS'S mother knows nothing of his present whereabouts. He hadsaid several weeks ago that he had thought of taking a tramp steamer toFrance, and Blunt had heard - I think either from HEWITT or the Americanfriend - that BURGESS had borrowed a car which had been hired.BURGESS has been in the habit of taking codine and, it is believed,morphia for his insomnia.I telephoned to the D.G. late in the evening, telling him what hadhappened and suggesting that he would wish to come up on the following day.Later we received a message from Immigration to say that MACEEAN andBURGESS had left Southampton on Friday night for St. Malo, which they shouldhave reached at about 1O o'clock on Saturday morning. They had apparentlydisembarked there contrary to the excursion terms on which they were beingcarried. The facts had been reported by the Captain of the ship "Falaise"on its return to Southampton.We decided that the best thing was for Dick to leave on the first'plane for Paris, in order to stimulate the activities of the Surete, whohad already been alerted throughDick apent the night with me untilwithan outdated passport.IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLICRECORDS30th May.ACT 1968. Ago 2009I gave the D.G. an outline of the case. He said that he had neverheard about the BURGESS connecti on before. I tolld him that BURGESS was oneof the people whom the Watchers had reported as meeting MACIEAN, but that noparticular significance was attached to this they would obviously know eachother and they had been at Cambridge together. BURGESS might well bediscussing his future, since it had been suggested to him by the EstablishmentBranch that he should resign frcm the Foreign Office on account of hisbehaviour in Washington.Reilly arrived to discuss the matter with the D.G. It was agreed tha tother Police forces should be alerted thhough S.I.s., and that a certain amountof action might be taken to get further particular from relatives.I telephoned to Dick White at about 11.30 a.m. I told him thatthe general policy for alerting security authorities in European countrieshad been approved by the Foreign Office; these countries to include Tangier.The authorities were to be asked to arrest and deport, as undesirable aliens,both MACLEAN and BURGESS, if found. The Foreign Office has been asked toconsider circular instructions to consulates to impound the paseports ofMACLEAN and BURGESS if opportunity arose. The original plan of informingthe Americans about developments had been somewhat telescoped. I alsomentioned that BURGESS had said, several months ago, tha he contemplateda trip by tramp steamer to Marseilles. The only other item of interest wasthat he appeared to have brought back from America a wad of sterling notes,the value of which we did not know at the moment. Lastly, I said thatBURGESS had remarked that he was going away for the weekend in order to assta friend who was in some sex trouble and was being blackmailed. It vasjust possible that this was true, although on the whole unlikelly. It mighthave been a cover story put out by MACLEAN to deceive BURGESS. or a coverstory put out by BURGESS to deceive his friends.83.Bick telephoned back shortly afterwards to say that there had beenno progress So far, but that the French had been thoroughly co-operative.Anthony Blunt and Tormy Harris came to see me. I told them thatthe matter was a S eriou one; that BURGESS had lef't the country for Francein company with another Foreign Office official, and that BURGESS hadbooked a ticket in the name of "MILLER" which had subsequently been usedby his companion.Blunt asked whether the Foreign Office official wasMACLEAN. I said that he was and asked him what he new about MAOLEAN.He said that of course he had known MAOLEAN in his University days, buthadnotseenmuchofhim since. He did, however, know him as a friendof Guy BURGESS, and as one who had been closely allied with him as afellow member of a Communist group at Cambridge, in which were includedpeople like John CORNFORD and Maurice CORNFORTH. Blunt had been astonishedon returning to Cambridge in 1934, to find that these intelectuals ha'ddrifted right into the Communist camp. Guy BURGESS was a member of thegroup, but in 1935, for some reason or another, became embittered. Hehad wanted to blossom out as a Marxian historian, but eviidently thoughtbetter of it and drifted away from the group. He had, however, alwaysremained Marxian and had within recent years become bitterly anti-American.BURGESS told Blunt, and also an American friend called Bernard MILLER,that he had to help a friend over the weekend who in some sex trouble andwas being blackmailed. Both Blunt and Tommy Harris tried to specullatewho this friend might be, and MACLEAN had been one of the suggestions,since it was known that MACLEAN was a homosexual. It was not thoughtthat his wife was aware of this.The American friend, NILLER, whom BURGESS had met aboard the "QueenMary", had left the ship at Cherbourg but had subsequently visited thiscountry, where he intended to study as a medical student. He is goingback to the United States and will return here in July. He cannotthrowany more light on the disappearance of BURGESS.I asked Blunt and Harris whether they believed the story bf MACLEANbeing blackmailed, or whether they thought it was a story put over byMACLEAN to deceive BURGESS, or by BURGESS to deceive his friends. Theysadd that ayite frankly any of the above reasons were possible. TommyHarris then mentioned that he and Blunt had discussed the possibilityof BURGESS having been bblackmailed in America and forced to discloseinformation. What I think had given rise to this in their minds was theknowlegge that Jack HEWITT, when he unpacked BURGESS' suitcase on thelatterts arrival from America, had found a large quantity of pound notes.Did these imply that BURGESS was now working for the Russians, or was itjust ancommon Black Market offence? I think they both thought it wasunlikely that BURGESS would have sold himself to the Russians, but theyfelt that he was such an unstable character that almost anything waspossible,BASSETTWe then discussed the anxiety of Mrs. (BURGESS) about her son.Shehad been anxious to go to the Police, but had been dissuaded frcm doing 80.She had been told that the matter was already being dealt with by thePolice on a high level and that she Could rest assured that everythingpossible was being done. I told Harris and Bllunt that she could be toldthat her son had been traced abroad.This would probably satisfy her.Both Harris and Blunt assured me that they would on no accountdisclose to anybody that BURGESS had been accompanied by MACLEAN.84.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT1958.2009At 6.p.m. Dick rang me up at the Foreign Office. He saidthet there was no trace of either MACLEAN or BURGESS having goneout of France either by sea or'by and frontier; they might, ofcourse, have crossed the frontier on foot or have gone as stowaways.The check on ships' manifests vias a slow process with two or threedays delay. I suggested that it might. be worth while. in view ofthe previous information, to concentrate rather particular rly onMarseilles.Dick said that there were ce tain clues at St. Malo, but thatwe would not know precisely what they were until mid-day to-morrow, whena representative of the local police was expected in Paris. He saidthat the legal position was not an embarrassing one in France, since thewhole action would be administrative: MACTEAN and BURGESS would bedeported as undesirables without any right of appeal. It is thoughtthat action elsewhere should take the same form. Lastly, he suggestedthat it might be worth while ascertaining the movements of Soviet orSatellite ships from European ports.While I was at the Foreign Office a telegram came throughfrom Geoffrey Patterson, in which he stated his fear that the F.B.I.would pass the information, which he had been instructed to transmitto them for their personal information only, might well go to theState Department and the Attorney General. In view of this possibility,the Ambassador Wished to know:(a). what he was to say to the StateDepartment, and(b) to the press if there was a leakage.We drafted a telegrar in reply with Reilly, whibh in effect. said"If you cannot prevent the F.B.I. from transmitting the informationin some form or other endeavour to persuade them bo omit anythingrelating to the security issue'. The Ambassador should tell theState Department no more than was told to them by the F.B.I To thepress he should give the story relating to the disappearance of thesetwo officers, keeping clear of the security issue.Inspector Bridges telephoned to me at the Foreign office to saythat the Special Branch officer at Southampton had ascertained definitelythat MACLEAN and BURGESS had dined on the "Falaise" at St. Malo onSaturday and left hurriddly after dinner, leaving their cabin indisorder. He asked whether he should make any further enqulries thromembers of the cres. I said he need not unless he received furterinstructions.I had a long talk with Tommy Harris about Guy BURGESS which lasteduntil 2.00 a.m. and from which only the following material facts emerged,85.based on the evidence of BURGESS' Ame rican friend, Bernard MILLER,who had called on him on Friday expecting him to accompany himon a weekend visit. He had found BURGESS packing his clothes.BURGESS had bought himself what is described as a "black homburg"hat and a black mackintosh, which was clearly intended for hiscompanion. He packed one small suitcase with enough clothesto last him about a fortnight, and then placed it inside anotherlarger suitcase. He said that he had borrowed a small four-seatercar, and not hired it, and then later that he was leaving by the7.30 train, without stating his destination.BURGESS visited Tomry Harris and his wife, I think aboutlastWeanesday week. He had previously been barred the house,largely owing to Mrs. Harris' intense dislike of him. on thisoccasion BURGESS asked whether he might be allowed to "work hispassage back". When asked about Kim Philby, he put his handsto his head and said; "Don't speak to me of Kim - nobody couldhavesbeen more wonderful to me" and then burst into tears, a thingwhich the Harris' had never seen him do before. There maypossibly be some significance in this if, in spite of everythingthe Philbys had done to keep him straight, he had betrayed Kim throughgetting to know something about the MACLEAN case and acting on theinformation. There is no doubt tha t Kim PHilby is thoroughly dis-gusted with BURGESS' behaviour both inside his houee and outside it.31st May.I attended the J.I.C. (Directors) meeting on the D.G'sbehalf. I had a word with 'c', when. I mentioned to him thatBURGESS had been living with Kim and that Kim mighthave viewson the case.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDINDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONACT 1968.3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSJames Robertson. Arithur Martin and I went over to theForeign Office for a meeting with Reilly in order to reviewthe action taken regarding MACLEAN and BURGESS and to see wha tmore could be done.86.lst June.I spoke to 'o' and told him that in his absence we hadgone ahead with 1in the MACLEAN case, since nobody elsewas indoctrinated. I had, however, suggested totha't ifhe wanted authority with regard to circulating instructions to hisrepresentatives abroad, he had better consult'c'seemed quite satisfied.Garonwy REES came to tell me about a conversation that hiswife had had with BURGESS before the latter't departure. I saidtha't I would very much like to have as accurate an account aspossible. He promised to do this in conjunction with his wifeandlet me know. He thought the conversation sinister.I lunched with 'Doc' Hayes. He seemed in good form. Hehad discovered two Swift. documents. which the ational Library couldnotafford (e200>. He was proposing to offer them to Victor.Itold him to ring Cambridge.broughtround.I gave him atalk on the office and passed him on.to John Shaw and Hollis.During the afternoon the D.G. suggested that MACLEAN andBURGESS if found should be interrogated on the spot by someone fromhere. He thought ths very important, as otherwise we should have nochance of getting any case against them on which they could be detainedon arrival.I pointed out that this might well embarrass the foreign policeforces and woulld be acting to some extent ulltra vires. It wouldprovide an opportunit for the two fficials to establish their identity.The task of a foreign police force Would then be extremely difficult.The D.G. was disinclined to agree with this.Cimperman was acquainted with the information that we hadpassed to the F.B.I. and was told that we would informedORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION2nd June.(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT1958Aua2009Anthony came up at my request as information that Dick broughtback laat night seemed to indicate that BURGESS and MA CLEAN, havingmissed an 11.20 train from St. Malo on Saturday morning, had taken acar and joined the train at Rennes They were apparently heading forParis. It was, therefore, desirable to try and find out whetherBURGESS hadany addresses there to which he would be likely to go.Inthony supplied the addresses of three hotels, but knew ofno particular contaots either there or in Italy. In Switzerland heknew BURGESS had spent a holiday at Ascona on Take Maggiore, and that87.he has a friend, who probably lived in Berne, called Eric KESSTLER,although it was unlikely that either he or his family would be therenow. KESSTLER is believed to be en poste in Roumania.Anthony confirmed that to the best of his knowledge MACLEANwas a homosexual.The D.G. received a note from the Treasury about higher salaries,which nobody thought was particularly satisfactory. The previous salarieshad bean agreed by the Treasury, from whicl it was Clear that we shouldreceive whatever benefits Chorley gave to all other Civil Servants. TheTreasury were now proposing to reassess our salaries.Personally I do not feel that I am worth any more than what isbeing offered to me, and maybe not as much! But if. fouruyears ago theTreasury refused to give me any more than a token E25 above a seniordirector, and nov consider that I should have 5187 more than a seniordirector, I might well ask why they did not think of this one before -and $123 less than I ar entitled to under Chorley.12th June.I returned last night from Valles.The story of MACLEAN and BURGESS had appeared in the press onthe previous Thursday.There was no further informatio as to theirwhereabouts. G.C.H.Q. reported an increase in the volume of trafficbetween London and Moscow as from the 25th May, the day BURGESS andMACLEAN left. Two or three days later there was an increase in thetraffic from Berne, and about the 4th or 5th Junean increase of trafficfrom Prague. These increases may, of course, have no connection withthe departure of BURGESS and MACLEAN, but on the otherhand may be significantDick had had a talk with Anthony and Garonwy REES, which seemed toindicate that BURGESS had in 1937 been fairly closely implicated in Communistactivities. He had in fact told REES that he was working for the Cominternand asked REES to supply him with political anti-Fascist information. REESthought that BLUNT was aware of this. One of the people BURGESS was intouch with at the time was Rolfe KATZ. alleged at one time to have been aComintern official. He is a man of whom we have considerable records.Anthony seemeit vague about this and, although he recollected that BURGESSwas in conspiratorial mood, he imagined that his activities were connectedwith anti-Hitler propaganda and his asociation with the D. organisation ofS.I.S. BURGESS had never told him that he was Working for the Comintern.Dick seems to have formed a rather unfavourable impression of theintervi and remarked on the extreme nervousness of Garonwy REES. A numb erof other people who were known to be associated with either BURGESS or MACIEAThave been interviewed, but without any substantial result.AllBURGESS'papers are being closely examined.Tommy Lascelles asked me to go and see him in connection with thedisappearance of BURGESS and MACLEAN, as the King was asking for information.88.I told him that there was really no more news than he had seen in thepapers; that the departure was either due to blackmail or to someespionage past. I was a little inclined to fear the latter, onlythere was no firm evidence on whic to do beyond the fact that bothparties had gone through a period of Left Wing activities at theUniversity. It seemed to me unlikely that a man of BURGESS'Eintelligence could imagine that he had any future in Russia, and thatJ was rather forced to the conclusion that he might have tought thathis past was catching up with him and that the alternativ was a stretchin Maidstone gaol. Personally I thought I would sooner be in MaidstoneGaol tha in Soviet Russia'No mention was made of Anthony and his association with BURGESS,which had been referred to by at least one paper.I dined with Victor and Tess yesterday. They were as confusedabout BURGESS as we were. Tess, however, thought that it would beworth our while to keep an eye on James KLUGMAN, who wa's at one timea fairly close friend of BURGESS and the moving spirit of his groupat Cambridge.Dick had a long interview with Kim PHILBY who had arrivedfrom Washington at 2.30 to-day.Kim is obviously extremely worried. Dick did not think thathe was wholly convincing about the possibilit of a leakage havingoccurred through his office. There had been frequent conversationsand meetings between Bobby Mackenzie. Geoffrey Patterson and Kim, whichBURGESS might weal have heard about. The fact that Bobby Mackenzie wascalled in might well have indicated to him that some security issue wasbeing discussed, and BURGESS might have made it his business, either bykeeping his eyes open or by interrogating Kim's secretary, Esther WHITFIEIDwith whom he has for a time been donducting a desultory affair. Kimwas emphatic in his defence of Esther WHITFIELD. Personally I think itnot unlikely that the papers relating to MACLEAN might have been onKim's desk and that BURGES6 strolled into the room while Kim was not there.Alternatively, of course, BURGESS may have learned something from thegeneral administrative enquiries which were being conducted within theEmbassy under the direction of Bobby Mackenzie, although it is allegedthat every possible precaution was taken.B.2's mind is now harking back to the case of the Russdan,WOLKOF, who defected several years ago at Istanbul. He had giveninforre tion to the effect that there yere some seven people in BritishIntelligence who were in Soviet pay and that provided satisfactoryconditions were arranged, he would disclose all he knew. Unfortunatelybefore he did s0 he was kidnapped by the Russians, carried on to a Sovietsplane and carried back to Moscow. One of the British Intelligence agentswas said by WOLKOV to be head of the C.E. department. Kim was in facthead of R.5 at the time.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT1968.200989.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION13 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958Aua2009I dined with Anthony Blunt. He was a bit worried about thequeries that had been going on during my absence. I explained to himthet once the story had broken it was inevitable that enauiries wouldbe made of anybody who was known to have associated either with BURGESSor MACLEAN. He quite understood this. Meanwhile, he was beingpersecuted by the press, whom he had refused to see. He was obviouslyworried about his whole position. No new facts emerged, except thatIfeel certain that Anthony was never a conseious collaborator with BHRGESSin any activities that he mav have conducted on behalf of the Comintern(vide REES'S statement).13th June.Anthbonv telephoned about the press, who were still persecuting him.T advised him not to speak to them. and if accoated outside to say thathe knew nothing about the matter and had nothing to say.There are a number of P. Qs which are slightly embarrassingand the P.M. has askee the Foreign office to let him know aboutBURGESS'S government service, including that in M.I.5. our answer isthat BURGESS was never employed by M.I.5. but that during the war wewere in contact with him in connection with information which he bronghtfrom a friend (Eric KESSTIER) relating to German activitiesTheForeignOffice asked us to vet BURGESS in January, 1950, and we replied that althoughwe had no security information against him we regarded him as both asuntrustworthy and unreliable. We had at the back of out minds both theincident at Gibraltar and Tangier, where he committed every kind ofindiscretio and also what appeared to be a disclosure of Governmentinformation to Freadie KUH about o1r policy towards China.The D.G. has telegraphed to say that he has had a satisfactoryinterview with Hoover, who at the moment at any rate seems to be "Holdingeverything".lith June.At the J.I.C. to-day D.M.I. mentioned that an officer of M.I.was now in Teheran. where he will be met by a representative any of operationsl A.I.0.0.He intelligence up to an the British Consul at Kermanshah for onward transmission.willfixarrangementbywhicchA.I.0.C.viillpass90.D.N.I. asked for information about the two Foreign Officeofficials who had absconded, and said that he was constantly beingasked questions by higher officials and did not Inow what to say.His query was addressed to Ross of the Foreign Office, who said thatat the moment it was very difficult to make any statement and that thewhereabouts of the two officials was at present unknown.Michael Cresswell, the outgoing Secretary of the J.1.C. (F.E.),and Michael Stewart, his successor, attended the meeting. Oresawellgave his views on the situationir the area.(a) He said that feeling was hardening in the Far East on thepoint that there was some advantage in continuing to fight the Chinesein Korea, since otherwise the Chinese would be active in places whichwere far more vulnerable. In support of this view, he said that itwas known that at the outset of the Korean war, when the Chinese weremeeting with success, preparations were being made for operations inthe south which seemed subsequently to have been abandoned.(b) The tripartite meeting between the French, the Americansand ourselves in Singapore had, on the whole, produced useful results.De Lattre de Tassigny had emphasised the need for Intelligence, and hadimplied that we and the Americans had a great deal of informati tion whichwould be useful to the French, utwhich was not being passed to them.The idea of the omnisedence of ourselves and the Americansin the Intelligence field seems to be prevalent in every area wherecollaboration with the French is going on. Efforts were being made todispel this idea. It was explained to de Lattre de Taasigny that alllinformation whic might have a bearing on Indo-China was passed to him,and that in fact we and the Americans were as much in the dark as he wasabout Chinese and Soviet intentions.(c)Cresswell said that the D.E.0. in the area was somewhatinaffective and that their assessment of information was often bad.(d) It was arrangedthat there would be tripartite Intelligencemeetings every three months, alternately in Saigon and Singapore. Whileit was not intended to disouss sources, it was hoped that a8 muchinformation as possible coulld be given to the French on the "need to know"basis.(e) There is also to be arms trafic committee - I think ona tripartite basis - in which both the Navy and S.I.F.E. will participate.(f) While considerable progress has been made with fortificationsin the Delta area since the advent of de Lattre de Tassigny, Tonkingstill remains a danger area.(g) It is recognised that the improvement last year in Burmahasnot been maintained, and that should there be any serious Chineseintervention, it oulld have a serious effect upon the position in Indo-China.Atpoint to note in eonneetion with Burma was the emergengeof the Workers' and Peasants' Party as a local branch of the CommunistParty.91.(h)Asked about Chinese expansion, Cresswell saidthat it was difficult to express a view, although it seaned atleast that China would be interested, as and when opportunity arose,to create a cring of satellites in adjacent countries. He thoughtit would be a mistake to over-estimate internal difficulties asa brake on Chinese external policy; much had in fact been done inconnection with rice disthibution and other matters in China itself.(1) Questioned about the purge, Cresswell said that hethought it was a normal precaution for any Communist State to adopt,themore So since the Chinese had clearly accepted the risk of open warat the time of their intervention in Korea.(J) I asked Cresswell whether there were any problemswithregard to S.I.F.E. He said there were' none and that thingsseemed to be going pretty well.The D.M.I. spoke to me before the meeting about the PakistanMilitary Attache, who seemed to be worried about Army security. Itold D.M.I. that I had already discussed this matter both with Ahmedand with Kazim Raza, to whom I had given a note on the subject. Hesaid that he would tell the Pakis tan M.A. that the matter was alreadybeing dealt with through D.I.B.(I) spoke to me about the case of onea ciivilianemployee in the Air Minlatry concerning whom an anonymous communicationhad been received.was about to go abroad and C.A.S. wasapparently of the opinion that his movements ought to be watched.Iexplained to A.0.A.S.( (I) that this would be a matter for S.I.S. butthat they could do little without the assistance of the local policeauthorities.If the latter were informed there centainlybe publicity. I promised to look into the casel scommREate ithhim further.OHIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION13 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS1968.fua2009I had a long talk with Stourton, Commissioner DI Pocewho told ine that he was worried by the discovery that a number ofpassporte had been issued to undesirables who had given fallse particularsand that several other passports had been taken away by an abscondingofficial. He said that it all went to show that unless these thingswere closely supervised by white officers, and the passport officeturned into what would amount to a one-man show , there was practicallyno guarantee against such things happening. He proposed, hovever,totighten things up considerably on his return and to have a review ofall passports issued. This had in fact already begun, and it had beendisclosed that certain references from Barclays Bank had clearly beenforged.I asked Stourton about Dane guns. He agreed with me that it wasdisturbing that SO much steelltubing had come into the country andthatSlittle trace of it could be found. The difficulties in dealing withthe na tter, however, in the phesent circums t tances seemed to be almostinsuperable. The police were concentrating as far as possible on theex-service men who had been preciously a source of trouble. T gainedthe impression that very little would be done in thi's matter. Themain difficulty is the shortage of white officers, who alone can berelied upon to do anything effective.92.I asked Stourton what he thought of our activiths in the area.As regards Nigeria his experience had, of course, been infortunateowing to the inability of Johnson to carry out his task. sinceJohnson's departure, he had had no security officer and had dealtdirect with Accra. He thought Stephens had done well and had certainlystimula ted security consclousness throughout the area. I explained toStourton exactly wbn t the S.L.Os Charter involved and that it was not ourwish to be involved in matters outside it.came to see me and pump me about MACLEAN and BURGESS.He seemed to think thet there was a good deal of background informationhere which might be useful to the French and which we had so far failedto impart. I told him that at the moment we were almost as much in thedank as he was himself. We naturally felt that ither the motive wasblackmail or that there had been Some case of espionage. These seemed tobe the only two reasons that could possibly account for so sudden adepnrture. At the moment, however, there was no positive evidence ofeither.He wen't away reasonably happy, but now wholly convinced thatwe knew no more. He seemed a little hurt that the Surete had been calledin without the D.E.0. Being told. I said that as it was purely a policematter, we had rather naturally gone to the surete.wondered -I thought rather naliciously -whether the lenkage had hot occurred for thisreason. I said that that was a risk which we should clearly accept incomunicating particulars to any police force: clearly hundreds of peoplewould be alerted and it was inevitable that sooner or later cmething wouldappear in the press. He then told me that Hirsch had handled the matterhimself without even tellingwho was extremely annoyed on disecovering what had been going on. He hinted that perhapshandeliberately notified the press.It is really rather sickening to see how the French can onlyconsider Intelligence matters in terms of the war between A COPYe-ndthe D.E.C.ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSDick had a long interview with Kim Philby1968AUs2009Kimhad submiitted a note on all. that he knew about BURGESS. He deniedemphatically that he had ever discussed MACIEAN with BURGESS or thabEsther WHITFIELD,h secretary. who was extremely discreet, would havebeenlikely to do 80 either. He did agree, however, that if BURGESShad been intent on finding out something, he might have gathered certainstraws in the wind through a possible knowledge of meetings betweenPatterson, Bobby Mackenzie and himself.Dick then questioned him about his first wife. He said that hehadma rried her in Vienna in about 1934, knowing that she was a Communist,but that he had subsequently converted her. His marriage had broken tipin 1936 and, so far as he new, she was no more than a left winger. Hehimself had never been a Communist, but his sympathies with the loft hadbeen strong when he married his first wife in 1934. Dick intends toquestion him further about his own position.Meanwhile a telegram has come in from the D.G. saying that C.I.A.are already conducting enquiries about Philby, whom they regard as personanon grata, and that the F.B.I. may take up the running before long. Hethinks, therefore, that we should disclose to the F.B.I. now that Kim's93.fist wife was a Communist. I felt a little doubtful about volurteeringthis information at the present moment, when we had not even been asked.We have, therefore, left the decision with the D.G., emphasising thatifhefeelsitnecessarytocommunicatethisinformationnow,heshouldmake it clear that no proper assessment of Phinby's position has S0 farbeen possible, and that they should not prejudge the issue on theinformation about his former wife. This is to be subject fo 'c''sapproval, which we cannot get until-to-morrow.15th June,We got 'c''s clearance for the telegram to Washington. Meanwhilewe have been dealing with rather difficult P.QS about t he screening ofBURGESS. We have replied that there is nothing in BURGESS' recordto indicate that he was a Communis or associated in such a way as tocause reasonable doubts about his reliability. In fact he had alreadybeen in the Foreign office for several years before his name was referredto us in January, 19502 We gave anN.R.A. on the atrictly security side,but drew attention to disscussions with the Foreign office security branchwith regard to BURGESS'S conduct in Gibraltar and Tangier, in which wehad stated that we regarded him as thoroughly untrustworthy and unreliable.E spoke on the telephone to A.C.A.S(I) to-day and read out tohim a letter regarding which we had received from the Americans.He had not known that this information had come from the mericansoriginally. I told him that we had arranged with Immigration to checlepassport on his way out, to gee whether he had ir fact been payingfrequent visits to the Continent. We had also asked Immigration to letus know the name of anyone who was accompanying him. I had explainedto A.C.A.S. (I) yesterday at the J.I.C. that although S.I.S. might be ableto take some kind of limited action on their own, it would be difficultfor them to do anything really effective without alerting the local policy.If they did so, it would almost certainly lead to publicity. So far,therefore, we had confined action to anything that S.I.S. might be able todo on their own. A.C.A.S. (T) agreed that, for the momentatta rate,no further action was necessary.THIs IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION16th June.3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT1958Aua2009came round to. see me.Telephone checksindicated that he had rather got his ear to the ground in S.I.S. and wastrying to find out for Kim where the latter atood. He did not, however,attempt to pump me and prefaced his remarks by saying that he knew nothingwhatever about the case. He had, however, seen Malcolm Muggeridge, whowondered whether the publicity aspect of the case had been properlyconsidered and was in responsible hands. Muggeriage said that the pressoff the whole world was gaping for news of BURGESS and MACLEAN, and thatif it broke that they were behind the Iron Curtain, the Russians werelikely to cash in first with stories about the altruistic motives whichhad prompted the departure to Mos.cow. Muggeridge thought it was extremelyimportant that the Foreign Office should get in first by drawing attentionto the moral character of these two officers, and so negative the propagandavalue which the Russian statements would subsequently havd.94.came to see me about a report that he had received thattwo British deplomats were seen leaving Berlin by Soviet civil aircrafton the 13th June. I ascertained from Carey Foster that these werethe normal couriers, and so informedis still very inquisitive and very suspicious that he isbeing kept in the dark.The D.G. telegraphed to say that he has had a very satisfactoryinterview with Bedell-8mith, who has suggested that in future we shouldcarry the liaison instead of S.I.S. This is, of course, not a verypractical idea; we cannot do S.I.S's work any more than they can do ours.On the other hand it is arguable that S.I.S. might be able to do withouta representative in Washington. Certainly with the F.B.I. We could easilycarry the burden.18th June.The D.G. returned about mid-day. He seems to have been successfulin keeping Hoover quiet. The only grievance seems to be that we did nottell the F.B.I. about our short list, but I think we shall be able toweatherthat one. Our stock at the moment seems to be good both withthe F.B.I. nd with C.I.A. The only complication is that the F.B.I.know aboutwhereas C.I.A. do not.The D.G. has seen strang, and later the P.MandCimperman.'C' telephoned to say that he had had a letter from de COURCY,containing suggestions about MACLEAN and BURGESS being behind the IronCurtain, according to his informant. He goes on to discuss PEIERLSand Max BORN as two atomic scientists who should be regarded with Buspicion.Heemphasisesthedifficultiesofdisclosingeithernformationoritsorigin to the Government Departments without endangering the informants.It looks to me as if he was afraid that Section 6 was going to be usedan him.This IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION20th June.3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1968.Auo2009I saw Burt and Nott-Bower (in Howe's absence) and showed them(c'' letter from de COURCY, in which the latter discloses the namesof PEIERIS and Max BORN, The two scientists at Harwell concerning whomhe had doubts. We all agreed that this should not prejudice in any waythe proposal that S.B. should interview de COURCY under Section 6 ofthe O.S.A.I left with Burt a note setting out certain proposals with regardto vetting which we had previously discussed. He expressed his appreciationof this and said that in future if .B. were approachir an Establi shmentOfficer in an enquiry case initiated by us, they would let us know beforedoing so.95.The D.G. saw the Home Secretary at the latter's request.TheD.G. had spoken to Strang on his return about the possibility of the useof 18D in cases such as that of MACLEAN and BURGESS. Strang had spokento Morrison and Morrison had spoken to Chuter Ede. Chuter Ede hadexpressed interest and said that he would have the matter examined.TheD.G. explained to him.I had previously briefed the D.G. that the Home Secretary might askhim about the case ofa Foreign Office official who had at onetime had strong Cormunist sympathies. The Home Secretary had asked,through Newsam, to be informed whether the Foreign Secretary knew aboutthe matter. It was explained to the Home Secretary by tthe D.G. that wedid no bother Ministers unless there was a possible case for action.Wewere, however, in consultation with the Establishment Officer who wasinformed that we were making enquiries. H e would not, however, be told -mor did we think it desirable that he should be - that a H.O.W. was inoperation. The Home Secretary accepted this procedure as being the rightone.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION21st June.(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1968 Aua 2009At the J.I.C. to-day 'c' expressed considerable appretrension aboutthe very wide distribution of Chiefs of Staff papers, some of whichcontained details of his plans and information.The Secretary endorsed 'c''s views about the distribution of ChiefsofStaffpapers.Heexpressedsimilaranxietyaboutgeneralsecurityinthe Ministry of Defence. Two highly important documents - one relatingto chemical warfare - had disappeared somewhere between the Ministry andtheAdmiralty.HeventontosaythatphysicalsecurityintheMinistrywas bad. M.I. had been called in to advise on this subject, but noaction had been taken on their recommendations. Junior personnel weremoved from one place to another, e.g. COSMIC registries, without anybodygiving consideration to the suitability of the appointments. Sir NormanBrook seemed to think that the integrity of 1 civil servants must beaccepted, but the Secretary felt this view was a little out of date.I gathered that Gardiner was putting up certain recomendationsto General Maclean, but that if he did not get satisfaction he proposedto come back to the J.I.C. orsupport.We discussed a paper which it is proposed should be written onposible 5th Column activities in relation to any of the campaigns whichit is envisaged the Soviet Government might launch. The proposal hadbeen put forward that this survey should cover the U.K. It was agreedby the Committee that a separate paper on the U.K. and the Colonies shouldbe written. I explained that the size of the 5th Column in this country,at any rate, woulld be to a considerable extent dependent upon the way inwhich the war arose.. If there was a definite act of aggression on the U.K.by the Soviet Government, the 5th Column would be small: if, on the otherhand, we appeared to be the aggressors over some obscure interest, which theBritish worker could not easily understand, we might be faced with seriousstrike action. Another limiting factor, of course, in this country wouldbe the putting into operation of the counter-measures which we had in mind.It was not possible to say whether such measures would in fact be put intoforce, since this would be a matter for the Home Secretary of the Governmentof the day. It was thought that possibly some indication of this aspect ofthe problem might be introduced rather tentatively into the paper, but care96.would obviously have to be taken not to tread on the toes of theHome Office.The D.M.I. made a suggestion that some assessment of Sovietespionage aativitie in time of war might be made. I said thatany such assessment would be pure crystal-gazing and, in my view,valueless. This proposal was dropped.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958. Aus 2009I saw Newsam aboutand I gave him an answer aboutinforming him that the Secretary of State had already qestionedthe D.6 about this at yesterday's interview.Newsam then raised a point that the D.G. had made about 18D. Heseemed rather irritated that D.G. had gone over his head. I said that theD.G. had been summoned by the Home Secretary on the advice of the ForeignSecretary. Newsam said that he thought the proposal was not a good oneand that 18D was not really applicable. He was, however, having thematter looked into.I was rung up by Wing Commander Crouchley who wanted to know whetherI had seen Roycae GROOT'stlette to the P.M. regarding de COURCY.Hesuggested that somebody of the name of Orvall (or orbevall). who issomething do with Exchange Control (U.S.A.) on our behalf, would be theman to see de GROOT. ubject to anything that S.L.B. (who is at presentaway on sick leave) may have to say I think it might be useful to send awire to Geoffrey Patterson, suggesting that Orvall (or Orbevall) would bethe best man to handle the case. We do not, however, wish to get acrossany Treasury arrangements that may have been made on other lines. Oursole interest in de GROOT'E information is to discredit de COURCY andall his works.Jones of Special Branch called on de COURCY yesterday,position as a quite clear, requested him to furnish furtherresult Superintendent of my talk with Burt and Nott-Bower, and, after particulars making his about97.the statement that he made in the Ma rch issue of the Digest. De COURCYwas clearly much confuded and perturbed, but asked for time to considerhisposition. Subsequently he rang up 'or and had a conversation withhim, from which it was clear that he fully understood the weakness of hisposition. He talked a lot about his valuable sources and the dangers ofdisclosing them, hopeing that 'c' would intervene and get the proceedingeCalled off. 'c' made it quite clear to him that since the matter was inthe hands of the police, he coulld not possibly intervene in any way.This has clearly brought about a change of attitude in de COURCY,who has rung up to say that he is forwarding a copy of a letter that hewrote to "a certain person" to Jones, and tha he wishes to see thelatter again.The police intend to stick to their guns and to insist on knowingwhere the information has come from. If they are told that it comes fromthe Archduke Otto, they will wish to know whence the Archduke receiveshis information. If de COURCY says that he does not know, we shall havehim more or less where we want him, since at any convenient moment itcould be disclosed, through question and answer in the House, that hebases his categorical sttements in the Digest on information receivedfrom sources of which he did not know the origin. From conversationswith 'c', it is clear that this is precisely what de COURCY fears most.Alec showed me a telegram from Hong Kong which was very obscurelyworded. In effect it seemed to indicate that a rating on one of H.M.ships called PATTERSON was operating under control in a case involvinga Petty Officer named COLVERT. COLVERT was apparently supplying amicrofilms to contacts in Singapore and Hong Kong and receiving semethingin exchange. I told Alec that he should consult B.2, but that as far asT coulla see the point was to discover COLVERT'E contact and arrest bothCOLVERT and the contact when one or other of them wa s passing the microfilms.It might be necessary to get the Admiralty into line.23rd June.Field Marshal Montgomery attended the 3rd Division (World War I)annual dinner at the Trocadero on 22.6.51. After dinner he made anoff-the-record speech, drawing attention to the importance of his remarksnot being repeated. He said that as far as he was concerned he did notmind, but when things got into the press international complications oftenresulted. Most of the officers present were fairly senior in rankand age and numbered about 40.After explaining how his Headquarters at Fontainebleau had now beentransferred to N.A.T.0., he himself being deputy to General Eisenhower,Field Marshal Montgomery made the following points.1. Mr, Winston Churchill had maintained that the only realdeterrent to war to-day was the fact that the Allies had a preponderanceof atomic weapons.He did not beliwe that this was the predominant factor,in Russian calculations and had SO informed Churcchill, He was doubttu.lhow far Russia, which was a large country with industry widely distributed,woulld reallly be affeeted by the dropping of atomic bombs.98.2. the real key to the situation, in his view, was theproposal to rearm Germany. Until that happened he did not think thata war was likely, but as soon as a setttllement on this point was reachedand it would be reached - the cards would be face upwards and warbecame a "probability". The Russians would then have to considerwhether they would attack before the weapon of the Western Allies hadbeen forged, or abandon their ideas of world conquest.3. Before taking the Germans to our bosom and rearming them,it waB essential to absorb them politically into the scheme of WesternEuropean allliances. For this three conditions were necessary:(a) The occupation would have to cease.(b) Germany would have to be given fullsovereign rights and complete equality.(c) It would have to be made perfectlly clearthat we were not rearming the Germans inorder that they could fight our battlesfor us, but in order that they might playtheir part in the general defence plansfor Western Europe.Pending the solution of these political difficulties, ithad been made clear to the Germans that we did not intend todiscuss their rearmament.Montgomery believed that these difficulties would be solvedbefore very long and that the crucial period Would be the summerand autumn of 1952,4.Eisenhower had to be left free to deal with co-ordination:and the actual "forging of the weapon" was Montgomery's principal task.of all the Powers of Western Europe there was at themomentonly one nation which was preparing 1 tself in the right lines.AB an International Commander, he referred to them as "the British" andat times, when they did not do what he wanted them to do, he referred tothem ab 'those British"! They were head of the other Powers becauseimmediately after the war they had overhauled their whole war machineandwereadapting it to modern methods. He had visited all countriesfrom Norway to Traly and had met many curious people - some efficient,others not - but, in order to force the pace he had told them what theircontribution must be and that he would be holding fulll-scale manoeuvressin the early summer of 1952. He had, moreover, insisted that commandingGenerals should take the field themselves, and not direct theiroperations from an armchair; It was he who would be telling them whatto do and he fully expected that a considerable number of them wouldbefound wanting. He had told the Norwegians, for example, tha't theywould have to provide two-full-scalle Divisions. They had said that thiswas impossible, but he had insisted. H e wa's going there next weekto make sure that preparations were being carried out.As regards ourselves, he had made it clear that, apartfrom our regular forces, which would be immediately available, twoTerritorial Divisions would have to be in the field within a month ofthe outbreak of wary and that to increase their efficiency This they had would beenhave to train for four weels instead of two this year.agreed by the Defence Minister.99.5.Field Marshal Montgomery then referred to GeneralEisenhower's southern flank, and the necessity for its properprotection. What was required was a Supreme Commander in the MiddleEast. We had proposed a Britisher, but the Americans had turned theproposal down flat. The real point, however, was to commit theAmericans in the Middle East, and this could only be assured by givingthem command. General Eisenhower had threatened to resign unlessthis matter was settled. Montgomery had asked him whether he reallymeant this and, getting a reply in the affirmative, ahd asked that hisname should be coupled with that of the Supreme Commander. It was atthis stage that he had, at Bisenhower's request, come over here to forceasettlement with Mr. Shinwell. Admiral Carney' appointment had beenthe result.He went on to say that matters of this sort did not presentmuch difficulty as between Service chiefs; they coulld always find away: it was when the politicians intervened that difficulties arose.6.The only other remark of interest Montgomery made was thatduring his visit to Italy he had had a long interview with the Pope, whohad crea ted a profound impression upon him. He had found him extremelysound and very well informed through his Intelligence Service, which waBsecond to none.25th June.I talked to Farid Shehab, Head of the Lebanese Surete, who seemedto be an intelligent man trying to achieve an almost impossible task.I gave him the usual talk about the basic principles of security,for which he seemed grateful, Moreover, he seemed to think that theywere important. He painted rather a lamentable picture of his ownorganisation. He said that he had told Kyles, when the latter came asPolice Adviser, that he would not be able to S ticl it for more than sixmonths. In fact Kyles had stayed for eight months and had put forwardsome very sound recommendations abont police r eorganisation, They had,however, been shelved and a kind of ring had been placed round Kyleswhich made it impossible for him to operate.Farib Shehab's organisation had been cut down from 200 to 1100 andout of the 100 there were barely 5%6 upon whom he Could positively rely.If he could ever bring this up to 10) he would feel that he had achieveda good deal, but in fact such a possibility only appeared extremely dimlyover the horizon. He could place no reliance upon the ordinary police,who were both venal and stupid: they either warned a suspect and allowedhim to escape or they bungled the case through sheer enefficiency. When-ever. he warned the police about a Communist demonstration, the informationreached the Communist Party within an hour; he had now cut such warningsdown to about five minutes before the incident was supposed to take place,butthe Communiste had countered his action and discovered his informartby feeding him with false information and watching police reactions. InMinisterial circles he got little support, and undesirables werefrequently protected by their Ministers either because the latter weresoft or incredulous or for motives of a more sinister kind. In one casehe had reported arman who was working for the Russians, but nothing hadbeen done.100.I told the D.G. that de COUROY had been seen last week by the policeand had promised to send they a copy of the letter that he had sent to'o'. From a subsequent conversation that he had had with 'c' it wasclear that he was extremely perturbed about his position; he reallised thahe was in a position in which he had cither to disolose his sources - ifin fact he knew what they were - or lay himself open to a charge underthe O.S.A. It was pretty clear that he did not have any knowledge beyondwhattheArchduke tolld him. He had asked for time to consider hisposition. I told Special Branch that they could not be content that hegot his information from the Archduke otto; but that if of course he wasprepared to say tha he did not know anything about the origin of hisreports, our job would be more or less achieved. De Courcy would thenbe open to the charge that it was a highly irrresponsible aot on his partto make such categorical statements, that a fellony was being committedatHarwelll with the connivance of the authorities, if he had not takenthe trouble to verify the accuracy of his sources. Moreover, at anymoment this point could be brought by question and answer in the Houseof Commons. Special Branch have this matter well in hand and will pushit to the utmost limit.Meanwhile de COURCY seems pretty vulnerable on the financial side,and one of his representatives in America, de GROOT, who has recentlyresigned from the organisation, is prepared to divulge currency evasionsto a suitabl representative in New York. Kennedy has seen O'Donovanoft the Treasury on this point and action has been concerted throughGeoffrey Patterson.26th June.Kellar came to talk to me about his report, I said that it wasclear from the statement made by our S.L.0s, in agreement with S.I.S.,that there was no real security threat in the West Indies either fromwithin or from without. The proposal for integration, therefore, wasdesigned against possible degelopments in future and in particular to dealwith a situation that might arise in time of war - all somewhat remote.It seemed to me that before considering integration, we should be quiteclear about its efffecte on both the F.B.I. and C.I.A. Two df theterritories in which S.I.S. would operating would be Mexico and Cuba,both of which are regareed more or less as part of the American ColonialEmpire, where there was both O.I.A. and F.B.I. representation. TheAmericans were very jealous of these preserves and had quite openlyrefused in the past to give us any information coming from thoseterritories, and indeed from the whole of South America. If, therefore,S.I.S. got across their traoks it would be our office in Jamaica whichwould i nour the odium. There waa, moreover, an added difficulty owingto. the BURGESS/MACLEAN case which had caused grave misgivings in the mindsof the Americans about the security of S.I.S. It was possible, there-fore, that the only effect of integration would be to cause doubts of bothour offices.I attended the S.I.C. luncheon. Fock mentioned to me a DutchScientist who had been causing him a certain amount of anxiety throughhis contact with the Polish Legation. He was pssing the facts to usand asking for advice on how to deal with the case.101.D.D.M.I. (Johnstone) rang me up about the International Federationof War Veterans. The D.R.A. had been asked to attend a meeting inRome. I made some enquiries and told D.D.M.I. that although thearms of the organisation were sound on paper, there was reason to thinkthat it had been penetrated and that there night be a strong Frenchdelegation of a Communist kind. We agreed that it would be better ifthe D.R.A. did not attend. I gather, however, that some Admiraltyrepresentative was going to be there.Potter came to see me about an approach that he had had froman Assistant Editor of the Daily Mail, with whom he was friendly.Some three or four months ago this man had told Potter that he wa'sproposing to write a series cf articles to counteract those producedby the Daily Express under the signature of Chapman PINCHER. CouldPatter give him any assistance? Potter had replied that he was unableto help. The Assistant Editor had now returned to the charge and hadasked Potter to lunch an Thursday, when he was proposing to show himthe articles and obtain his observations and approval. Potter wantedto kmow whethe there was any particular line that he could adopt.T told him he had fallen into the classio press gambit, which wasto show a draft and then draw him into conversation and criticism.Isaid I would think the matter over and let him know what he should do.Air Commodore Constantine rang up to say that Mackay, the AirLiaison Officer at New Zealand House, was trying to arrange for hisDefence Minister, MacDonald, to see the D.G. We had already heardthat MacDonald was seeing the Secretary of State for CommonwealthRelations about the setting up of a new Security Service in New Zealand.I told Constantine that I would communicate with Mackay and arrangean appointment.I saw Victor and Tess at Claridges. He said that he, Tess andStewart Hampshire had a long discussion over the weekend. They felt thatthere were a certain number of people whom they knew who had had aconsiderable Left Wing past at the University, and who should inspresentcircumstances come forward and assist the authorities. They wereconsidering the desirability of going to these people and urging themto do their duty; failing which they would have to take the matter intotheir own hands. They would not themselves have taken this actionduring the war, but in the present circumstances they thought it wasright and would like to have my views.I said that in the first instance I thought it was desirablethat we should know who these people were and possibly make some enquiriesabout them, since otherwise they would be presented with a gloriousopportunity of whitewashing themselves. It was possible that some ofthem might have continued their activities since their University days,and before talking to them we should like to ascertain whether they werecurrent secret members.102.Victor saw the force of this argument.He was going avayfor two weeks and would get into touch with me immediately. on hisreturn.27th JuneI attended the J.I.C. (Deputy Directors) meeting to-day whenwe considered the paper from Intelligence Division about their powersof detention and interrogation under 2.E.I. 68. The question aroseas to whether these powers should be retained with or without theagreement of the German authorities. From the Intelligence pointof view it seemed to be of paramount importance that they should beretained.I advanced a view that it would be better for us to retain thesepowers,s: since criticism woulld be greater if we encouraged the Germansto formulate a new law giving their Government what here woul beregarded as Gestapo powers. This view was generally accepted,THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 19682009The D.G. saw Bridges to-day and I gatherthat,after a somewhatdifficult interview at which Horrocks and Padmore were present, adecision has been reached about the higher salaries, which will notbe the full Chorley allowances.Horrocks still maintained that in equity the decision wasunfair, since our previous salaries had been agreed and confirmedon no less than three or four occasions by the Treasury and we werems* the only civil servants who were not granted the Chorley rates.We have heard to-day that a friend of an ex-employee of S.I.M.in Italy has offered to disclose the whereabouts of BURGESS and MACLEANin Italy fon a sum of 1,000, to be paid only after identificationhas been established. The offer has been accepted, subject tosuitable arrangements being made.Dick has agreed a memorandum with S.I.S. on the subject ofKim Philby, which is to go to the F.B.I. I have made variousamendments, and in particular the exclusion of a reference inGaronsy Rees' statement to the effect tha t BURGESS thought thatKenneth Younger would be sympathetic to his views about China.103.Rees's remarks about Anthony Blunt have been allowed to remain, butI have said that I thought that Anthony's answer to them should alsobe included.I am a little worried about the report, since it. seems to metobe too categorical about matter -which there is no real evidence.Garonwy, in his statement, sas that BURGESS told him in about 1937 thathe was working for an anti-Communist organisation:w which was a secretbranch of the Comintern and was collecting information of a politicalkind. He had asked Garonwy and Blunt to co-operate with him. How farthey actually did so has not emerged, nor indeed were they really in aposition to give very much assistance. Blunt says that he never knewthat BURGESS was working for a Comintern organisation, but thaught thatit was something he vas doing for our Secret Service to combat Naziactivities. Personally, I feel that, whatever the facts, Anthony wouldhave been far more interested in his artistio pursuits than in politics,although his friendship with BURGESS might well have led him into doingsomething rather stupid. I find it difficult, too, to imagine BURGESSas a Comintern agent or an espionage agent in the ordinary acceptedinterpretation of these terms. He certainly had been Marxian and, upto a point, an apologist for the Russian regime, and woulld have beencapable of discussing in a highly indiscreet manner wi.th anybody almostanything that he got from official sources. He would have done this outof sheer political enthusiasm without any regard for security. Dick'sreport does not convey this, and it may be rightly SO. In any case theAmericans in these matters are incapable of assessing the finer pointsin a case like this; a man is either black or he is white. It seems tome that as a result of this report, Blunt will be blacklisted in America,which, whatever the facts, of his past, seems hardiy justifiable.On my return from leave a couple of weeks ago, I learned thatthe Government had decided against our going under the Home office. Weare to remain under the P.M. and from time to time certain aspects of ourwork will come under sdrutiny of a P.U.S. committee, consisting of Briages,in the Chair, and P.U.Ss from the Home Office, the Foreign office and theMinistry of Defence. At the moment we have received no direction aboutthis.The decision in the Cabinet was due first to a statement by theP.M.and secondly, and largely, on a statement by the Home Secretarythat he did not Wish for control of the department, provided he waskept adequately informed, as in fact he was, about the reasons for theimposition of warrants. In face of this Sir Norman Brook said he didnot wish to press his point.Anthony Blunt telephoned to say that BURGESS' mother was upsetby a statement in the Daily Express that BURGESS had been dismissed fromthe Foreign office on account of his activities in America. She thoughtthat the Foreign Office should issue a denial and wished to suggest thisto Mr. Seddon.I spoke to Skardon (@ Seddon) who rang up Mrs. Bassett and toldher that her point would be given consideration.104.28th June.I attended the J.I.C. nn behalf of the D.G. to-day.Malik's new proposals about an armistice in Korea wereconsidered. It seems that the Russians have benefitted by theseproposals,whatever their outcome. First of all they had the kudosfor coming forward as "peacemakers" and this fitted in with their"peace" campaign. Secondly, the line we held at present was farmore defensible than any line we have yet held. If, therefore,the proposal is that we should go back to the 38th Parallel, ourposition would be much weakened. Thirdly, the Chinese clearly wanteda "breather". Fourthly, if they really anted peace in Korea, itmight well be because they wished to liberate forces for activityelsewhere.Reilly said that Drake, the Managing Director of the A.I.0.0.had seen the Commanders-in-Chief in the Middle East. He was certainthat if strong action were taken the Persians would, even at this latehour and in spite of the extent to which they had committed themselves,decide to give in and negotiate on a proper basis. The Commanders-in-Chief, however, had instructions to do no more than to evacuate Britishpersonnel, if and when this became necessary.We discussed a paper on the probable Soviet capabilitiesand strategy in the event of total war in 1952. Some members ofthe Committee, and the J.I.S., thought that our former vew, tha tthe Russians would attack on all fronts, should now be modifiedin the light of two factors: (1) the establishment of N.A.T.O.forces, which would render their task in Europe more difficult,and (i1) the alignment of Jugoslavia with the West. and the clearwarnings that the Americans have given about any attempt by the Sovietbloc to attack her. The matter is to be given further consideration.General Kirkman attended the Comittee to discuss variousmatters concerning Intelligence Division.I spoke to Potter. before going to the J.I.C. and told himthat he should warn his friend that after mhentioning the matter tohigher authority, he had definite instructione that he could noteither indicate any lines on which the article on security shouldbe written, or criticise any draft which might have been made.I lunched withand General Wood, who is theMilitary and Air Attache. In discussing Malik's latest offer, theythought that one point which the Russians had in mind was the "ceasefire" in the field, which was precisely what MacArthur had offered.Truman had been C onsidering doing the same thing, but had been peeven tedfrom doing 8o owing to MacArthur's action. The American attitudeto Malik's proposals had already caused a reaction in MacArthur'sfavour; people were saying that the President was now agreeing to sayprecisely what MacArthur had suggested.THIs IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1968 Aug 2009105.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED3 IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SFOTIONACT A 1968.(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSI have read a report from Tin-Eye on the visit of an officerfrom S.I.M.E. to the Sudan to enquire into the causes of the mutinyin the Police.The report is all right in itself, but in forwardingit to the ommander-in-Chief', Tin-Eye has suggested that as our linkin the Sudan was the Police and the Police had failed, the remedy wasforusto appoint a D.S.0. to the Sudan who would cover both Adenand Somaliland.106.It is, of course, utterly wrong that Tin-Eye should madesuch a suggestion without prior reference to ourselves. It alsoshows that he has the wrong idea about a D.S.0's functions. Thereal ansser to the situation in the Sudan is that a new Commissionerof Police should be appointed. While it is true that a D.S.0. mighthave heard a certain amount about pending disturbances, in the main hewould rely upon the information that he received from the Police.29th June.Burt telephoned this morning to say: that Jones had: seen de COURCYagain at Alderbourne Manor. De COURCY'S tone had changed completely;he was polite and accormodating. He has given a good deal ofinformation which will be embodied in the report, but it seems fairlyclear that he knows nothing about the source of his information,except what the Archduke Otto may have told him. He has now offeredto get the Archduke over here. I think this offer should beaccepted. Alternatively, the Archduke should be seen in Paris.I saw 'C' for a moment in Dick's room. when I told him aboutthe case of de COURCY.He seemed to think that it would be preferablefor the Archduke Otto to be seen over here.Sir Frederick Shedden and McBride, Australian Minister of Defence,saw the D.G. and were then passed on to me. I gave them a generaltalk on the work of the office. Shedden seemed interested in thecase of BURGESS and MACLEAN, to which I was obliged to give a non-commital answer. In fact I could say, quite truthfully, that we didnot know their whereabouts, nor had we any positive information as totheir motive in leaving the country. He asked whether the F.B.I.had developed their cases as a result of information received fromFUCHS. I told him that they had and I made it clear to him thatthe discovery of FUCHS was, at any rate in part, due to a very carefulanalysis of a limited number of facts. I made it clear to both himand McBride that the difficulties of detecting Russian espionge wereverygreat indeed. Mc. C.Bride mentioned his law against the Communists.T told him that we were not contemplating anything of the kind here atthe moment, as we did not think that in onditions here such actionwould either be justifiable or profitable.I had a meeting on the report of the Working Party to considermeasures for coping with the increased vetting commitment.We agreed107.150 - we were about 25 to 30 short. We agreed that we should aimto an immediate increase of registry staff, bringing the figures up totowards having something like 85 people in the L.U. section, although itwas difficult. admitted We that recruitment under present conditions was extremelyagreedtoanow 15 days behind, up to date and to the setting up of tp a section vetting. tospecialeffortbeingmadebringcarry out the destruction of useless files and cards. It was thoughtthat possibly Stanley Strong might be placed in charge of this sectionand that Graham Mdtchell might take over his 0.l commitmen We alsoagreed to put lower category people on the Index nstead of on the files-Fascists, Pacifists and certain other individuals would be regarded asN.R.A. Communists, whose membership dated from January, 1948, onwardswould be stopped, as well as anybody engaged in espionage. Doubtfulcases and in particular Communist Party members prior to 1918 would bemarked "enquiries needed" and should be resubmitted by departments fora full-scale vet if necessary.2nd July.I gave my usual talk to a course of Colonial police officers. Oneof them is in charge of the Interrogation Centre in Malaya. He told methat this Centre was now a going concern and producing very usefullresults. The method of approach is to try and convince the Chinamanabout the fallacies of Communism. This is an extremely uphill task,but by perseverance has been achieved in a number of cases. It isonlythen that information begins to flow, the previous attitude having been"I no speak". The women are in many cases more difficult to deal withthan the men, but once they break them they generally have a fund ofinformation, since they are almost invariably used for courier work.Mr.lacaonald, the New Zealand Minister of Defence, called here tosee the D.G. about the necessity for improving the work of the SpecialBranch of the Pollice. The D.G. offered to go out, but Mr. Macdonaldis apparently apprehensive about the possible publicity that mightresult. He does not want to run any risk of an attack in Parliamenton the lines that a Ges.tapo is being set up, neither does he wish tooffend the susceptibilities of the New Zealand Commissioner of Police.D did not see Macdonald myself, but I suggested to Shaw that when hesaw him he might devise a possible compromise course, which would invollvethe setting up of a committee with a representative of the Prime Minister'soffice in the Chair and members from the three Services,8 and the Commissionerof Police to cover matters connected with security. This woulldenable the Government to keep a closer grip on what was being done.Macdonald iB to communicate with us if he wishes for our assistancein any way.At the Directors meeting to-day Horrocks made a statement about thefinal adjustment of the salaries of the higher Staff.I mentioned the proposals to meet our vetting commitment which hadeenput up by the Working Party, and got the D.G's approval to go ahead.Holis said that if these measures were to be effectively carried out, it108.was essential that Graham Mitchell should take over C.1 and thatStanley Strong should be given the commi tment of reviewing filesfor destruction. The D.G. agreed.Money told me that Inspector Cooper of the Gold Coast Police,accompanied by a Special Branch Inspector, had just returned fro avisit to the House of BOWMAN, a Communist, where three Nigerians werehoused. The object was to interrogate these Nigerians about thefalsity of their passports and about their proposed visit to.8University in Eastern Germany. BOWMAN had refused S.B. entry tothe house and, unfortunately, the Inspector had made it clear thathe wanted to interrogate the Nigerians about their passports.Itseemed likely, therefore, that the Nigerians would move to anotherhouse or leave the country. Would I authorise B.6 observation?I said that I did not think that we gbuld profitably use B.6, Sinceto be of any value the watch would have to be a 24 hour one and mightgo on for some time. It seemed to me better to put a T.C. on BONMAN.I rang up saffery and got this done.3rd July.I was told shortly after my arrival that the Nigerians wereat Heathrow airport and abou't to take off. I rang up Burt. Hesaid that he was prepared to take a chance and would cause them tolose the 'plane, the grounds that their passports were out of order.Meanwhile Cooper would go down and interrogate them. Unfortunately,Immigration were not particularly co-operative and instructions reachedtheS.B. officer too late. The Nigerians were allready in the air ontheir way to Amsterdam in transit to Prague.0.S. then asked me whether the Dutch could be informed. I saidI thought there was little likelihood 6f co-operation from the Dutch,since they would have no powers upon which to act. There would be noharm, however, in giving them the facts. If they of their own volitionsend the Nigerians back, 8o much the better. Later T discovered that thishadbeen passed on to S.I.S. allmost inthe form of a request for detention.I spoke to Geoffrey Wethered, who got on to the Hague. It then appeared ththat the Dutch did not feel that they had any powers under which to act:the only thing they coulld possibly do would be to lose the passports andso cause the Nigerians to miss their 'plane. I felt that any actionof that kind would inevitably lead to serious questions in the House.We should be accused of requesting the detention of British subjeets bya foreign Government without any satisfactory evidence that a crime hadbeen committed. I therefore telephoned S.1.S. that the Nigerians shouldbe allowe to go on but t at if there were time we should be glad to havephotographic copies of their passports. From these we may be able toproduce evidence of forgery.Kazim Raza came to see me. I gave him a copy of a note onmilitary security which I had already given to Ahmed some weeks ago.He had been impressed by the organisation of C.I.C. in America andthought that the Pakistan Army should have something similar, but hewas afraid of accusations of setting up a Gestapo. I said that C.I.C.109.was a normal organisation to have in any Army Field Intelligence, andthat it could qute easily act asa cover for a Security Wing. In order toavoid another plot in the Pakistan Army by high-ranking officers, he shouldestablish liaison with the Security Wing in the Army at all levela, as infact was done here. He seemed to think this idea was a good one.I had lunch with Stourton.This IS A COPY3 IN ORIGINAL DEPARTMENT UNDER RETAINED SECTIONDOCUMENTACT (4) OF 1968 THE Aus PUBLIC RECORDS 2009I arranged for Kennedy-te-Bee-Hollis:and Marriott.Lth July.110.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.Aua 2009I had a meeting with Dick. John Marriott and Hill about a meetingwhich is to take place at Room 055 with a pressman from the Daily Mailwho wants to write a series. of articles on security. The naily Mailhad communicated with Downing Street, who in turn had spoken to the D.G.Downing Street thought we might like to give the Daily Mail some sortof a line through the Press Relations Officer at the Home Office.TheD.G. said that he would like the pressman to be seen by one of ourofficers. Hill thought that we shoulld make it clear that the interviewwas entirely confidential and conditional on there being no mentionof the fact that any of the informatior had come from ourselves. Weshould then listen to what the pressman had to say regarding what hethought of writing, and make no comment until we had had time to considermatters further.101.5th July.I attended the J.I.0. Directors meeting to-day. I had a word with'o' after the meeting. He told me he was very wprried about the caseofin I.R.D. who saw a lot of CX material. I told 'o' thha twe were turning on the heat and tat we hoped to clear the case up assoon as possible; probably by an interview.I also had a word with Peter Shortt. He seemed very worriedabout the lack of any Government action in Persia, but said that ithad now been decided to carry out certain troop movements rather onthe lines previously adopted which might conceivably bring the Persiansto reason.I also spoke to Dick about the long, lists of Czech visas whichwere supplied with ACORN material. In the last list that I had seenI noticed that BOWMAN had been to Prague in May. BOWMAN Was theCommunist who was housing the three Nigerians - was there any recordon his file to show that such a visit had taken place? Apart fromthis, there was a long list of delegates going via Prague to a conferencein Russia, which in addition to the usual list of fellow travellers,included BURHOP, formerly of atomic energy, and MCGIBBON, the Soviet spy.Dick did not se m to know what happened to these lists, but said thathe would find out.F.J came to tell me that there had been some sand put in thebearings of a destroyer called H.M.S. St. Kitts. The ship had ordersto put in at Portrush. How did we varn the R.U.C. and ask for theirassistance? As Kennedy was over here, I suggested that we should gethold of him.THIs IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONACT 1958.(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS2009112.The Daily Mail representative was seen by John Marriottand Courtenay Young at Room 055. He did not seem to have a clueand opened by saying that clearly security here was in a bad state,what was the story? Marriott and Courtenay replied "What is yourevidence that security is in a bad state?n This rather nonplussedthe pressman, who could merely think in terms of PONTECORVO, MACLEANand BURGESS escaping from. this country. It was agreed that he wouldwrite a series of articles and then let us see them.At the staff meeting to-day D.E./A reported that a letter hadbeen received from Australia asking for the loan of Mr. Potter toassist in the organisation of their Registry and records. It wasagreed that D.E./A. should discuss this letter with the D.G. andinform him that in the opinion of the Board it was not possible forMr. Potter to be released t the present time.D.E./A reported that a letter had been received fromMr. A.F. Giles, formerly D.I.G. (CID) Palestine Police, enauiringinto the possibility of a post with us. The Board agreed thatthere were no present opportunities for which Gile's could beconsidered, but that his name should be kept before us as apotential reserve.S.I.M.E. D.mentioned that possible developinents in Persiamade it undesirable that both H/SIME and his Deputy should be awayfrom S.I.M.E. at the same time. The Board agreed that D.0.S. wouldcable this decision to H/SIME, in view of the projected visit ofMr. Stewart to Head Office.There was a discussion on the relative functions of the0.S. Sections and of B. Division. It was felt generally thatsome clearer definition of functions could be reached, and it wasagreed that D.B. woulld examine the matter and in conjunction withD.O.S. would arrange for further discussions at a working level.A draft cable to S.I.F.E giving information on the attitudeto be adopted towards the request for the appointment of Port andTravel Control Officers in the S.I.F.E area was discussed and agreed.Vetting. D.E./A reported that the back-log on the Indexhad: been reduced from 8,600 to 7,100 names, largely as a resullt ofovertime work. It was agreed that, if the need continued, considerationshould be given to the possibility of drafting down ex-members ofR.2 staff from other sections, to assist in disposing of the arrears.Arrangements could be made by negotiation between the Lady Superintendentand the Senior fficers concerned.Kennedy came round and spoke to the I.G. in Belfast.The R.U.C.are sending e,Davidson, to Portrush to meet the St. Kitts at 10 a.m.tomorrow.113.6th July.I spoke to Burt and suggested that perhaps a copy of his report onde COURCY should go to the D. of P.P. After consultation with theCommissioner, he had rung me back to say that a copy had gone to theHome Secretary, who would doubtless be sending it on to the D. of P.P.,but that if we liked to show it to the D. of P.P. there would be noobjection. He had also told Paling about the enquiries that he hadbeen making in connection with de COURCY and the contents of his lastreport.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT1958Aua2009-Dick told me that Askew, who was formerly in charge of ciphersat the Foreign Office and has since retired has, with Earey Foster'sagreement, given an interview to the press on the subject of security.Amongst other things he told the press that all ciphering and decipheringwas done under the supervision of Sir Edward Travis of Eastcote.The irresponsibllity of encouraging a man like Askew to talk to thepress is beyond belief. Doubtless he has made many other indisoretions.We only learned about the interview through the pressman's notebook whichwas left in a public lavatory and picked up by the Police.7th July.I had a talk with Dick, who tells me that there is to be a highlyconfidential enquiry in the Foreign Office about the security risks ofemploying homosexuals. Sir Norman Brook is to be in the chair, and theother two members are Cadogan and Bland.Dick was summoned to a meeting at Broadway at which 'C',andwere present. They were extremely worried about Philby''sposition and anxious that his case should be fubther investigated beforehe returned from leave. Dick aid that it would be difficult for himto carry the enquiry any further on the assumption that Philby was identicalwith "ELLI" of the Gouzenko case, or that he was the "C.E. officer" mentionedby Wolkov. He suggested that Edward Cussen or Buster Milmo should begiven all the evidence and conduct an enquiry. He doubted, however,whether114.any such enquiry could be conclusive: Philby wouldhav to be toldthat the Americans suspected him of being "ELLI" and that it was upto him to do everything he could to produce factual evidence to thecontrary. This might, however, be extremely difficult.Meanwhile, o'Malley, late of the Foreign Office, has been toStrang to say that he had positive evidence that Anthony Blunt had abeen a friend of Guy BURGESS and that while at Cambridge he wasCommunist. Strang thought thi's information shoulld be given toSir Alan Lascelles and thought that it should be transmitted through outux rather than the Foreign Office. Dick thinks that the only wayis for me to see La'scelles.on certain Dick points wants Antohny which have to see cropped James up Robertson in the Guy and BURGESS Arthur Martin correspondencetaken from his flat in Bond Street. I am going to arrange this.9th July.The Chief Constable of Stockport (Mr. Rees) telephoned thismorning to say that the firm of Merlees, Bickerton and Day, who aremaking diesel engines for the Russians, are having a lot of troublewith inspectors, in particular one OTCHINACH. They have acontractfor 15 diesel engines; 13 have been shipped, but as there is notransport for the other two, the Russian has been insisting that theybe taken to pieces and re-examined. No. 14 has been taken, butNo. 15, although it complies with all the requirements, has up to nowbeen rejected.The Russian made two curious equests, both of which were refused,The first was for microfilms of component parts of the engine, andthe second was for photographs of the outside of the factory. Whenasked why he wanted this he became incoherent.Merless, Bickerton and Day are apparently seeking for guidanceand would welcome either a telephone call or a visit from us.Iunderstand that Hill is in touch with this firm.Dick reported, at the Directors meeting to-day, on the agendafor to-morrow's meeting of the Home Cold War Committee, The questionof Communist in the armed forces was being raised on the basis ofa suggestion that serving officers should lecture to their men on thesubject.We all agreed that this would be highly undesirable, since manyof the men might know far more about Communism than the officer, whowas likely to make a fool of himself. Dick suggested that ve shouldrecommend the exclusion of Communists from the armed forces, eventhough such a proposal would obviously open the door to those whowanted to avoid military service.Both the D.G. and I felt that there was little really to showthat Communists in the armed forces were in any way making themselvesfelt, even though it was true that some laaif dozen cases had been broughtto notice of service men who had declined to fight in Korea. In a115.general way it seemed that a service man would get no opportunity ofpropagating his views without the fact coming to notice, and disciplinaryaction being taken. Provided, therefore, he did not get into a positionwhich gave him access to secret information, it did not seem that he coulddo much harm. There was at least a chance that having served two yearsunder military discipline, he might come out of the service a better man.Dick said there was a view in the Services that it was a waste oftime to train men who in war were going to desert to the enemy. Whilethis may be 8o, I think it is difficult as long as the Party remainslegal; to make a stronger case for the total exclusion of men from theServices than their total exclusion from the Civil Service.I attended a cocktail party at Thames House to meet the Tripartitedelegates to the Atamic Energy Security Conference. Hollis is representingus and has a difficult job putting over our point of view on securityscreening in such a way as to convince the meeting that by and large ourmethods are as effective as those of the Americans. It is easy enoughto argue on a particular case that if a full loyalty enquiry had beencanried out, certain facts might have come to notice. The point is,however, that as hard cases make bad law, 580 it may in the long run bea waste of time and money and, indded, of efficiency, to frame securityregulations on the basis of one or two cases.51anoI met Roach, the F.B.I. delegate, and I also had a talk withNicholson, the new Commissioner of the R.C.M.P. who is basically inagreement with our point of view. Portall was the host. He is leavingatomic energy next month - I think with considerable regret. Some peopledo not seem to think that he has been the success that he should have been,but whether it is his fault or that of the eGovernment I do not know.l0th July.Ihad lunch with Anthony. He toldme about the recent activities ofJack HEWITT, who seems to have sold himself to the Daily Express and to bein a highly neurotic condition. The Daily Express have been taking himon trips to Paris to try and obtain evidence about the whereabouts ofBURGESS and MACLEAN. Meanwhile, he has given them several highly indiscreetinterviews. Both Anthony and Garonwy REES have reprimanded him severely,as a result of which he is threatening to undermine Anthony' position.On one occasion he went So far as to say that he would commit suicide.Garonwy REES informed the Police, through a friend of his, and some actionwas taken by them to calm HEWITT down.I took the opportunity of asking Anthony again about his views onMarxian doctrine and the extent to which at any time he had been associatedwith Communist activity.He told me that in his early days at Cambridgehe had been associated with a number of Communists, many of whom werefellow "Apostles". He ha always been interested in the Marxian inter-pretation of history and artistry but he had never believed in the wayin which the Russians applied it, nor had he ever accepted or been interestedin the purely political aspects of the Marxian teaching He was quiteemphati that when BURGESS approached him, I thinkt 1937, to assist him116.in obtaining political information of an anti-Fascist king, he was firmlyunder the impression that BURGESS was working for the Government. BURGESShad never said to him anything which would imply that he was workingt forthe Comintern.I subsequently saw Dicl, Robertson, Arthur Martin and Burbidge,andIthinkthatwhatIhadtotellthemdispelledsuspicionsonanumberof points which had been aroused through a number of conversations on theT.C.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DEPARTMENT DOCUMENT RETAINED12th July.3(4) OF 1958 THE PUBLIC UNDER RECORDS SECTIONI saw Kenne th Page for a moment. I askedhim what he thought ofour ste-up in the Caribbean. He said that he liked both Beith and Leeand that he thought they had done a good job. He felt that havingestablished ourselves there it would be unwise to withdraw at this stage,although the security threat was not at the moment in any sense a seriousone.At the staff meeting to-day we got Ferguson, the J.I.D. epresentativein the Middle East, to talk to us about his staff problems. He said that>while he could generally manage with the staff he had dealing with Communistmatters, when the problems were not of an urgent character, he could notdo with less than three officers of reasonable competence to handleespionage cases. He now had six D.A. cases of some importance, and it wastherefore impossible for him to sparewithout a eplacement.We allfelt that he had made out a good case. Dick is to consider whether he canSpare anyone from B. Division. He will give us three names from which tochoose after assessing the relative claims of home and overseas.Dick drew Ferguson out on the question of integration in this country.Ferguson feels that integration intthe Middle East has been of enormousbenefit to both M.I.5 and M.If and has enormously increased the quality ofthe information obtained. He he reservations, however, on the extent towhich integration can be carried out in this country. Dick argued thatCommunism, in its international sense, was being carried to a large extentby the Foreign Office; R.5, therefore, no longer had a function in educatingtheForeignOffice on this subject. Ferguson thought there vas somethingin this, but he still felt tha t espionage presented a difficult problemowing to the different approach in S.I.S. who were always concerned with thesecurity of their operations. Apart from this, they had to operate muchmore quickly. Their filing system was different, since it was to a largeextent run on the basis of the information produced by each particular agent.He did not ser how files could be amalgamated at home; he agreed, however,that a good deal of streamlining could be done if the two organisations werein the same building.Johnstone saw me about a ship being built in Sunderland on behalfof the Polish Government, which the Admiralty now intend to take over.I signed a letter to the police warning them about this and asking themto give any protection they could against possible sabotage by members ofthe Polish crew who were intending to take over the ship on Monday.117.13th July.I had a talk with Nicholson (RCMP). I think he finds himeelf inagreement with us on the vetting problem. He thinks, however, that vemay have to make some slight concession to the American point of viewin particular cases.He told me about Kelly's appointment, and I explained to him thatwe proposed to give Kelly a free fun in the office.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDOEPARTMENT (4) OF UNDER SECTIONACT 1968. THE PUBLIC RECORDS2009I saw Tommy Lascelles, at the D.G's request, in order to conveyto him a report made by O'Malley to Willliam Strang to the effect thatAnthony Blunt had been a Communist and might well be one to-day.I told Lascelles that I had known Anthony Blunt for about tenyears; that he had in his University days associated with a number ofCommunists that he did believe in the Marxian interpretation of historyand artistry, and that he had no sympathy 1theories as applied bythe Russians. I was convinced that he had never been a Communist in thefull political sense, even during his days at Cambridge.Tormy said that he was very glad to hear this, since it was quitepossible that the story might get round to the Royal Family; he would thenbe able to say that he had already heard it and looked into it and wassatisfied that there was nothing in it. He told me that Blunt had onone occasion intimated to 'the Queen that he vas an atheist - Tommy thinkshe may well have said an agnostic - and that the Queen had been a littleshaken by his remarks. He was certain that if he now went up and toldher that Anthony was a Communist, her immediate reaction would be"I always told you so"!I spoke to Cumming about the honour for Briscoe, which 'o' was pressingto put forward, and for which he hoped to get our backing.I hadconsulted the D.G. who if approached would be ready to give the matterhis support.16th July.I saw Kelly of the R.C.M.P. this morning and told him about thelay-out of the office. I introduced him to Sir John Shaw. It was118.agreed that 0.8.2 would act as a point of contact for Kelly untilhe knew his way about the office; thereafter he would make hisappointments dhrect with sections and have the same freedom inthe office as Johnny Cimperman.I talked to the Head of the Siamese C.I.D. Colonel SchamrosMadukananda, at a flat rented by S.I.S. An S.I.S. officer,using the name ofwas present.I gave the Siamese a general talk on security principlesand then got him to talk a certain amount about his own problems.He said the Soviet Legation had no real raison d'etre in Bangkokand that the authorities were aware that they were making contactwith revolutionary Chinese. Hi's main task was to deal with theChinese Community and also with the half-Chinese; the latter were onoccasions of considerable value to him and on the whole loyal to Siam.Colonel Madukananda did not seem unduly worried about hisproblems. He mentioned among other things that his department hadthe task of settling disputes between Capital and Labour: not onlydid they intervene when a strike occurred, but the position had nowbeen reached where a representative of the workers was inclined toapproach him with their grievances before they presented them to themanagement. Colonel Madukananda said that the police by no means sidedallways in with the management; on numerous occasions they had succeededobtaining better conditions for the workers. The effect ofthishad been good in that the people had come to realise that the policewere not there solely to oppress them.Ronnie Howe rang me up to-day to tell me that one Maurice RICHARDSON,who is Assistant Editor of "Lilliput" is inclined to tell his friendsthat he is working for us.Whether this be true or not there is apparently some questionof RICHARDSON being concerned in a new publication by the Hulton Pressin conjunction with Claude e-COCKBURN.Howe thought that if RICHARDSONwas telling COCKBURN that he was an agent of M.I.5, it might not betoo good.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDNDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION17th July.(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS'o' telephoned to say that MacMillan was concerred abe 2009 statement1958Auamade to him by de COURCY to the effect that Vansittart, more than a yearago, had said in the House of Lords that there were 12,.000 Communistsin the Civil Service, and that he was prepared to supply details to theGovernment. In fact nobody had approached him.I told 'C' that I would look into this.19th July.me at Colonel the suggestion Francis, Deputy of Sir Edwin Chief Herbert. Censor during the war, called to see119.Francis is a member of the solicitors firm Herbert, Smith & Co.62 London Wall. He is also a Director of Head, Wrightson & Co. Ltd.the steel corpany, and of Head Wrightson Processes Ltd. His privateaddress is 4, WWythburn Court, Seymour Place, W.1. (Paddington 6928).He said that Sir John Wrightson had spoken to him about Jack HEWITT,who is apparentl in charge of all staff entertainment for Head, Wrightson& Co. Wrightson seemed to think that because of his association witheBURGESS HEWITT, and another man called GeeMB6, an accountant in the firm,weladmight be forming a Cormunist cell, although he had no evidence whateverten. of any subversive activitiy in the firm. His suspicions had then wanderedDAULS to one Raoul Conrad FISHER, who is the Managing Director of Head WrightsonProcesses Ltd. The only grounds on which this suspicion was based werethat FISHER was formerly German and was employed with the company ofBorsig in Berlin. He had subsequently joined a man called FOSTER-WHEELER,an 01l distillation expert in the United States. He travellled a greatdeal in the course of his business and was proposing to spend his holidaysin Jugoslavia, where it was stated he had an old mother.I asked Francis whether there was any national security interest inall this. He said that Head Wrightson Processes Ltd. were the onlycompany here doing oil distillation on a highly scientific basis. Theyhad no contract with the Government at the moment, but might possibly getone with D.At. En. in the future.I told Francis that I did not think he need worry too much about anyCommunist activity by Jack HEWITT, and that as far as FISHER was concernedthere was nothing from the national point of view that he could disclose -indeed, it seemed unlikely that he would mix himself up in anything of thekind, since he was earning something between E5,000 and E10,000 a year.I attended the J.I.C. (Directors) meeting to-day.Mention was madeof a new paper in English published and cinculated in Russia; the paper wascalled "News" The Committee were ancious to know if it was getting anycirculation in England. I said that as far as I knew was not.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS1958fusThe ubject of defeators was considered.Chairwas anxious that the whole question should again be reviewed and thatpublicity should be given to the measures taken to rehabilitate Russians.I made it clear that the measures being taken in Germany were purelyService measures, designed to teach Russian defectors a trade and also theEnglish language in order that they might more easily take up jobs inEnglish-speaking countries. There had, however, been diffbulties as theArmy appeared to resent these Russians being given better donditions thantroops.Hilken, speaking on behalf of the D.N.I. said that he had discussedthe matter with his own people in Germany recently,a also with the otherServices; he thought that the Navy were looking after their people well, but tthat the other Services regarded defectors as a nuisance and took littletrouble about thern. He mentioned that most defectors brought a Germanmistress, from whom they were immediately separated on arrivall in the WesternCone: this was bound to cause resentment.120.I tolld the meeting that, in spite of the many difficulties,we had coped with any defectors sent to this country, but thatour task would be very much facilitated if we could comeuout inthe open and make use of Government resources. In this connectionthe Cabinet ruling., that all expenses were to come from the secret votewas acting like a blight. The meeting decided to give directionsto the Working Part to put forward a report embodying the followingpoints: (a) that defectors were the most valuable contribution toIntelligence; (b) that the volume had not increased (c) that arrange-ments were not adequate, and (d) that publicity was desirable.The D.M.I. seemed to think that the Services very not adequatelyrepresented on the Working Party. I told him that we had also reachedthis conclusion, particularly with regard to the War Office representativeTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.Aua2009121.Scrambllens for use in S.I.M.E. - A. reported that a demand had beenmade for these by S.I.M.E. as the Army had refused to issue them on thegrounds that they were insecure. D.O. asked A.] to find out whether thiswag a general Army instruction, as it was contrary to the decision reachedat a recent meeting on communications.Dictograph system - A.l reported that the dictograph syatem would beinstalled in Hanover Square for the use of O.S. Division. Both D.( andA.1 pointed out that conversations between two people talking on the systemcould be overheard by a third person who turned down his tab on the buzz-boxconnecting with either of the two concerned. It was agreed that a warningto this effect should be issued to all users of the system.Hanover Square i- D.C. asked that an interview room should be allowedfor the use of C. Division Officers quartered in Hanover Square, and A.]said he would examine the possibility.D.O.S. asked what Canteen facilities voulld be available andhe was advised that transport would bring staff back to Leconfield Housefor luncheon, and a light Canteen would provide coffee and tea at HanoverSquare.Staff -a general discussion on staff was held and D.B. said thathe Would probably require a further six offiers. A.l fellt that, beforeaccepting any commitment to engage staff, we should first examine therelation betwe n the Estimates and costs on the staff side, as he did notfeel sure that this number of vacancies was available from the estimates.The Board decided that the Estimates 1951/52 should be examined and theresults submitted at the first available opportunity.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONACT (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS1958Aug200920th July.I have just heard that Abdullah of Transjordan has been assassinatedon the steps of a Mosque in Jerusalem by a Palestinian Arab.122.Johnny Cimperman brought his assistant, O'Brien, to see me, althoughwhy he hs been given an assistant both he and I were far from clear.Icanonly think that he is going to carry Johnnyls golf clubs!.Burt telephoned to me this afternoon to say that he had heard from apress contact of his that the London office had received notification fromtheir representative at the London Airport that BURHOP had had his passportwithdrawn and that the press intended to publish this information.David FLOYD, the Foreign Office official, hag also had his passportwithdrawn, since he came forward and expressed a wish to make a statementabout his past. He disclosed to Skardon that he had been a Comrunist inhis University days and intermittently since then, although he had completelygiven up his Communist ideas since 1945. He had been employed on the BritishMilitary Mission in Moscow during the war and before going had got anintroduotion from WINN(7) which led to his meeting a Russian on some twentyoccasions. He maintained that he had never imparted any information, althoughthe Russian had pressed him hard about the personnel of the Missinn. It isdifficult to see how FIOYD could have told them much, since he was mainly incharge of the catering.21st July.I spoke to Hill about the case of FLOYD. He feels that we should putthe matter to the D. of P.P. - the more so since there has been publicityabout the Foreign Office officiall who has also had his passport withdrawn.This shoulld not, however, prevent us from recommending against a prosecution,which so far as we can see will do nobody any good and may have the effect ofpreventing others like FLOYD from coming forward.Ahpress statement has now been put out to the effect that 10 other peoplehave had their passports withdrawn. This information may well refer to alist on 10 people connected with the BURGESS/MACLEAN affair whose names wecirculated to Special Branch only under very strict reservations about secrecy.The D.G has been told by his contact that the information aame from theYard.23rd July.This A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT1958.Aus2009Ve had a long discussion about the difficulties of watching. TheEgyptians apparently use as many as three cars to watch one suspectand causethe cars to rotate in order during the operations.123.Ihad ten minutes talk With Mr. MadasHooja, whose name suggests amythical animal in a child's story book! He is MuMik'E deputy inDelhi. He seemed intelligent and rEseptive. I talked to him aboutthe general principles of security.At the Directors meeting-to-day we discussed the press leakages.The D.G was convinced that they came from the Yard and thought that wemight consider a T..C. onMeanwhile he asked me to findout what Burt had to say.Battersby came to see me about the approach by MacMillan to 'c' apropos of Vansittart's information. I subsequently telephoned to 'c"and told him that we had not made ahy approach to nsittart, who inthe House of Lords haa suggested an enquiry about Communists in theCivil Service and had offered to assist with certain information at hisdisposal. The Government ha turned down the question of an enquiry.We had, however, subsequently made contact with at least one of Van's1nformants: this man had given us some information that we already knewabout Communists in Inland Revenue and a good deal of other informationwhich was clearly Very Wide of the mark. Their intentions had, however,been honest. Lastly, we felt that if Van really had anything importanthe might impart it either to 'C1 or to myself, or indeed to Dick, who knowshim well.'c' will advise MacMillan to let the matter drop.I told Burt that the D.G. was worried about the leakage ofinforation with regard to the list of 10 people, since their nameshad been passed to Special Branch only. We were extremely anziousthat these names should not be given any publicity, sine should thishappen it would be extremely embarrassing. Burt said he would lookintothe matter and ring me back.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION24th July.(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1968 Aua 2009Burt telephoned to me this morning, suggesting that the noticein the Sunday Express indicated that the Foreign Office had leaked aboutthe 10 indiviuals. On looking at the paper it was clear that a passagewhich Burt atitrihuted to Ridsdale was merely a speculation by the DailyExpress correspondent. I told Burt my vie and made it clear that theinformation which we had passed to him had not been divulged to anybodyin the Foreign Office or any other department outside our own. He saidhe would g0 into the matter further.Emery came to talk to meI asked him about counter-espionage in Ismadilia.Hesaid that since he took over,E ,al] reports had been given to and afterprocessing they passed the relevant portions to J.I.D. or to CX, MiddleEast Counter-espionage, Ismailia, had formerly been done by GeoffreyJenkins,and could again be done by himself direct from Ismailia, although124.most of the informants formerly used by Jenkins had bee got rid of asS.I.S. did not want them.Dick and Hill, with Reilly present, saw the D. of P.P. on theFLOYD case. The D. of P.P. was quite clear that as matters stood aprosecution was not possiblle, since there was no evidence of anyinformation pasaed by FLOYD to his Russian contact. It was suggestedthat possibly WYNN might be interviewed.It transpired during the meeting that Morrison is taking a veryaggressive line about the staff of the Foreign Office. He thinks thatthe Establishment Branch have been far to soft in the past and thata number of people hght to have been eliminated. He thinks thatifgrounds exist there should be a prosecution of FLOYD.We have taken the view that this would be a mistake, since theman came forward voluntarily, and to penalise him would discourage othersfrom volunteering a statement about their past. Apart from this, asuccessful proseoution seemed extremely unlikely. We have only submittedthis case to the D. of P.P. in view of the publicity which has arisen overthe withdrawal of FLOYD'S passport and the possibility of questions inthe House. We should, in my view, be in a position to say that FLOYD'Scase has been considered by the D. of P.P.The D.G told us that he has just attended a luncheon party withRobertson, the editor in chief of all the Beaverbrook press, Oordon,I think of the Sunday Express, and Elland, editor of the Evening Standard,although how this was arranged I do not know.An off-the-record conversation took place in which the D.G. askedhis host exactly what the policy of the Beaverbrook press was. In thecase of PONTECORVO they blackguarded the authorities for allowing him toleave the country, but now that the authorities had withdrawn the passportof BURHOP, they complained about a "Star Chamber". Was their policy topick up any old stick and beat the Government? Robertson was evasiveand tried to make out that the case of PONTECORVO was much more serioussince he would have been carrying current information. The D.G. saidthat he did not think this in any way affected his argument, and wouldlike to know what the Beaverbrook press expected the Government to do;they could not have it both ways - either it was right to stop both thesepeople, or it was wrong to stop anybody. No satisfactory reply wasforthcoming.The D.G. then complained about the onslaught on the Security Service,which he imagined must be due to prders from the Beaver". Surely itwas not necessary to talk about, the D.G's imminent resignation and splurgethe worst photograph they could find of him across the front page, regardlessof the facts. In any case the attack did not come very well from thatquarter, seeing that it was Beaverbrook who was raking the internment campsduring the war and filling up our research with people of the type of FUCHS.Moreover, in So doing he was going directly against the advice of theSecurity authorities.In reference to the case of BURHOP, Robertson referred to the list often other people who had had their passports taken away, and to an infringemenof the rights of citizens caused by this action. The D.G. said"Well,hereagain you have got your facts wrong. The passports have not beenwithdrawn125.and there is no intention of withdrawing the passports of ten people.Gordon told the D.G. after the luncheon that he was very glad thathe had said what he did.The D.G. has been sumoned to a meeting on Monday of the P.U.S'sSecret Service Committee, when the question of our representation abroadand our position on the SIGINT Board will be discussed.I told the D.G. that I 8O farhad not seen Norman Brook's reportand I thought that we were going to get a bowdlerised version of it.The D.G. then handed me the full report from his safe, but I only hadtime to read a few pages before he left and wished to lock it up for thenight. I noticed that it had been seen by Serpell, and D.O.S., and Iunderstood some time ago that it had been read by Horrocks.25th July.At the J.I.C. to-day there was a discussion on the Chief's of Staffruling that the J.I.C's report on the scale of attack by Russia on theU.K. Which was for the purpose of civil defence planning, should be returned-to the J.I.C. to be re-vrittan. The Chiefs of Staff seemed to think thatit took no account of the potentialities of our defence and thereforeexaggerated the probable effect of Soviet bombing.This raises quite a fundamental issue. The duty of the J.I.C. is tosupply factuall information and to assess in relation to all campaigns theforces that the enemy can put into the field. The only people who canassess the extent to which these forces are likely to be successful are theAir Defence Committee or the Planners. In its covering note the J.I.C.have mada special reservation in this sense, but of course it had not beenread or hoisted in by the Chiefs of Staff. We all came to the conclusionthat such J.I.C. reports ought not to be released at all until the Plannershad expressed their views. In other words, that such papers should bea joint assessment by the J.I.C., the Joint Planners and the Air DefenceCommittee.Reilly came to see the D.G. on three points.As regards the Brook report, he fully supported the view that we shouldbe full members of the SIGINT Board.As regards representation overseas, he seemed satisfied with Brook'srecommendation, provided there vas no question of high-handed action withoutprior consultation with the Foreign Office.The D.G. made it clear thatwhile we were reasonably satisfied with the present arrangements, we did notwish to feel that if we suggested representation in Paris or elsewhere at anytime we should not atomatically become involved in a battle with - ashad been the case over our representation in the U.S.A. We wished to feellthat our request would be accepted as a right bject to any seriousoverriding objection. Reilly seemed fairly happy about this.126.We then discussed monitoring by TASS. The question had been takenup again by the Air Ministry through the Brook Committee. Reillythinks it ought to be put back to the J.I.C. for further examination.We made it clear that we were all in favour of clipping TASS'S wingsour disagreement with A. .C.A.8. C. A. S. (I) was solely on the point that hisevidence, that monitoring had been going on during manoeuvres, wasquestionable, and ve pointed out that it was always open to the SovietEmbassy, the Trade Delegation, or the Sovict rest home at Seacox Hill,to monitor communications whenever they liked.ACORN BRIDE tells us tha't in 1944 and 1945 Moscow was interestedin BURHOP.26th July.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS1958 fur 2009127.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1968. Ahug 2009There waa no opportunity to consider the following points:(i)Move to Hanover Square(ii)Joint accommodationowith SI.S. in Horseferry Road(iii)Use of Conference Room as temporary offices to meet the presentneed for accommodation.(iv) War organisation.128.27th July.Drew came to see me about the deception plan (Operation INDEXinvolving the use of "Duff". He is holding a scientific journal, about30 copies of which are normally sent to various institutions in Russia.On one of these copies he will have little spots made, intended to show that"Duff" has been affixed, and subsequently removed. Later he will actuallyaffix "Duffn, which will contain information designed to imply that someonein the institution was working for the British. A completely differentchannel will be used to indicate to the Russians that these communicationsare being passed: they will first of all discover that a number of copiesindicate the removal of "Duff", and will then institute a watch and discoverthe actual messages. The idea is to cause dislocation in the izholeinstitution through an impression that a spy is working there and cannot beidentified.I pointed out to Drew that his main difficulty would be to synchronisethe operation he would have to ensure that his indication to the Russiansthat "Duffn was being used coincided with the actual use of "Duff". His purposein visiting me wa's to get my co-operation in obtaining a H.O.W. on the addressin Moscow to which the publication vas being sent.28th July.I have seen the minutes of meetings beteen D.0.S. D.B. Magan andKellar on the future of 0.S. Division. Magan divides the office at homeand overseas into local, regional and global, and concludes that whille0.S.1 and 2 are within their charter, 0.S.3 and L, tend to go outside it andusurp the functions of B. Division. He puts B.1.B. and B.2.b. under aSenior Officer, as he regards them as global and the counterpart of R.5.While there is a good deal in his arguments, it is, I think, questionablewhether B.2.b. under another Senior Officer, would operate satisfactorily.If it had not the stimulus of B.2 it might relapse into doing research forthe sake of research, and lose some of its practical force.30th July.I saw Newsam about the case of SHELLEY, the Assistant Legal Adviser inthe Home Office who was dismissed from Government service during the war onaccount of his connection with the Fascists. Newsam said that the Home Officehad taken SHELLEY on again with their eyes open and whith the official approvalof the Teeasury. He was, however, rather shocked to hear that SHEITEY wasstill a supporter of MOSLEY in 1948. He does not intend to take any action,but thought 1t right that we should hawe brought the matter to his notice.Our letter will be placed on the record. SHELLEY is at present employed ondrafting laws for the Channel Islands.I had a tallk with Kirly-Green and gave him my views on what he shoulld bedoinginvest Africa. He raised a point in regard to the defence plan for theGold Coast, in which it 1s stated that it is the business of the police todetect and prevent espionage, althoughiit is mentioned that constant liaisonshould be maintained with the S.L.O. Kirby-Green thought that we ought todirect espionage. I pointed out to him that we were not in a position eitherto detect or to prevent espionage, since we had no machinery for the purpose.129.Provided, therefore, we were informed whenever a case of espionage orsabotage arose, it seemed to me that our needs woulld be met, unless wehappened to run up against a particularly difficult Chief Constable. Sucha point might, of course, arise in a place like Hong Kong. On the whole,however, and after consultation with Hollis, I am inclined to think thatthings can stand as they are.y If our S.L.0s have the standing that theyshould have, they ought to be able to iron out any difficulties thatthey have on their own or with the assistance of the Governor.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1968. Aua 2009The D.G. attended a meeting of P.U.Ss to discuss the Brook reportthis afternoon. He told us afterwards that the first point had beenthe discussion of our representation as a right in certain countriesabroad, if we thought a useful purpose would be served.101 had raiseda number of difficulties in particular in connection with the French, whohad used the old argument that M.I.5 might be played off against M.I.6,and vice versa. The D.G. hd replied that our relations with M.I.6were now entirely friendly and that he would not allow anything ofthekind to happen, and he imagined that 'C' would take similar steps. Heinstanced the case of our representative in Washington, which has provedto be an unqualified suocess and of condiderable value to both parties.While it was true that the present arrangement allowed us to put forwarda case for representation in any particular country abroad, we shouldbe doing 80 rather on the basis of asking for a special dispensation.Norman Brook thought, and the D.G. agreed, that we should do s0 as a right,although, of course, we would always put forward a case and consult theForeign Office and S.I.S. Curiously enough, Strang supported this viewwhole-heartedly and Newsam, who knew hothing about the matter but hadbeen prompted by me in the morning, drew attention to the fact that if wehad had a representative in Lisbon during the war, thrxmistakes mighthave been avoided and a considerable advantage to counter-espionage wouldhave resulted. The meeting agreed that sir Norman Brook's proposal shouldbe adopted.The next point for consideration was our nembership of the SIGINTBoard. This proposal seems to have been accepted nem con, although, forthe sake of decency, Bridges seemed to think that it should be givena little more thought.The object of our representation is that now, and particularly inwar time, the Services and the Foreign Office, who make a financialcontribution, might decdied that all their resources should be turnedon to operationsl Intelligence. Once we are established on the Board,I think that we should make some approach to the Treasury and ask thata sum of money be allocated to G.C.H.Q. which should be our contributiontothe general pool. This would certainly strengthen our hand in gettingour requirements met.130.Thistle tells me thatis on the point of becoming amember of the Communist Party.THis.IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION31st July.(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS1968 Aua 2009D.0.S. talked to me about Magan's report on his Division.He seemed to think that Dick was solely interested in getting theservices of certain 0.S. officers-E and t at having done soT was notmuch concerned about the future of 0.S. I said I did not think thatthis was intended.D.O.S. felt that Magan's proposals relegated O.S. to theposition of a caretaker section. I said that in fact it recommendedthat the functions of 0.S.01 and 2 should continue, but that certain functionsof 0.S.3 and 4 should go to B. Division.D.O.S. seemed to think that the Overseas Division seemed tocarry some sort of experteese in overseas matters, and gave the case ofa Chinaman called LIM FAT, who had been admitted to atomic energy onthe grounds that he was born of naturalised Chinese parents in Mauritius.Enquiries after the event have shown that LIM FAT's brothers favour theCommunist regime in Chins; meanwhile LIM FAT, who is taking a holidayin Mauritius, has announced that he does not intend to return to thiscountry. He has a certain amount of information about Harwell andWinscale, but nothing very serious. D.O.S. contended that had the casebeen preferred to 0.S. at the outset, they would have advised againsttherman's employment. I said that I could not see that any experteezewas necessary in a case of this kind; it seemed to me a matter of commonsense. LIM FAT should never really have been employed. As against this,however, one had to bear in mind that atomic energy emplloyed a number offoreigners and that enquiries in regard to their relatives had not beena normal procedure up to the present, although it seemed likely that as aresult of the Tripartite conversations, some alternative would be made.I reminded D.O.S. of our original memorandum to the D.G. on thequestion of an overseas division. I still felt that we were right inwhat we said. Nevertheless, the D.G. hd decreed otherwise and we hadto work the overseas division as best we could. D.O.S. agreed that somefundamental reorganisation embracing O.S. functions within the administrativedivision was really the right answer.Ist August.At the J.I.C. to-day I spoke to Ross and to Young about thereport of the Joint Committee on Atomic nergy,published as an officialdocument in Rpril, 1951, in the United States. I have been reading thisreport in some detail; it is generally designed to show that such leakageof information as has occurred is due to the activities of NUNN MAY, FUCHSand PONTECORVO, rather than to disclosures made by agents such as GOLD,GREENGLASS and ROSENBERG in the United States. It is a record of theCourt proceedings in the U.S.A. which show that atomic GREENGIASS bomb, although disclosed howdetails to ROSENBERG of accurate the manufacture I do not know. of the Before the evidence wasgiven far these there details had clearly are been discussions between the Court, the AtomicEnergy Commission, and other Departments of State. It had been held that131.under a democracy it was right that the prisoner should be confrontedwith all the evidence against him, but, as an alleged precaution, theJudge had cleared the Court beforeathe evidence was given. He had,however, failed quite deliberately to exclude the journalists, with theresult that alll the evidence, which is detailed in the report, waspublished on the following day in the New York Times. While it mightof course be argued that Russi.a has already had the information. it wasclearly not in the interests of Allied security that the 's shouldtdotted and the T's crossed in open Court. This must, moreover, havebeen the view of the authorities, otherwise there was no point in clearingthe Court - ineffective as such a measure was bound to be if the journalistswere allowed to remain.As far as I know, no action for contempt Of court is possible ina case of this kind. I recollect that in the Nazi spy trial in 1938the whole proceedings before the Grand Jury, which were held in camera,were published on the folllowing day in the New York Times. I raised thertatter with the District Attorney, and was then told that the Federal Courthad no redress.Ialso mentioned to Ross and Young the recent proceedings beforethe Senatorial Commission, where all the leading personalities had beenquestioned on matters of defence and foreign police vis a vis Russia,which affected not only the United States but aln the Allies. Whileonly an expurgated version of the proceedings was published in the press,the full stenographic minutes were in every press office and must, there-fore, have leaked to the Russians.As proof of the importance of the statements made, I quotedGeneral Marshall's answer to one of the Senators, to the effect thathe was being turned into one of the best agents that Soviet Russiahad ever had. It seemed to me ridiculous that the Americans shouldcome over here complaining about our screening tests and loyaltyenquiries, when they themselves were handing out top level informatioin a big way. I had raised this matter more than a year ago on theJ.I.C. when Service Directors were c amplaining about harmful disclosuresin the United States affecting British armament design and BritishIntellligence. It seemed to me that such instances ought to be carefullylisted and used to counter American allegations of insecurity in thiscountry.Ross entirely agreed with me, but I did not have the feelingthat he was going to do very much.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT1968Aua2009132.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 Aua 2009133.I have seen the stenographic minutes of the meeting of P.U.SSto discuss the Brook report, from which it appears that althoughStrang, in spite of c's representntions said that he would haveno objaction to our representation abroad, and that it was indeedright and necessary for the two Services to co-exist on foreignterritory in certain places, provided that the Foreign Office andS.1.S. were consulted before the post was established, Bridges hadsuggested that any remaining difference of opinion might be madeif Brook's recommendation Was interpreted as follows:"It should be open to the Security Service, with theconcurrence of S.I.S. and the knovledge of the Governmentconcerned, to maintain liaison officers in foreign countries,the division of responsibility between the Security Serviceand S.I.S. being regarded as more functional than geographical.The words "with the concurrence of S.I.Sseem to me to putus back exactly to where we started.H1ll spoke to me about the case of Max BORN, which causedhim a certain amount of uneasiness, pa articulary in view of theHome Secretary's suggestion, based on the information of de COURCY,that BORN'S case should be investigated.Firstly, the file showed that as late as 1950. BORN, in a collegedebate, had expressed the view that it was the duty of all scientistsin this country or in America who were in possession of atomic bombsecrets to give them to the J.S.S.R. and secondly, that although hehad been naturalised a British subject he had made it clear to theHead of his University that on the expiry of his contract in two yearstime, he intended to return to Germany.It is of course true that Max BORN has not been connected vithatomic energy for a good many years, but he doubtless moves in atomiccircles,and if he feels no particular loyalty to this country and thinkssthat all information on the atomic bomb should be given to the Russians,he ought to be, if only for our own protection, further investigated.2nd August.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1968.fur2009134.At the Appointments Board te-day the following matters wereThis IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDNDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.2009Accommodation.i)The Board was advised by A.1. that it is expected to move intoHanover Square on about 3oth September. A.1 will then ask Directorsfor their demands for the space created in Leconfield House.ii) The Board was also advised that the Conference Room was beingtaken over as Office space oving to acute croding in Leconfield House,This was approved.iii) A.] raised the question of Plan-7 telephones, pointing out thatthe G.P.O. were growing more and more reluctant to instal them on accountof the complicated wiring and expense. The Board decided that only SeniorOfficers and above should use Plan-7 telephones.iv)The Board agreed that there was nopost in the Service for this candidate, whose name had been put up by0.S.3rd August.Hill talked to me about the case of Max BORN. It seemed to himthat our file was somewhat incomplete. Although we knew thatBORNhadbeen employed by Tube Alloys, we had no idea of the extent of his knowledgeon atomic projects, from which it follows that we are unable to assess his135.potentialities for doing harm. The file shows that he held the view, asrecently as 1950, that all information regarding the atomic bomb in ourpossession or in that of the Americans should be given to the U.S.S.R.He was a member of the Russian Academy of Science and, unlike Sir Henry Dale,had refused to resign.Lastly, he had expressed the view to Sir EdwardAppleton, Vice Chancelllor of Edinburgh University, that when he retiredin two years time he woulld settle down in Germany. He had been naturalisedon the 3lst August, 1939, presumably as a matter of expediency. He couldnot, therefore, be regarded as a loyal British subject. I have minuted thefile accordingly, suggesting that some enquiries should be made.Madan Hooja came to see me before his eparture, when Icontinued my talk about the work of the office and answered a certain numberof questions. He Struck me as being more balanced and intelligent than hischief, MULLIK.Lth August.Arthur Martin and Ronnie Reed came to tell me that T.C.disclosed that PHILBY was going yachting from Chichester with a friend.His wife had said, apparently in jest, to Nicholas Elliott:" suppose heisnotdoing a "dis"?" I got Ronnie Reeed to listen to the conversationpersonally; he confirmed that Eileen's remark was in jest and ascertainedthat PHILBY'S companion was someone in business in the City.I was also told that T.C. disclosed very definitely that PHILBYwas very active in looking for a job here. In all the ircumstancesit seemed to me that no action was warrented, even if any appropriateaction were possible. It was already too late to stop PHILBY gettinginto the yacht and it seemed equally unjustifiable to issue any warningto the French. I decided, therefore, to do nothing.Miss Weldsmith showed me hertminute on the recruitment of femalestaff. She considered that although useful progress had been made throughthe approach to schools, we should fail both now and in the future if wedid not a) improve pay conditions, and (b) make the work of the Registrymore interesting. She is quite convinced that some alteration in regardto registry work, which will give giris an opportunity of following a caseright through, is essential. She points out that if the girls now beingrecruited go back to their schools and complain about the dullness of thework our new sources for recruitment will inevitably ary up.7th August.Ronnie Reed and Martin came to telll me that on Friday two draftsfor 81,000 each had reached Mrs. MACLEAN. Alan MAOIEAN had tried to getin touch with Skardon, but having failed did nothing until Monday. Onedraft was on the Swiss National Bank, and the other on the Swiss Union Bank.The money was transmitted by a certain BECKER to Mrs. Melinda DUNBAR, thegirl's mother. Evidently the man who remitted the money thought that toaddress it to Mrs. MACLEAN might arouse suspicion. The drafts were in an136.envelope posted from the Reigate-Redhil area. Enclosed in the envelopewasa letter written by MACLEAN, dated July, in which he said that he was wellsent measages to his children, and assured his wife of his continued affectionfor them all; he was unable to disclose his whereabouts.Enquiries have been set on foot InSwitzerland to see what is known ofBECKER, who gave a hotel address. Ronnie Reed has been down to see Mrs. MACLEAN,who seemed on the whole unmoved: she identified the handwriting ab being thattof her husband, but said that it seemed a little bit shaky and more widelyspread than usual.This IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 19682009Simkins and Davis Whyte came to see m me about the case ofTheD. of P.P. has given his opinion that no case can be mounted againstonthe evidence. This is satisfactory from our point of view. The Foreign Officeare being informed.I saw Hocrocks about the case of HODGSON and gave him the filc to read.We discussed our responsibilities overseas for espionage, sabotageand subversive movements in relation to the appropriate wording in overseasdefence schemes. These responsibilities , of course, differ as between oneoverseas station and another, e.g. in West Africa we aot only in a liaisoncapacity, whereas in Gibraltar we have certain executive responsibilitieswith the machinery to carry them out. There is, therefore, no singleformula which will fit every station.As regards African and Caribbean stations, it seems to me that we shouldbe guided by the following considerations:a) Broadly speaking, our overseas representatives advise and aot as atwo-way channel for information passing between Head Office and the Colonies.This information relates not only to espionage, sabotage and subversive move-ments, but also to advice on how to set up a uitable protective security ma chineto operate both in peace and war.b) In these territories we can neither detect nor prevent espionage,sabotage or subversive activities, si'nce we have neither the powers nor the137.machinery. The responsibility, therefore, is rightly placed on thepolice, and we should avoid any form of wording in defence schemeswhich might gibe rise to the suggestion that we had executive authority.c) Our organisation in these Colonies must remain flexible. Ifwe become an indispensable cog in the locall defence scheme, we shall beunable to dispose of our manpower to the best advantage. We might atsome future date feel that we could profitably reduce or close down onestati on and open up another.d) An S.L.O. who is goind his job properly will have establisheda degree of confidence between himself and the local authorites sufficientto ensure that all our liaison requirements are met, and if he runs intodifficulties he can always invoke the assistance of the local Governoror ourselves and, in the last resort, that of the Colonial Office.If, therefore, we appear in Colonial defence schemes, it should be clesthat we are only performing a liaison function which involves a free exchangof views and consultation on all matters which are of interest to this officS.I.M.E. and S.I.F.E. are very d efniitely an integral past of thedefence machine, by fvirtue of our membership of the local J.I.Cs J. Cs and forother reasons. But there are, of course, very great differences in the roleeachahas to play for the reason that S.I.M.E. (with the exception of Cyprus)is based on foreign territory, and S.I.F.E. (with the exception of Burma) onBritish territory.In so far as S.I.F.E. is concerned, I should feel that para. 2(b)should apply, provided that the necessary appeal machinery, either throughthe J.I.C. or the B.D.C.C., is recognised in any case where we feel thatthe police are taking action without proper consultation.In Gibraltar and Mata we are an integral part of the defence forcesand have control to some extent of sources of information not available,to the police. In any defence scheme our responsibilities in theseColonies should, I think, be more closely defined.In India, Pakistan,eCeylon Pakistan, Ceylon, Washington and Australia, the questiondoes not arise.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED8th August:IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSI lunched withThe conversation was general9th August.of Broadvay came over to see me. He was seeking informationaobut the planning of Counter Espionage in S.H.A.E.F. during the war. Hewished to see how far our experiences were applicable to the presentsituation in S.H.A.P.E. Miss Russell-King was able to supply him withthe lay-out of Dick's office when he was with S.H.A.E.F., which showed themain headings under which the department was organised.138.I had a long talk with Macdonald about our role vis-a-vis the Policeand overseas stations. He thought that the arrangement reached withGeorge Jenkin, which allowed for close consultatior in all cases ofespionage and sabotage, was really satisfactory, since it was quite clearthat we could neither donduct nor prevent such activities ourselves. Onthe other hand, he thought that there ought to be some sort of appealmachinery, possibly through the J.I.0. and the British Defence Co-ordinatingCommittee, in case we ran up against troublesome Commissioners of Police,like Mackintosh in Hong Kong.There seems little doubt that S.I.F.E. is now very firmly established,and even something of a Power in the Land.Isaw Patrick Rilly and cleared with him, and subsequentlyof S.I.S.. a letter which the D.G. is sending to Hoover, suggesting theindoctrination of Bedell-Smith into basic material connected with the MACLEANcase. In spite of the fact tha t Bedell-Smith is Chairman of U.S.C.I.B, theequivalent of SIGINT, he is unaware of the source of our information.Thiscauses his subordinates to worry both S.I.S. and ourselves with wild theoriesabout the disappearance of BURGESS and MACLEAN.l0th August.This IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT1958Aus2009Admiral Buzzard, the new D.N.I. called. He seemed rather a differenttype, intelligent and keen. I gave him the usual talk about the office.He saw the D.G. D.0.S. and, in D.C's absence, Furnival Jones.HealsosawMarriott. He hopes to return for another visit in the Autumn.Martin and Reed came to see me to tell me that Mrs. DUNBAR had rungp,asking to see Skardon before paying in the two cheques. There was acertain moral issue which she wished to discuss before she put her signatureto the cheques. Ronnie Reed had arranged to go down to see her at 5 p.m..he would listen to that she had to say, which would probably be that byaccepting this money her daughter might be in the position of living on theproceeds of her husband's treachery - a point which had already occurred tous. Ronnie would say that there was nothing illegal in the transaction:wehad already ascertained that it aid otncontravene the Treasury exchangeregulations nor eyen on the assumptio that the money. came from Russia, couldit be l1able to Confiscation, unless we were at war with the Soviet Union.139.The issue, therefore, was purely a moral one and perhaps Mrs. DUNBAR mightlike to satisfy herself as to the origin of this money before paying it intoher account. At the moment we could not help her, since enquiries inSwitzerland and in New York, where BECKER had also given an address, are notyet complete.I reported developments in the MACLEAN case to the D.G. who saidthat he would like to see the officers concerned and also Hollis, after lunch.This meeting took place,when the whole ground was gone over. The D.G.felt that something might be gained by Mrs. DUNBAR writing to the two SwissBanks, aslng for informatio on about BECKER and the origin of the funds.Arthur Martin, with whom I agreed, felt that while this course might possiblyproduce something, it would be better to await the result of the enquiriesinNew York and Switzerland. It was finally agreed that the matter mus beone for Mrs. DUNBAR herself, but that if she was prepared to write to theBanks she should be encouraged to do so.The D.G. took exception to the fact that these developments in theMACLEAN Case were not being handled through Hollis, in view of the instructionsthat in Dick's absence Hollis would be in charge of B. Divi sion. Reidexplained that when he spoke to Dick over the weekend, Dick had told him toreport the facts to me on Tuesday morning, and that this morning HOllis wasaway at the J.I.C.I explained that I had passed all the information on to Hollisimmediately I received it.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT1968Aua2009140.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1968Aua2009l1th August.A wild story came in from Special Branch that a man called DAKERhad told the Police that he had seen BURGESS in a pub BURGESS hadsaidthat he had come from Strasbourg and gave DAKER a bundle of franc notesWhich were exchanged for potinds. He said that he had known BURGESS personallySubsequent enquiries by Special Branch proved that DAKER was offhis head!13th August.Speake, who was formerly in the Immigration Branch and has beenworking with Oakley for some time, is now takeing over Oakley's liaisonduties with us. I impressed upon him the importance which ve attachto his job, since if the Home Office was not in the picture, it was oftendifficult for them to assess the importance of certain action which we mightwish them to take from time to time. I gave Speake a general account ofthe work ofathe office. He is seeing other officers in the department.At the Directors' meating Hollis gave some account of the meetingshe had been attending in regard to the interrogation of applicants forD. At. En on their political views. The matter is to be discussed bythe P.M. st a Cabinet meeting on Friday.Perfect mentioned to me that Boddington's talks to the Police andsabotage have been well received and that at a recent meeting a man calledParkes, of the Forensic Laboratory at Bristol, had been present. He hadexpressed a wish for Boddington to talk to his fellow Directors.I am speaking to Hollis about this - I am not quite sure thatBoddington is the person to give such a talk.141.15th August.Ross rang me to ask whether the D.G would have any objection tohis raising the Tass Monitoring problem at. the J.I.C. to-morrow, in viewof the fact that he, the D.G. had been unwilling for his letter on thesubject to be circularised to other Directors.I told Ross that I could see no obJection, but would let him knowif the D.G. had other views.I subsequently spoke to the D.G. 9 who said that his only reason forobjecting to the circulation of his letter was that a memorandum was beingprepared on the whole subject and that he thought it better not to go offat half-cock.l6th August.I had a talk with Geoffrey Patterson, having previously spoken toHorrocks, on the subject ofgoing to Washington. It seemed tme that in view of our lnowlledge of her acquaintance with the whole of theMACLEAN family, we could nnt accept the risk of her going to Washington,where she would become aware of the strong pointer towards Donald MACLEANhaving engaged in espionage in 1944 and 1945. This implies no reflectiononbui t ao not wnink unaT we can run une IISK O1 placing nerin that position. When the MACLEANs, who have So far been engaged in a g(deal of wishful thinking, come to suspect that Donald is a spy, they mayattempt to communicate withor write to each other suggesting that ghmight help. This woulld be quite sufficient to put us in the dog house witthe Americans.I told Geoffrey about my proposed visit to Canada and the U.S.A.THISISACOPY ACOHYORGINALI ORGINALDOCUMUNT DOCUMUNTINDEPARIMENOU CiiON(4) OR THE PUDLIC LLSORDSACT 1958any142.399143.17th August.The D.G. attended the P.M's meeting on the question of approachincandidates for D.At.En about their political views. He told meafterwards that the suggestion was hotly opposed by Chuter Ede, onthe grounds that we were on the slippery slope of the Gestapo andpandering to American procedure. The P.M. Lord Addison, Lord PortalAlexander, and Strauss all took. the contrary view.The D.G. said that in his experience, both as a policemanand as head of this department, direct interrogation was likelytobe of very great value. He was thinking of the problem purelyon grounds of national security.The decision was reached that the new procedure shouldbadopted and a suitable announcement made in the House of Commons.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT-RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION20th August.3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS1958.Aud009I had a talk with Martin about the various entries in thePHILBY file. There seemed to me to be a few loose ends. He saidtha't it was all being worked through again and most of my querieshe had already answered. There i no doubt that he knows his casesinside out and backwards.I am still rather inclined to think that it was not a leakagewhich caused MACLEAN and BURGESS to make their hurried departure.It seems to me quite possible that BURGESS had discussed with MACLEANon hie ratern the to memeranda which he had put up te the ForeignOffice on our policy in regard to China.BURGESS had tried to get thEmbassy in Washington to forward them to London and, on getting arefusal, was anxious to put them in himself on his return. He woulldquite naturally have discussed this matter with MACLEAN, as head ofthe American Department, who i.s a friend and would be likely to take asympathetic view. Such a conversationyover a good deal of drink, migwell have led both to express their innermost feelings about Russia,to vent their dislike of U.S. pollicy, and to come to the conclusionthat they must do something to prevent a third world war. At that stMACLEAN might well have talked about his past and his apprehension thait might one day catch up with him. They might then have decided toleave the country - BURGESS taking the initiative. If this is true,it would account for BURGESS' remark that he was going to help a freewho was in difficulties.144.said that he had been asked by Washingtonwhether we would be interested in their comments on our paper aboutPHILBY, since Washingtin appeared to take the view that we were nolonger investigating PHILBY'E case. I said. that I thought thismisunderstanding had possibly arisen because we had expressed theview that an interrogation of PHILBY at this stage could not produceany useful results and might in fact dry up certain sources which couldpossibly help us to find a solution. We had in fact, and were still,making exhaustive enquiries. Meanwhile, it was uselees to interrogatea man who had all the cands in his hands. Until we get somefreshcards,and some pretty high ones, there was nothing in the way of interrogationthat would be profitable. I hoped that he would express this view, withwhich he agreed, upon his superiors: in Washington. They have been urgingus to interrogate immediately on the more sinister allegations againstPHILBY arising from both the GOUZENKO and WOLKOV cases. He asked whetherwe. should be making any interim reports. I said that ve might in a monthor tWo' time when e should obviously have to take stock. This wouldbea normal procedure. We might then conclude that we had come to a dead endand take a chance on interrogation.2st AugustI gave a talk to Mr.of the Danish Intelligence Service.He is responsible for the Civilian side of things, whereas his colleague,I imagine, of equal rank, has similar responsibilities within the ArmedForces. They both work closely together. Althoughhas closeliaison with the police forcesrh has powers to send down his own men,either to ports or frontiers or internal police districts, if he thinksthat this is necessary. His relations with the police appear to besatisfactory. Precautions on matters which concern him cannot beinstituted without his approval.Mr.has recently taken over and has reorganised hisdepartment. It was for this reason that he wished to know somethingabout oun system mn''dthe principles on which we worked. He seemed to meintelligent and friendly. It was clear to me from what he said thatmany of the sections under him vere running little Registries of theirown. I impressed upon him the dangers of this system and the importanceof having a central registry. I think he was impressed by what he saw hereHollie and T gave him lanch at tha Cripps Arms. ne was accompanledbyI should say an ex-soldof Collonel's rank.Miss Chenhalls told me thathad been approached by theRussian Assistant Military Attache, who had asked him to lunch. Theyapparentl had a common interest in sport. In the course of conversationthe Russian had askedwhat the French and the British thought of theCenturion tank.had been non-commital. I said tha I did not thinkany useful purpose would be served by givingtechnical informationto pass on to the Russian, or of using him for a deception channel.would inevitably show his ignorance in the discussion. He should, howeverlceep up the connection.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS1958145.22nd August.Irvine came to tell me that he had attended a meeting at theForeign Office, with Reilly in the Chair, at which Helm, our ex-Ambaesadorin Israel, and Evans, his successor, were present.23rd August.I attended a farewell dinner party to Longley-Cook at theSenior last night. All members of the J.I.C. were present. I hada long conversation with A. C. S. (I) on a variety of subjects.Going home. Longley-Cook said that he was very glad that we hadbeen found to be right in our view that the Bedenham explosion and thesubsequent one in Gibraltar, were not sabbtage but due to some technicaldefect in the Torpex used in the depth charges. I asked him what washappening. He said that a decision had been reached within the lastthree days to scrap all Torpex throughout the Navy, since the view washeld that it was an unsuitable explosive.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDINDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3( 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1968 Aua 2009146.THiS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER S ER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT19682009To-day's J.I.C. was more interesting than most. We discussedthePerimeter Review. There is a certain amount of anxiety aboutthe Sowlet build-up in the West, and particularly by the satellitesvi vis Jugoslavia. Kenneth Strong was inclined to link this upithytilks at Kaesong, which looked as if they were going to break down.The general opinion of the meeting was that Russia might be tryingto work a war of nerwes in the West whille intending to make an all-outdriwe in Korea as soon as the Chinese had had a breather. Such a driwemight be -undertaken by what has been referred to at warious times as the'International Force', equipped with Russian material. There were aconsiderable number of Migs. on the Manchurian Bidecof the border, butagainst this there were no aerodromes in Korea from which they couldoperate in support of advancing troops; all such aerodromes were keptunder constant observation by the U.N. Forces.The Committee felt that an urgent report should go to theChiefs of Staff on Soviet and Chinese Intentions in Korea.We discussed the .N.I's memorandum, entitled 11 Where are wegoing?". I did not feel that it Was a very good document and althoughthe Committee were loud in saying that it stimulated an extremelyinteresting discussion, T do not thhnk that any of them really agreedwith the .I's point of view. They refused to pass it to the Chiefsof Staff with their conments, but did not object to the Ds. of I. shovingit to their respective chiefs. It had already been seen by the FirstLord, who had not approved it.D.M.I. said that he did not see how we coulld criticise the Americanrearmament drive, and although there was a good deal of talk in the U.S.of preventive war, both he and Pat Reilly felt that it would take a greatdeal to push Congress over the edge in that direction. The meeting feltthat until we reached parity, Or something near it, it would be impossibleto get rid of neutralism on the Continent of Europe. By the time I wasasked for my comments, most points had been covered: I did, however, saythat the document gave me the impression that we ought to be sayingsomething to the Americans now which we were not in fact saying. If, asall believed, the D.M.I. was right in his view, the sooner we reachedsomething near parity with the Russians the better. It seemed to me thatany expression of anxiety to the Americans that we were being dragged bythem into preventive war, would only instil distrust.Kenneth Strong made a point that much of the talk about theRussian menace in official quarters was unavoidable if Congress weregoing to be induced to vote the necessary appropriations for Westernrearmament.At the end of the meeting I think the D.N.I. was fairly wellflattened out, although it had all been done very nicely! It was his147."swan song" and nobody wanted to be unkind!THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION13 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS2Lth August.ACT1958Aua2009I had a discussion with Drew, Anthony Simkins and Martinon Drew's deception proposal (Operation INDEX). In the end itwas agreed that it would be better -merely to put little fleckson the scientific journals, indicating that DUFF had been removed,but not to follov this up with actual messages. I agreed to seeLittle about the necessary interception.27th August.Dick came back from leave and I put him into the picture abfar as possible as to what had happened in his absence. I askedhim to pay particular attention to our 5th Column contributionto a J.I.C. paper. It seemed to me important that we should notonly indicate the strength or weaknesses of both the British andforeign potential 5th Colums, but say something about the measuresproposed to counter them in the event of War.BoththeDsofI.and the Chiefs of Staff were a little inclined to exaggerate thepotentialities of the 5th Column: it was therefore necessary to givethem thoroughly reasoned argument.came to say that he had seen the man who hadtold him that his information about 11,00 Communists in the CivillService, quoted by de COURCY, came from two Civil ServantB with whomhe Was in touch; he would, however, be quite ready to give us thenames of these people, with a view to our talking to them direct.Dick is accordingly making an appointment.We think it almost certain that these are the two men thatwe saw early in the year; they had a certain amount of information,which was confirmed from our records, about Communiam in the InlandRevenue. We know most of these people; they are not purgeable asthey are not engaged on secret work. The remainder of what theySaid was somewhat tendencious.T saw Sir Alexander Little and told him about Drew's operationto sow discord in Soviet scientific establishments in Moscow. Hesaid that he had no wish?for any warrant and would instruct Allan tointercept the scientific journal for special treatment.We also discussed our establishment in the new building. We feltvery strongly that considerable economies could be effected by ourselvesand S.I.S. being serviced as far as possible by the Post Office andplacing our equipent in close proximity. Little agreed and said thatas far as he could understand S.I.S. were coming round to our point ofview.148.THE ORIGINAL DOCUMENTRETAINED IN DEPARTMENTUNDER SECTION 3(4) OFTHE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958. Huo 2009149.lst October.I returned from leave to-day.Since I have been away the case against PHILBY seems to besomewhat blacker, although we are still working on what may be purecoincidences. While all the points against him are capable ofanotherexplanation, their cumulative effect is certainly impressive. It nowseems that his first wife made a number of journeys to the Continentat the time when Kim was living with her in London. The inference isthat she was then acting as a courier. These facts were never revealedby Kim, although they must have been within his knowledge. His associatiowith her only ended in 1940.Dick tells me that traces have now been found of E.H. NORMAN whichshow very clearly that he was one of the Cambridge group in 1934-36, andthat at that time he was closely associated with BRADLEY, of the IndianCommunist Group in London. Somewhat regrettably, this matter was notreported to the R.C.M.P. Vickery put a ban on it and Jane Archeracquiesced. Infantile Leftism was not, of course, at that time takenSO seriously as it is now. We are, however, putting the R.C.M.P. inthe picture, although I do not think the information adds a great dealto what they already know.I saw the D.G. who told me about his interview with Bedell-Smith.Bedell Smith was given certain facts about the PHILBY case, which he wastold were still under investigation. It was, however, made clear to himthat up to the moment these could only be regarded as a chain of Co-incidences, all of which might have a different explanation. He seemsto have got a somewhat false impression of this interview and told 'C'that we were now confident that PHILBY was identical with the man mentioneby GOUZENKO and by WOLKOV. This of course is far from the case.2nd October.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS1958.Aua2009150.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS1958.Aua2009Ronnie Howe rang me up to say that a Swede named Sodermann, who hasapparently been assisting the German Police in their reorganisation plans,was anxious that the head of the German Special Branch should come overand make contact with the Special Branch of Scotland Yard. This couldnot be done, however, without the agreement of Kirkman, whom Sodermannbelieved to be our representative in Germany. IAmade it clear to RonnieHowe that Kirkman had nothing to do with us. He said thath would SDinform Sodermann.I talked to D.0.S. about the Cairo Station. Stephens, in a well-expressed letter, thinks that while it is necessary to have someone withan understanding of orientals, the job should not be one for a specialisedofficer who remains in it indefhnitely: he was, therefore, opposed toGiles.I told D.O.S. that in my view it would be better if he consultedFonlkes on the question of the necessity of two or three officers in theCairo Station, since I felt that Foulkes would take armore: rational viewthan Emery.3rd October.Ross of the Foreign Office telephoned to ask for information aboutthe continued activity of the Tass onitoring Station.T told him, when Isaw him at the J.I.C., that we knewthat the Stationwas still operating last Monday, and we had, moreover, a copy of theTass Bulletin dated four days after instructions vere issued for theStation to be closed down. Tsaid that if he wished to challenge theSoviet authorities, I thought we coulld devise a formula for telling themthat H.M.G. were aware that the Station was still in action.151.At the J.I.C. toeday we considered a paper by the Security Serviceon the "Peace' Campaign both here and in the Colonies. There was unanimouspraise for the paper and the members of tha Committee were impressed by theamount of information on the subject that was in our possession.Thistle came to talk to me about the finances of the C.P.Igave him the back history of the machinery by which subsidies have beenreceived since the early days of the Revolution in Russia. He then told methatwe learned that Bob STEWART had recently been to Sheffield:he first made contact with George Henry FLETCHER, Jnr. and had then gone toGeorge Henry FLETCHER, Senior's bakery. He had collected a suitcasebelieved to contain some 220,000.that this was Russianmoney and part of a regular subsidy. We do not know at the moment how itreaches Sheffield.Bob STEWART has brought the money back to London and deposited aboutE10,000 with Sam COHEN in Hertfordshire. The money is presumably requiredin connection with the Communist election campaign.It is interesting to note that both STEWART and FLETCHER have beendoing this job since 1922. I cannot help feeling that had Miss Saunders'History Sheet on C.P. finance been available, thes might all have beendiscovered long ago. This is a clear instance of the value of recordswhich are nearly thirty years old.I had a discussion with Dick, James Robertaon and Simkins.Robertson and Simkins were anxious to getgoing on Anthony (BLUNT)and on Tormy HARRIS, as they felt that something might emerge in regardto Kim. Distasteful as this would have been. I did not wish to interferein any way with the enquiries now proceeding if any useful results werelikely to be obtained. It seemed to me, however, inconceivable that eitherAnthony or Tomny, had they known that Kim had been a Soviet spy while he wasworking for S.I.S. would not have come forward and exposed him. Themost, therefore, that they might discuss would relate to Kim's attitude andactivities from the time of the war of intervention in Spain. WhetherTommy was associated with him at that time I do not know, but it would notbe wholly improbable. In any case, the picture of Kim at that time is afairly clear one: it is his subsequent activities which really interest us.By general agreement the-proposition was turnedTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONLith October.3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS19E8 Auc 2009At the J.I.0. (Directors) meeting 'c' made a statement about theatomic explosion reported in to-day's press. He said that the time anddate of the explosion - I think September 25th - were known. Recordinginstruments, which were now extremely good, pin-pointed the explosion withinaboutfive miles of and in the vicinity of Lake Balkash(s in Eastern Siberia.H.E. The violence of the explosion was the equivalent of about 100,000 tons ofThe Americane had already picked up certain particles of the cloud offHapan. The Canadians were operating as the cloud passed over Canada and we152.were picking it up again over the Atlantic. An analysis of theseparticles would give the positive answer as to the nature circles of the the earth bomb,believedtobeplutonium.Thecloud,apparently,twice before disintegrating to a point where the picking up of radioactive particles becomes unprofitable. Aircraft may have to operateat 35,000 feet.SIGINT material indicates that the whole area near Lake Balkashwas witness the explosion. There is, however, some mystery over the factcordoned off by the M.6.B. and that a number of peopibe went down tothat the explosion took place under extremely unfavourable meteprologicalconditions. If the explosion. was a purely experimental one, it wouldclearly have been more profitable to have it under good weather conditions.The assessment of weather conditions in Eastern Siberia is apparently nowThis, I gather, is due to the fairly stable meteorological conditionsa fairly simple matter, and far simpler than assessing them in the Atlantic inSiberia.Riley told us that Airey was having considerable difficulty incarrying out his task as Chief Intelligence Officer at S.H.A.P.E. Itseems that a good deal of American information fra General Gruenther toGeneral Eisenhover by-passes Airey. I think he intends to raise thisissue, since it violates the whole principle of integration.Riley also read out a report on the Abadan situation. He aidthat as regards foreign exchange and payments, Persia would not Evidence reach acrisis until the end of this year or the beginning of 1952.showed that the Tudeh Party had about 8,000 supporters and 30,000sympathisers. There was no indication, however, that during the disputethe Russians had intervened. Clearly they had felt that everythingwas going their way and that had they done S0 they might have interferedwith the purely nationalist lines on which the crisis had arisen anddeveloped,i in a manner highly gratifying to the Russians. There was,however, evidence that they had recently made anproaches to the Persiansoffering them economic and technical assistance.I apoke to (I) after the meeting and told him of my talkwhich the had been responsible for the raid on the Londonderry Barracksin middle of June the Roscatta Group of the I.R.A. (the "Ginger" GroupDublin with Liam Archer and Dan, fhom which it had transpired that insome months ago) had been contemplating similar action on one of ouraerodromes five to seven miles outside Londonderry. The Irish clearlyhad a good source in the Roscatta Group which they were anxious tosafeguard; it was, therefore, essential that if any warning was to begiven to Northern Ireland it should be of a Barracks, general kind, urging possible that stepinViewofwhathadhappenedatLondonderryeveryshoulld be taken to tighten up security of damps of arms and ammunitioat Air Force stations.I lunched withNothing of specis 1S in aterpst wasdiscussed.ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS1968. Aua 2009made to Jack MORTON to take over the S.B. in the Malayan Union on hadWe had a staff meeting, when D.0.S. discrosed the offer secondme ha befor two years or more. At the D.G's request he had seen Lloyd, who153.said that it was a matter of national importance that MORTON should beoffered the job. Authority had therefore been given to the Governorto discuss the proposition direct with MORTON.Hollis said, and I agreed with him, that it was difficult to seehow MORTON could be of much fallue to us in the future if he stayed formorthan two years in Malaya. The only argument in favour of the project yoube that we should have someone in charge of S.B. who had the right ideas aIntelligence, although I think this equally appiied to "George" Jenkin. Icannot helpfeeling that he would not have resigned had there been anypossibility of doing anything useful.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION5th October.3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSAT 1958Ronnie Howe rang me up tordraw my attention to ue COtROYE2009Intelligence Digest for October which contained a diatribe against thePolice, the Home Office, and ourselves, and also an allegation thatwas a Communist. Howe seems to think that something oughtto be done about this.I reported the matter to the D.G., who spoke to Baker of the HomeOffice who suggested that I should go over and see him, since it seemed thathe Chief Constable who had written a letter to de COURCY in highly impropeterms was likely to beformerlynow retired.6th October.Anthony Simkins brought me a telegram from Patterson which indicatedthat Hoover was extremely annoyed about 10' having told Bedell-Smith theorigins of the case against MACLEAN. Hoover, in his reply to the D.G'sletter suggesting that Hoover might aquaint Bedell-Smith with the Facts,said that this was not really his business but had suggested that anapproach should be made to A.F.S.A. This had been carried out byin Washington. General Canine, the head of the rganisation, wasaway, but his Deputy, Admiral Wenger, said he saM no harm in Bedell-Smithbeing told, the more So since he had already been informed about the Sourcein general terms in his capacity 99 heed of U.S.C.I.B. The .G. naasubsequently written to Hoover and told him what had been done. Theprobability is that in suggesting an approach to A.F.S.A., Hoover hadpreviously arranged with Canine that bjections should be raised, but thatin Canine' abbence Wenger had sold the pass, much to Hoover's annoyance.Theallegation now is, that alt ough the action by 'c' was carried out withWenger's knowledge, it was not done with his approval. We have no recordhere of what passed betweenland Wenger, but I shall be speaking to'0' about this.Gurney has been assassinated in Malaya, which will complicatematters very considerably there, although I believe tha t he has notbeen regarded as a particularly uccessful Governor.154.8th October,I gave a talk to Colonial Police Officers on the usual lines.I also talked to three Jordanians., sent over by Glubb Pasha.It was clear that they would have considerablle difficulty in applying thenormal security procedure to their own county. One of their main toublesis that the Police have not got the co-operation of the public, andanother thing, of course, is that most of their Ministers are probablycorrupt. Only one of them could speak much English, but they seemed tothink that they had learned something.I attended a meeting at Scotland Yard to-day, with the CommissionerofPolice in the Chair, to consider' possible action with regard to pages6,7, and 8 of the "Intelligence Digest" for October, 1951.Nott-Bower, Howe, Burt and the Legal Adviser were representingthe Metropolitan Police, and Baker and Cornish attended on behalf of theHome Office.I think the meeting was fairly satisfied with the informationI gavethatis the Chief Constable who vrote the letter to de COURCY criticising M.the Metropolitan Police, and the Home office. Howe was particularlyanxious that some action should be taken, but the general view vas tharlegal action on the basis of the information available would be extreme?,difficult. A direct approach toat this stage, even if he wereprepared to admit he was the writer of the letter, would not be likely toget us very far. It was felt, however, that the Home Secretary couldjustifiably take de COURCY up where the latter says that the evidence ofthis former high Police Official is, of course, available to any honestgovernment which wants to investigate. In fact if he were not to do So, imight be taken as an admission of de COURCY' implication tha t the presentGovernment is dishonest. It was to be expected that de COURCY'E reply wouprobably be a negative one. If So, the matter could be taken up again aftithe Elections by the new Labour or Conservative Home Secretary, with theultimate aim and object of dealing with the whole question in the House ofCommon,9th October.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1968. Aua 2009I lunched withHe told me that he had come intocontact with H.C. PIECK, who had asked him travelling to be his exhibition. representative The purpose inhad London of PIECK'S taken in an connection organisation instinctive with is dislike a to plan promote for to PIECK a inter-European and had heard trade. from his Van own Moyland contact155.that PIECK had something of a revolutionary past but was now consideredto be all right.I toldthat we knew about PIECK; that we had seen himwith the knowleage or une Dutch Government, and that we had reached moreor less the same conclusion as they had.The fact remained, however,that PIECK had, a good many years ago, subborned a British official andthat we could not, therefore, wholly trust him. He was on the gate'and this might account for his wishing to appointas his agentin the U.K.is going to turn the proposal down.Reilly telephoned to say that he had discussed the MACLEAN casewith Kit Steel, when the latter was in this country recently, and had toldhim about the cheques. Steelnov wanted to pass this information toBedell-Smith in order to promote goodwill.I said that I would consider the matter and let him know.Reilly also told me tha't the story about the eheques had reachedRoger Makins through Cobbold of the Bank of England, who had received theinformation from: a Director of Morgan Grenfell.loth October.I saw Hill about Chapman PINCHER'S article disclosing the identityof the atomic physicist PENNEY and the reasons for his visit to the U.S.A.This was a direct infringement of a D. Notice requesting that atomicphysicists employed on weapon development should not be referred to.It has transpired that Admiral Thompson, has Hotted his copybookby agreeing to publication with reference to the Ministy of Supply.We agreed that it was for the Ministry to deal with the matter.l1th October.HACLGRW)VOUF looked i. ne aiscussed the OURLON case. Viotor thoughtthat Tess could hap quite a lot about PEACH. He thought, too, that therewere others who should help in a general way and he was prepared to pressthem to do so if the information abou their past did not remain on the recto beyised by future generations. It was clear that what these peoplemight be willing to say would have to be handled by those actually workingon the cases. It was agreed that Victor would give the matter fubtherconsideration and help us in any other way he could.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPABTMENT UNDER SECTION:3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 19582009I also told him about the bloweup in the F.B.I. referring to theapproach to A.F.S.A. He said that Wenger was quite definite abou there156.being no bjection, and that he himself said nothing to Bedell-Smithexcept in the most general terms.Reilly spoke about the Egyptian crisis. From an interview betwthe Ambassador and the King, it seemed that the latter was extremelyembarrassed by the action of Nahas and anxious to help us as much as hecould. He thought that the declaration had been made for purely internalpolitical reasons, and there was no doubt that the Government had for themoment been able to cover up their deficiencies on the economic frontthrough rallying public opinion on a national issue. This, however, wouldnot last. The King' said tha he would do his utmost to restrain anyattempts to cut off supplies from the British Forces on the .Canal.The Persian situation did not seem to show any improvement, andthere is a definite feeling that the Americans have on the whole behavedextremely badly; they have, moreover, been told so.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS1968. Aua2009.157.James Robertson came to talk to me about the SHAG case, whichseems to be going well. The difficulty is to supply high gradeinformation which will give the necessary bui ld-up for deception.our own C.E. needs are being kept in mind. So far we have exploited thecase fairly successfully on the C.E. front and have gained knowledgeabout nethods of communicatior and the registration numbers of cars used.12th October.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS1968Aua200915th October:Two Italian officers from the Italian espionage and C.E Service,subordinait tes of General Broccoli, a reont visitor, have been seng a numberof officers here. I gave them the usual talk about the organisationThey seemed intelligent, although one of them asked Roger how it waspossible when the Italians had their records full about PONTECORVOwehadnot consulted them. The answer, of course, was that at thematerial time we were at war with Italy and therefore consultation wouldhave been rather difficult!Anthony telephoned about Jackie HEWITT, who has once morethreatened to commit suicide. He walked out a day or two ago andhas not been heand of since. Anthony wonderad whether he ought todo anything. I advised him to do nothing, at any rate for the timebeing.Jack MORTON telegraphed to know whether if necessary he couldcome back for consultation. I have agreed.I left in the afternoon for Rugby in orde.r to lecture toRyton Police College to-morrow.16th October.I gave a lecture at Ryton Police College tn some 200 policemen,mostly of the rank of Sergeant, drawn from all brances of the Force.158.I discussed first the wider implicati ions of sharing defencesecrets not only with the Colonies and Commonwealth but also withthe N.A.T.O. Powers, and described how our organisation had beenextended for the purpose of achieving Closer co-operation andimproved standards of security. I then discussed the principleson which our own security work in this country is conducted, withparticular reference to the relationship between Intelligence andInvestigation on the one hand and Protective Security on the 0 ther.It is difficult to say whether the talk was of interest tothe audience, since although a large number of questions were askedin the second half of the meeting, they seemed to have little bearingon the subject of my lecture. I put this point to the Commandant andhis staff, but they seemed to think that my lecture was the kind ofthing the Police ought to have.The course, which lasts six months, is by no means confinedto police matters.After my return from Ruyton, Wing Commander Crouchley telephonedto say that some complain had been received by the Treasury fromde COUROY about enquiries into his finances in Paris. I told Crouchleythat Bridges was already handling this. Hill had previously told methat he had had an interview with Bridges, who was worried about theseaccusations and was anxious for advice. He said that he had spokento Donovan of the Treasury who had assured hint that no such enquirieshad been made. Hill said that if this was really so, he wouldrecommend aoletter to de COURCY. stating that as far as could beascertained no such enquiries had been made by the Treasury, and askinghim for chapter and verse.It appears that both these doctors are Communists, and itwas lenown that they had been contemplating emigrationnbehin theIron Curtain, proabaly to Poland. We have nBeslared by the MedicalResearch Council that they have had no access to/material, and Harwellwere warned before the visit was made. One of them, however, hasbeenexperimenting with some substance which has a bearing on the hydrogenbomb.17th October.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958Aua209159.Stallard, Assistant D.I.B. Paiistan, came to see me. I askedhim about the general state of security in Pakistan. He thought itwas reasonably good, but T did not thinkhis account was particullarlyreassuring. I told him how we were organised and he subsequentlyvisited various sections. He is an assistant - to Kazim Raza.18th October.At the J.I.C. (Directors) meeting to-day the War Office representativeproduced two copies of a report from Tokyo, one of them in full and theother expurgated. This showed fairly clearly that anything relatingto China, Formosa and the hillipines was for American eyes only.Onthe other hand. we appear to get everything which elates to Korea.D.N.I. said that the Russian whalers had left the Antarctic; theywere numbers 1 - 16, but No.1 did not sail. This may be an indicationthat superstition cannot be wholly eradicated even by a Marxian State!Things in Egypt seem to be going reasonably well so far. Onthe Arab side Ibn Saud appears to be openly with us, ome of the othersmay be but daren't say So. Selfton Delmer has reported from Khartoumthat Egypt has done herself a lot of harm in the Sudan.In Persia it was said that the Tudeh Party were lying low, but thatthe penetration was considerable, although the Army seemed to be carryingout a purge.In Irag, Nuri appears to be friendly. Although a revision of theTreaty is desired, there is no wish to kick out the R.A.F.On Korea the D.N.I. expressed the view that the delay in Kaesongmight be due to a desire to concert action in other parts of the Far East,e.g. Indo-China and Burma, and that we ought to write a paper for theChiefs 0f Staff, indicating what the Chinese can do in the next sixmonths. From the weather point of view, the most favourable periodwould be November to March.Reilly said, completely-.off-the-necond, that the mudsle in theSecurity Council over Abadan was about as bad as it could be. and thatthe action of the Government in taking the matter to U.N.0. had beenentirely contrary. to all official advice.This IS A COPYIN ORIGINAL DEPARTMENT DOCUMENT RETAINEDACT 3 (4) OF 1968 THE PUBLIC UNDER RECORDS SECTION2009160.2.D.E./A. mentioned that S.I.S. had issued a circularinstructing their staff to report if they were ever in touch withaliens and Communists. It was not felt that there was any generalneed for such a circular to be issued by us, but D.D.G. would give thematter further considerati on.3. It was agreed that from time to time the Board woulld considerthe progress made by A.7 and the principles being adopted by it.4.D.E./A. undertook to consult S.L.B. and B.1 and 2 regarding theposition which has arisen since the abolition of the Press Seotion.General Lockhart came to see me. He is taking over from Briggsin Malaya. I told him about our organisation and how it fitten in tothe general Intelligence picture. I told him that the real deficiencyfrom our poinb of view was a lack of Intelligence off the ground, forwhich the .Bs and the Police were really responsible. He askedme aboutJenkin. I said that I knew Jenkin well and I could, not believe that hewould have done what he did do unless he had been pretty well at hiswits end. He was only an adviser to S.B. and clearly his advice wasnot being acted upon.I discussed the position of Morton. and told him that we wereprepared to make the yacrifice if the present structure would make itpossible for Morton to do a useful job. I was not, however, whollysatisfied on this point.19th October.Kennedy of the R.U.C. rang me up about a trawler which had beenbombed near Archangel.and is now in Belfast. It had been suggested tohim by Immigration that he shoulld interview the crew. He did not wish toS0 if this has already been done by the Admiralty. I undertook to ringN.I.D. and to ring him back if he was required to do anything.I spoke to Hilken,w told mne that they already had a report andnothing further was required.Hollis spoke to me about a rather awkward case of a man calledwho is a legal adviser to I.C.I. and has complained that he is not inthe confidence of the Board. He suspects that this is due to adversereports from M.1.5 and threatens legal action.The fact is that we did give a warning to I.C.I. and that they arereluctant to take him on the Board, where highly secret matters may bediscussed.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS1958Aug2009.161.Reed tells me that one of the twelve Poles for deportation is tryingto get a visa for Eire through his solicitors. I said that we would notobject, but that we ought to tell the Irish. Haldane Porter has arrangedto do this through the C.R.0:, on the understanding that if any questionsare asked the Irish will say that they got their information from thenewspapers.22nd October.Morton has telegraphed to say that he has turned down the job ashead of 3.B. Malayan Union, but has offered to do anything he can inthe meantime to assist. He thinks it a good think that the D.G. shouldgo to Malaya, where there are three difficult questions to solve, one ofthem being the desirability of Gray, the present Commissioner, remainingin office. He seems to doubt whether the S.B operateserficientlywith its present chain of command.The more I hear of this business the more certain I am that"George" Jenkin must really have been at his wits end when he inducedthe Deputy Commissioner to issue orders placing the S.B. under hisdirect command and making him responsible to theI passed on Morton's views to the D.G. We have also telegraphedtotheD.G.,givinghimashortresumeofthepositioninWashington,where the position has been complicated by Bedell-Smith's appeal to thePresident. At the moment the issue seems to be a domestic one, butifthedecisiongoesagainstHoover,hemaytryandtakeitoutofGeoffrey Patterson. In that case there might be some point in theD.G. going to Washington on his way back.I spent the weekend with Victor, where I sav Anthony. T hadanopportunity of talking to him privately. I told him that there wasstill no firm evidence as to the whereabouts of Guy BURGESS and MACLEAN,but that it seemed incredible that as their names and photographs werein the hands of the continental police and press they should be livinganywhere this side of the Iron Curtain. I then asked him againwhathethought could be Guy's motive in going away: after all, he must haveknown that he would probably be sgeezed dry and put in the waste paperbasket. Was there, therefore, anything else on his mind which if disclosedwould have nvolved him in a worse fate. Anthony seems to have changedhis attitude to some extent from the first time I discussed BURGESS!departure. I asked him again whether he thought the relationship betweenBURGESS and MACLEAN was such that BURGESS would have made a sacrifice.Anthony thought this was unlikely, and I had a clear impression that hethought there was something sihister behind BURGESS' action,. He thenreferred to certain sums of money in notes which had been in BURGESSpoesession. I asked him whether he was referring to the notes whichBURGESS brought back from America. He said no; he recollected that therehad been at least one, and possibly two occasions, when BURGESS had beenin possession of notes. He thought he had mentioned this, or that wehad got it from HEWITT. I asked him to try and recollect the dates.He was unable to do s0. I think he must know more than he has told us,but clean he is torn by a sense of loyalty to an old friend.I also had a private discussion with Victor and Tess. Tess knowsa girl who was formerly a secret member of the Party but has had, shebelieves, nothing to do with it for ten years. I do not know to whom she162.is referring it may bewife. Tess would be willing toput us into touch with this person, provided it were possible thatthe information did not go further than Dick and myself. I said thatone of the difficulties we were up against was that we had had to reviseour opinion about these sort of people. Formerly we had been inclinerto take the vie that t ose who had committed youthful indiscretionsand had not shown up in the records for ten years could now be regardedas cleared, but in the light of recent experience we have had toreviseour views. I thought, therefore, that before we made any approachto a person of this kind we should have to know all about their presentactivities. We could not do this without a wider disclosure of thename, for reasons that she would clearly understand. At the momentthe position has been left like that, although I propose to return tothe charge.I left with Victor a note about the Polish defector, MARKOWSKI,who wants a job as a zoologist. He said couid.THS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION23rd October.(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS1968Aua2009Tommy Harris telephoned to say that he had just got back fromMallorca. He asked me whether I could dine on Saturday, when Anthonywould be there. I was unable to do this, SO he then asked me to dinnernext week, which I accep.ted.T.C. shows that Kim and his wife have both dined with Tommy.Kim explained his retirement from S.I.S.: he said that he had beentreated very generously and did not seem to have any recriminationeto make against his old firm. His position in the matter he fullyunderstood. Tommy, on the other hand, seems to be rather indignantabout the whole thing and will doubtless tackle me when I see him.I have, therefore, asked Dick and B.2 to consider precisely what linethey wish me to take. We believe that Tpmmy could help us veryconsiderably, but we have to tbe sure thatyany discussion on thequestion of Kim it would be necessary to have a guarantee that nothinggoestback. I am going to try and get Tommy to come up here so thatwe can go into the whole question of BURGESS and his friends in someconsiderable detail. This will lead us on in the case of Kim.I lunched withHe is going to attend the Conferenceat S.H.A.P.E., where counter-intelligence matters will be discussed.There will be representatives from both the D.E.C. and the Surete,and from G-2 and C.I.A.said that the worst of the French was that they neverplanned ahead. The same, to some extent, applied to the Americans,who met round a table without any very clear idea of what they wanted.The British, on the other hand, always had a cut and dried plan andinvariably carried the day. He admired the British for this and fortheir general ability in handling Conferences, although they frequent lyproduced a false impressior that they were being too clever and tricky.I agreed with his views and pointed out that the British in generalsettled a large number of matter on a lower level: they startedfrom the bottom upwards instead of from the top downwards. Theresult was that many things were settled on a level where the questionvas really understood and settled in a reasonable way, as ve all decision knewthat once these indirect problems reached higher authority, and MACLEAN arested on a tos of coin. He asked me about BURGESS and163.I gave him the usual answer, that there was no firm evidence as to theirwhereabouts. It is of counse true. He mentioned, too, during adiscussion ofwas generally regarded asbeing an agent of British Intelligence. I managed to turn the con-versation immediately without givingany answer.24th October.I attended the concluding meeting of the course arranged by the 121Portr& Travel group for Dominion Security Officers. All the Dominionswere represented except New Zealand. They seemed to have enjoyed thecourse, but said that they would have liked to have heard rather moreabout our acnal experiences during the last war. I think this criticismis probably right, since they get practically nothing from B. Divisionand had never heard of the London Reception Centre.I attended the J.I.C. Directors meeting to-day, which was heldin the afternoon on account of to-morrow's Blections.Reilly told us that the action by Middle East Forces in cutting offthe oil had caused very considerable donsbernation and was obviously avery potent weapon. The Ebyptians had clearly not envisaged anythingof the kind; their immediate stocks were very short and they realised thatwithout oil t ey would draw upon themselves considerable fire from theirown people. The American Amb assador had evidently been somewhatperturbed and had made representations to our Ambassador, as he thoughtthat a continuance of this policy might in the long run make it moredifficult to reach a settlement.'c' told the meeting thathadshown a deterioration in the morale and organising ability of the SovietForces in that area.Sir David Kelly, in his final despatch before leaving Moscow, moreor less agrees with the views of the J.I.C. about the likelihood orunlikelihood of war, but thinks it important the the West should becareful not to provoke the Russians more than is absolutely necessary.25th October.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE EPUBLIC RECORDSACT 1968Aua2009164.ITHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS29th October.ACT1958Aug2009I talked to Hollis and Cookie about the Agenda for the ImmigrationOfficers' Conference and the question of a possible course here for Os.We areto discuss this to-morrow with Ruck.I talked to Hill about Maxwell-Fyfe, our new Home Secretary, who,according to de COURCY, is one of his friends. If Maxwell-Fyfe believesin de COURCY and reads the Digest, he is likely to take a pretty poorview of this Department I thought, therefore, that we ought to have somekind of memorandum ready which will make it cllear to Maxwell-Fyfe the kindof person with whom he is dealing. Hill is going to get out a note.A telegram, which has reached us through the C.R.O., shows that theD.G. has abandonedithe idea of going to Malaya, on the ground that Mortonhas made his decision. He notified the Colonial Office from New Zealandso he would not have had my telegrarn lembodying Morton's views about thelocal situation aind favouring a visit by the D.G. I think the decision,however, is the right one, since Morton made it clear that the D.G. wouldbe involved in a whole host of police matters, not least the retention ordismissal of Gray.165.3oth October.Ruck camne for a eeting with Hollis, Hinchley-Cooke andmyself, to discuss the Agenda for the Immigration Officers' Conference.It was agreed between us that the item in regard to SpeciallBranch taking over security serutiny of British subjects should bedealt with Off the Agenda. We made it clear. that although we realisedthe limitations imposed upon Immigration officers at ports where thetraffic was particularly heavy, we would not like them to leave thesecurity check entirely to S.B. as we thought that there were certainaspects of these cases over which they helped us in the past and werelikely to do so in future. From our pointsof view the more peoplewho could exercise some sort of supervision the better.We a 1so arranged with Ruck that Irvine would be present for thediscussion on Post Report, and that Hollis and I would attend two ofthe other meetings. It was agreed that I should put forward asuggestion about a course for Immigration Officers.31st October.I saw NewsamHe suggested introducingme to the Home Secretary, but T declined as I had to go straight onto a meeting of the J.I.C. He seemed pleased about his new boss,who he said understood Home Office problems, having done a good deal ofwork for them in a legal way.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION1st November,3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1968.Aua2009I saw Brigadier Khan, D.M.I. designate for Pakistan, UO wromI gave a short talk about the work of the office.uiid L166.It was agreed at the suggestion of D.C. not to accept thesuggestion which had been made of giving information to the LordChancellor's Office regarding the Communist J.P's.D.B tabled a revised instruction regarding the cardingof Communist sympathisers and this was approved.Ronnie Howe came to show me a letter which he had receivedfrom de COURCY, intimating that now the new Home Secretary was inpower Howe would be free to come and stay a week-end with Be COURCYand talk things over. He nad snown this leiter to the Comissionerand. of course had turned the offer down.I do not quite know why he took the trouble to come overand tell me personally!2nd November.I attended the Immigration Officers' Conference.Irvine made a short speech on Post Report which was reallyexcellent. Without any notes he summarised all the factsand was never for one moment at a loss for a word. TheImmigration Officers were visibly impressed.167.I then made my offer to give a course and thankedthe Immigration Officers for all they were doing for us. Nothingwas settled about a course, and although I. think that most of theofficer would like one for themselves or for their juniors, therewoulld be difficulty in people being spared away from their jobs.One officer Suggested that possibly we might send someone downto talk to junior ranks.I lunched with David Williams, who has been back fromAbadan for about two weeks. I asked him who he thought was to blamefor the present situation. He said he did not think that theCompany could be blamed; they had done an enormous amount for thelocal population but most of the money they had given to the Governmenthad been squandered or taken by corrupt Persian officials. In spiteof this they had made at first an offer of 259, which they hadincreased to 50;6 on account of the terms given by the Americansin adjacent territories. This was on the point of going throughwhen Rasmara was assassinated. None of the present Persian Governmentreally had the interests of the population at heart and they weretotally incapable of running the oil industry themselves. Hethought that Stokes had made a mistake in saying that he had onlycome out for ten days - he should have said that he was preparedto stay for ten years. The whole business was like buying a carpet.The second mistake had been to leave Persia; there was an opportunityat the beginning of October when Moussadek showed signs of weakeningand put forward slightly modified proposalls which would have enabledthe negotiations to be drawn out - it did not matter what peopletallced about so long as they went on talking! If thenegotiationshad been protracted for about six months, the Government would havereally begun to feel the pinch and would probably have been preparedto make far greater concesaions. Once we left the area it wouldbe extremely difficult to get backagain. He said that forrison'sstatement, that the 300 employees could not be expeoted to put upwith the conditions Which had been forced upon tham, was entirelywrong; they would not have minded in the least staying on, eventhough they had little to do. Once, however, Moussadek's suggestionsfor further talks had been turned down, it was inevitable that theircontracts would be terminated and that they would have to go.Young and Turney of the D.S.I. came on a visit to the office.I was anxibus that they should do this as I have felt for a long timethat Young view all our activities with the greatest scepticism.I gave, them a talk for about an hour and then passed them to Hollis,who finally passed them on to Dick. I think they got a healbellyfull and I have since had an appreeiative letter in which Youngsays that he was much impressed. He does not say whether theimpression was favourable or unfavourable!3rd November.I dined with Tommy Harria and his wife last night. We didnot get on to any discussion of officer matters until after dinner,when Tomrny expressed anxiety about Anthony' indiscretions.RLua168.Anthony had told Tommy that the American, Bernard MILLER,vas returning to this country to study and that he intended toresume touch with him. Tomy had told Anthony that he considered thismost unwise. He said that he had never been wholly satisfied withthe peculiar story of Bernard MILLER, who had become acquainted withGuy BURGESS on board ship, had visited Geneva, been present whenBURGESS was packing his clothes to depart, and had returned to Americaimmediately afterwards. Toramy thought it quite conceivablle that MILLERmight have played some part on behalf of the Russians, or, alternatively,that he might have been an agent of the F.B.I. Even if he were wrongin both of these assumptions, it was quite possible thar MILLER might nowbe acting for the F.B.I. and that information detrimental to Anthonymight go back to them. On all these grounds he had strongly advisedAnthony to have nothing to do with Bernard MILLER and had told himthat if he, Anthony, had no objection he thought of mentioning the matterto me and asking my advice.I told Tommny tha't he could tell Anthony that 3 entirely agreedwithhis, Tommy' view, I was sure that if Anthony did not pullhimself together he might well be jeopardising the whole of his career.We then talked about Anthony's relatione with Jackie HEWITT.Tomny, of course, knev about the latest incident and had stronglyadvised Anthony to break with HEWITT and not to go on visiting himin St. Mary'e Hospital.This led to a discusaion about Guy BURGESS, and of a hunchwhich Tommy had just after his disappearance that he might have gonebehind the Iron Curtain. He recalled that he mentioned this a t myfirst interview with him and Anthony; that D had asked him what madehim think 80, and that he had been unable to give any concrete reasons.I had then told him and Anthony that BURGESS and MACLEAN had been tracedto France. It was clear to me that Tommy now felt rather onfirmedin his original belier, although he had always been worried by theidea that, whatever his potentialities, nobody could have serdousllyemployed an individual who was SO notoriously unreliable.He feltthat if this had been a Bmoke-screen to cover up more sinister activities,BURGESS was a far clleverer man than-he had ever believed him to be.During the whole evening PEACH was hardly ntioned and noreference was made to his dismissal. Tormy did say at one point ofthe conversation: "I suppose you have seen PEACH and got all theinformation you want from him?". It was quite clear to me that theidea that there could be anything wrong with PEACH had never enteredthe head of either Tommy or Hilda.A8 I was going away, Tommy took me out to the car. I toldhim that we had no positive evidence Df the whereabouts of BURGESSor MACLEAN, but that there were a number of points where I thoughthe might be able to hep us. I coulld not go into them now, as Dickhad a good many of the details. Coule he spare the time to look inon us one day next week? He readily accepted and we fixed 11 'clockon Monday.In the course of, thig final conversation, Torrmy did mentionthat he had driven Benes about at the request of BURGESS and that thiswas in 1939 when BURGESS was working for D.During the whole of our discussion I coulld detect nothing thatwould suggest that Tommy was not being wholly frank and genuine.THIS IS A COPY169.ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION5th November.(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSAT1958Auo200oI told Anthony Simkins about my evering TommyHe seemed quite happy about the position.Tommy Harris came up and he Dick and I had a talk for abouttwo hours. Tommy outlined his ovin position. He had run away fromschool the age of fifteen and gone to the Slade. He did not goto. either University but contmed to study art and to take ancertainamount of interest in his father's business. He first met Anthonyhe thinks somewhere about 1936, when Anthony on behalf of Victor wasbuying a picturd. In 1938 he had somehow been placed in touch withIt was not until 1939 that he first met BURGESS - he thinKsthrough Anthony. His work consisted in driving people about in his fastcar, in particular Benes. He abandoned this job as being more or lessa waste of time and went to America to realise dollars on certain pictureswhich had been deposited in the U.S. After the collapse of France hewas approached to join Station 17. There was a meeting betweenCommander Peters, Burgess and Kim, at which Anthony was also present.This was the first occasion on which he had met Kim. Tommy' job was tDget to know all the names of the camp,wh were of various ationalitiesand some of them highly intelligent people. He had to report on theirmorale and look after their welfare. His wife did the cateringandcooking. The only points of interest that emerged were that Kim andBURGESS were in fact responsible for the memoranda on policy, and inparticular one which related to a proposal to assassinate Franco.Therewere innumerable rows, and finally Gubbins had taken over and militarisedthe camp. It was at this stage that Tommy joined us and, presumably,when Kim went to M.I.6.We then discussed Anthony. We told Tommy we thoughtthatthere Were a number of matters on which he could Help us, but that up tonow his memory had been extremely hazy; we thought in fact that he coulddo better. Tommy said that Anthony was probably reluctant to tell usns wrote lire story, wiun allusions to his frieuls, uuless UG factewere really relevant. He could not, of course, know whether they wereor whether they weren't without reference to our files, but his personalloyalties re.such that he would be unlikely to disdose informati on unleshewere convinced tha't there was a really important national interest.Tommy entirely saw our point and thought he coulld probably put Anthonyin the right frame of mind. We said that we would like to think thisover.I discussed with Hill the case ofWe drafted a letter,atthe request of the Foreign Office, stating our reasons for not wishingthat a prosecution should take place. They are, broadly, that ifhs put in the witness box or subpoenaed andEries to defend himselfby saying that the payments he made, being of a secret nature, no receiptwere kept,is bound to be questioned on the nature of his work.Ifthisgetspublicity, we shall almost certainly lose our informants andmay have our office closed down at a time when its continued existence isvitally important. Moreover, there is likely to be considerable170.political seandal involving the Foreign Office. I have been toldthat if our view is upheld, we may be asked by the Foreign Office topay E9,000. In di scussing this with Con T have suggested that ourreply should be that we would be quite prepared to ask the Treasuryfor this sum as a special grant, but that in doing so we should, Ofcourse, have tto disclose all the facts: these wo ulld include an admissionthat, in spite of the fact thathad gone to Cairo with a warningas to his honesty, no proper supervision wag maintained over his account6th November.We had a special meeting of the J.I.C. to-day to discussthe state of Intelligence and methods for improving it. This wastaken in conjunction with the paper on defectors, with which I agreedsubject to the proviso that if the Government refused to finance theproposals from the open vots, we could not do more than what we weredoing now without turning ourselves into a welfare organisation.Iput in a memorandum to this effect for the recond. I accepted thesecurity risk of an additional number of defectors being sent to thiscountry. Personally I doubt very much whether the proposals will resultin any incressein the number of defectors. A great deal is made ofthe idea that if one man goes back, the whoe policy receives a set-back. The fact remains that two or three who have gone back do notappear to have had any effect on the numbers, and in any case the Russiaiinvariably misrepresent the position to their own people. on the otherhand, nobody wishes to do anything which may possible prejudice futuredefection, since it is one of our few sources of Intelligence aboutRussia.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 ACT (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS1968.Au2009.171.7th November.At his own request Tommy HARRIS called to see me to-day.He said he had just heard from a friend of his the storyof a party attended by Donald MACLEAN about a week before his disappearanceat which, when exceedingly drunk, MACLEAN had made the comment You-knowI am the English Alger HIES". Harris was anxious for us to have the storyas soon as possible and therefore came round with it immediately. Dicktold Harris,but without, we hoped, discouraging him, that we already hadthis information and that it was reasonably well corroborated.Tommy made no further mention of PHILBY.I took the opportunity of telling Tommy that after carefulconsideration we thought it woulld serve a useful purpose for him to havethe talk with BLUNT which he had suggested.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED8th November.IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOCTIONOF THE PWBLIC RECORDS1050Reilly reported at the J.I.C. to-day on the complaint fromS.H.A.P:E. that the J.I.C. were not supplying them with enough inforretionThey claimed that they were now getting better and quickeb information fromthe Americans.The real fact of course is that S.H.A.P.E. are trying to operateon a wartime footing, with a staff which is not capable of evaluatingdetailed Intelligence. They want informatio about almost everything thatis going on, a Commitment which can easily be fulfilled by the many officerswho are falling over each other Pentagon Building, but not by the hard-worked staffs of the Intelligence Services here.In the present state of affairs, it is obviously much betterthat S.H.A.P.E. should receive properly digested Intelligence, even thoughit may be a bit old.I talked to the D.M.I. about a request of his that we should sendaC.E.officer to Austria. I said that with our present commitments thiswas not really possible, but suggested that we might discuss the problemith a suitable officer here in London.D.M.I. felt it was essential that somebody should go out from here,as otherwise it would be ddfficult to assess the problem. I was unable togive him any assurance that we should send someone at the moment, since wewere being heavily pressed by the Middle East.'o' and I spoke to Patrick Reilly abouttc' agrees withour point of view that any prosecution would be likely to jeopardise ourorganisations in Egypt. The matter is to be considered by Strang.Events in Egypt seem to be moving towards a show-down, particularlyif the Military get their way in regard to the impesition of full sanctions.The Ambassador is opposed to this, as he feels that the economic consequenceswould only rally Egyptian population round the present Egyptian Government,and S0 make a final settlement more difficult.In Irag the situation is not too good. the ultra-nationalistopposition are gaining strength and are openly advocating the abrogation ofour existing Eready. Nuri is at the moment basically on our side, but hemight at any moment be assassinated.172.At the Appointments Board to-day I mentioned that the D.M.I.had given me details of a cable he had received from B.G.S.I. BritishTroops in Egypt supporting the demand for anti-terrorist officers inthe Middle East. It was agreed to draft a suitable reply for theD.M.I. defining the spheres of responsibilities as between ourselvesand the Army authorities on security matters. It was noted that theArmy needed help in personnel with anti-terrorist experience as wellas we ourselves.We thereforee agreed that the D.M.I. should allsobe requested tolsend a telegram to General Kirkman, C.C.G., asking himif he would receivewith a view to ascertaining if therewere any ex-Palestinian Police officers serving with C.C.0. who wouldbe time. available to assist both the Army and ouralves in Egypt at the presentTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDNDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS1958.2009.Brooman-White rang up to say that he was now P.P:S. at the WarOffice and wished to discuss security. I put him on to Roger.9th November.Burt came to see me. He told me he had heard a rumour thatthe Commissioner would be retiring before long and wondered whether Ihad heard anything about it or of his possible successor. He did notwish to retire himself, although he was in a position to take his pension,unless the new Comissioner gave him the same support as the present one.He told me that he was more or less allowed to run his own show andthat whenever it was necessary he got the Commissionen's full backing.I told him that I had heard nothing of Scott's retirement andthe second part of the question did not therefore arise.I attended a meeting of a Committee set up to atudy the problemof the integration of the Secret Intelligence Services. set up as aresult of Norman Brook'e report. Winnifrith was in the Chair, wirthPatrick Reilly representing the Foreign Office, Sinclair representing S.I.$.Martin Watson representing J.I.B.THIS IS A COPY173.ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONThe points for discussion were:(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS19582009(i) The future of compromised S.I.S. employee's(ii) An exchange of personnel within the variousIntelligence Services.As regards (i) I said that while we should always be preparedto consider any case on its merits, we should find considerablle difficulin the normal course of events in employing people in the forties andfifties. This age group was well filled and in small organisationit was extremely discouraging to young and intelligent members tofeel that older men were being brought in over their heads. Equally,to place such people under junior officers inevitably created a difficulproblem and their suggested early promotion to Assistant Secretary wouldprobably be out of the question.Apart fromrthe the above considerations, a serious burden would beplaced on the employing department if it had to take over pension rightsI had the impression that the Committee accepted my view, that it wasunlikely that we should be able to help much in this field.As regards (ii),(a) It seemed to me that the purpose of theCommittee was to promote a etter.understaing among Intelligenceofficers of each other's work, and a consequent improvement in the qualiof Intelligence produced.It was also felt that if a wider variety of workwas open to candidates, a career in ntelligence might be more likely toattract good men.(b) I said that in SO far as our relations withS.I.S. were concerned, I thought that considerable progress had beenmade towards better understanding through improved relations at homeand through the integrated units in the Middle East and Far East.Iexplained to the Committee hov these units in the field worked; how the;were now in a position jointly to give directions to S.I:S. stations inad recent countries, and how Eo a neaule buuh parties woto agreed Chief tquality of Intelligence had been improved. I went on to say that whenit was possible for S.I.S. to be housed in the same building at home,further improvements might be effected, and possibly also certaineconomies.(c) Patrick Reilly was very insistent stent that theremust be considerable duplication betweenandourselves,andwonderedwhether some form of total integration inthe new building might not besible. I said that this would immediately raise the problem ofresponsibility for such a unit, which had been the rock upon which sucha proposal had founderedSinclair said that it had to be recognised thatboth sides had a slightly different interest in international Communismand foreign Intelligence organisations. We both of us thought thatany hasty solution to this problme would be unwise, but that the positionmight become a good.dea clearer when we were both housed in the samebuilding.174.(d) Reilly allso seemed to think that anoccasional interchange of higher grade fficers between S.I.8. andM.I.5 might be a good thing. T said that while S.I.S. could get animmediate dividend from one of our officers by posting him to oneof their outstations where there wan a considerable counter-Intelligencecommitment, it would probably be some time before we could train theirofficer for a post of comparable responsibility Sincllair took lightexception to this and said that if he had an officer of the calibre ofsurely we could make immediate use of him? I gaid that certainlywe could in the case ofand left it at that(e) I mentio oned that there was a category ofofficer who might be better suited to M.I.6 work than M.I.5 work, andvice versa. Provision for an interchange of such officers alreadyexisted through the Establishment Officers of each department, and toa veny limited degree successful transfers had taken place over a periodof years.(f) It was evident that an exchange of personnelbeteen other departments in the Intelligence field had already beendiscussed, but it did not seem to me that the proposal had met with muchenthusiaam. Martinvatson of J.I.B. expressed the view to me after themeeting that such officers as had been transferred to J.I.B., so far frompromoting better relations, spent a good deal of time in abusing thedepartment from which they had come!4.I asked whether it was within the terms o reference of the Conmitteeto disouss the possibility of some civilian nucleus within ServiceIntelligence departments to give continuity to the york. It was cleallthat this matter had already been discussed and that the Committee werewhole-heartedly in agreement that some such arrangement was desirable.Moreover, the Services seemed to be agreed on this point themselves,provided they could get the necessary establishment.Lastly, I asked whether the Committee had considered theappointment in regular departments of officers from the IntelligenceServices who could improve the relations between producing and usingdepartments. It seemed to me that the users were often unaware of theimmense difficulties of the producers, and yice venga. made it clearthat if such an arrangement had any merit it would necessitate an increasein establishment, owing to the narrow margin to which Intelligence Serviceswere working.Although the Committee seemed to think there might be somethingin this suggestion, I gained the impressior tha it was rather outsidetheir terms of reference.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIO3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 Aua 2009175.broughtto see me.has takenover from Allan Dulles, who has moved up to No. 2 in C.I.A.was full of appreciation and thanks for the work whichourdepartment was doing for C.I.A. He realised from his talks withthat our assistance was considerablle and he was extremelygrateful for a1l that we were doing.The only interesting point that emerged was a statement byto the effect that he hoped and expected that the difficultiesbetween his organisation and others in the U.S. would before very longbe finally ironed out. Whether he was referring to Bedell-Smith'srecent approach to the President, on the withholding of top secretinformation by A.F.S.A. and the F.B.I. I do not know. It seems justpossible that as a Result of a bllow-up there, some improvement may result.I doubt, however, whether Hoover will ever see eye to eye with anybodyelse in his field.l0th November.Graham has had to argue a case put forward by the ThreeAdvisers, that the purge procedure was being circumvented by departmentswith our connivance. Some thirteen cases were reviewed and with thepossible exception of one, the Advisers were satisfied that there had beenno breach of the rules.We have to-day sent off an answer to the telegram to the WarOffice from B.G.S.I. about our Middle East responsibilities, and alsoone to S.I.M.E. who seem somewhat vague on this point. We are acceptingthe commitment to provide information about terroristss in the Canal Zone,but we cannot be responsible for actual protective security measureswhich, in the present situation, must be planned hy the Military.12th November.Bevir telebhoned about the P.M's Swiss valet. I gavehimthe result of our enquiries, which were negntiveTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION13th November.3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT1958Aua22009I gave a lecture of a kind to the police course which startedto-day.Howard of the Aliens Department telephoned to me about theproposal to withdraw control at the Irish ports.We arranged thathe shoulld sornewhat amplify my remarks, which had not been very fullyreported by Ruck in his account of the special meeting of Immigrationfficers which I attended. My main Contention was that whatever the176.Irish authorities might agree to do now, would be of doubtful value, fortwo reasons: Firstly, nobody could say what the political ituationwould be at any moment, and secondly, that, ith the best of good will,they were not in a position to carry out their obligations. In thisrespect it was true to say that our opposite numbers had grave doubts abouttheir reliability and efficiency, and in delicate cases made no requestto the ports for action. Apart from this, the Irish were not generallyinterested in the alien problem.theDavid Boyle came here to discuss/security of Canadian bags.Geoffrey Patterson had intimated to us that these bags, which are carriedby our King's Messengers, were being tampered with. The suggestion wasthat this was being done by H.M.G. This is entirely untrue and we mustther fore assume that either one Of the King's Messengers 1s going wrong,or that the bags have been left lying about. We both of us agreed thatthe only met of of dealing with this was to get the Canadians to write inofficially. Geoffrey Patterson is going to try and get his informant topersuade the Canadian authorities to do this.l4th NovemberAnthony callled on me this afternoon, the visit having bviouslybeen precipitated by an interview between him and Tommy Harris.Anthony informed me that, in connection with the BURGESS casehe had just remembered being in possession of a further load of BURGESSpersonal papers and that these included, he found frcm a quick glance, anold passport. He therefor e wished to know if we wanted to inspect them.This point was put to Dick after he had been gummoned by me to join thediscussion. Dick made it clear that ve should certainly want to inspectevery paper relating to BURGESS that we could lay hands on. We thereforesubsequently arranged that Simkins should accompany Anthony back to theCourtauld Institute where the papers were lodged in the basement and bringthem back to this office for inspection.The above point having been settled Dick took Anthony once moreover the BURGESS story. The following points, not all of which may be new,were made by Anthony:1.He is absolutely confident that BURGESS must first havebecome a Communist while at Trinity College, Cambridge, between the datesOctober 1933 and February 1934. He asserts this because he was himselfat Cambridge at the earlier. date, at which time BURGESS was certainly notclaiming to be a Communist but, when Anthony returned from a Continental visitin February, 1934, BURGESS had certainly become converted to Communism.Hetherefore places the conversion as having taken place in the winter term1933 and considers that the particular influence in persuading BURGESS toCommunism was probably James KUIGMAN, and that John CORNFORD may have hada hand in it. In any case, he remembers KLUGMAN and CORNFORD saying thatBURGESS was a very erratic Communist and that either their time or thatof a competent Marxist. was required almost every day to deal with hisvarious deviations.workat2. Anthony remembers that he worked under SIMPSON and that heDuring the period that BURGESS was doing historical researchTrinity,took as a special sub ject the Indian mutiny.1777.3. Anthony has a clear recollection of BURGESS' breal withCommunism and places it as in the Spring of 1935. The break prearedasavidlent revolt against Party discipline and because this seemed tobe entirely in line with BURGESS! temperament, Anthony thought nothing ofit. It was just another indication of BURGESS' erratic enthusiasms. Itallsodid not urprise him that BLRGESS threw up his job at Cambridge -he had never thought BURGESS to have the right sort of eraonality to behappy as a Don.L.Anthony believes he can confirm that, on his return toLondon, BURGESS tried for a job in the Conservative Central Officeand wonders whether, during the period he worked for The Times, he wasintroduced to that Journal either by Micky BURN or, by H.CARR.5.Regarding his Continental travels with BURGESS in 1938,Anthony says that although he may have passed through Paris the Springtour was mainly to Italy.6.As an indication of BURGESS' political views, that theyremained essentially Marxist, Anthony nemembers that:(a) BURGESS completely accepted the Russian purgetrials on the grounds that the French had inde-pendent evidence of a conspiracy by the personspurged.(b) BURGESS argued that the German-Soviet paot wasnoit RusBiaE fault but that we had forced herinto it by sending a low level delegation todiscuss a Treaty with them which was neverpllenipotentiary.7. Anthony nemembera that BURGESS' valet, George STEPHENSON,once told him that he had discovered a wad of pount notes in BURGESS'property. He could not place the date of this discovery but thought itmight have been three years ago though it might have been much earlier.He also ramembers that when the time came for BURGESS to Bettle fairlylarge personal debts to him he would pay out 620 or 83O at a time innotes rather than pay by cheque.I think in fairneee-to-Anthony-: should say as regardsBURGESS' paper, he was at some pains, I think genuinely, to explainthat he had not deliberately withhelld them from us, but had quite honestlyforgotten about them. They had been deposited with his as books byMra. BASSETP - I imagine shortly after BURGESS left - and it was only whenasked for their return that he took a look at them and thought they might beof interest. He realised that in the circumstances of our interview apoor construction might be put upon their sudden produetion, but hoped thatI would believe him when he said that there was no more in it thanforgetfulness and a failure in the light of later events to estimate theirpossible importance Bt the time of receipt.178.15th November.The D.M.I. telephoned to me about the case of an officer inGermany who had been court-martialled for indecency and Bent home.He had previously been reprimanded for getting arunk wit! a Sovietofficer and since his arrest had shown signs of defecting to theRussians. D.M.I. wanted him kept under observation.Hollis has made it clear that our powers in this respect areextremely limited.At the J.I.0. to-day it was announced that Esenhower hadwritten a lletter to the C.I.G.S. complaining abou the Britishcontribution to Intelligence, to which Reilly is sending a reply.Kenneth strong raised the question..of the Perdmeter Review,which he considered to be one of the most important documents producedby the J.I.0. He felt, however, that there was a tendency to ignorethe Middle East in aasessing what the Rusians might do. Reilly saidthat he had tried to fill this gap, and that ultimately he hoped that itmight be possible to have some kind of separate meeting which would putthat part of the world in its proper perspective. On the other hand.he pointed out that the Agenda of the irectors was allready very full;that it had to get through its business and that it was not hereforepossible tp spend very much mone time on the Perimiter Review than wewere doing already.'or mentioned that there had been an extremely bad leak bythe Seeretary of State for Air in the U.S. Finletter, in which hehad disclosed the tactios of the American Strategic Air Force, namely,to bomb the Russian bases before their atomic planes could take offand so destroy their stocks of atom bombs. I asked what was beingdone about this. I had raised the matter before and it seemed to methat we should at least have cases of this kind listed, and use themin argument when we were accused o1 lack of security. The meeting weregenerally agreed that this and thought that the P.M. shoulld be properlybriefed when he went to Washington.Points of interest in the Perimbter Review were a speech byBERIA, which showed a reduction in tractor productig and mightpossibly indicate a corresponding increase in the production oftanks.Schumnann; the French Foreigh Minister, is opposed to a high-level approach to the Russians at this moment He thinks thatGermany should be brought into N.A.T.0. now. He saya that Germaneconomy is going ahead and thatitiis, therefore, of paramount importanceto bring Weatern Germany into Allied schemes. He think thatSchumacher's desire for an all-erman election is a purely selfishpolitical one, Since e-believes that the Socdalist Party will comeinto power. Schumann thinks that the Russians will make considerableconcessions to avoid German rearmament.The situation in the Far East did not look very good,particularly on account of the increased air strength of the Russiansand the Chinese and their determination in constructing airfiellde inNorth Korea in spite of the United Nationa bombing.179.A similar build up seemed to be: taking place with regard toIndo-China. Meanwhile the position in Malaya had deteriorated. Weane now faced with a Communist Government in Nepal, but it is not thoughtthat the Ghurka supply will necessarily be cut off.In Egypt the present policy is to discredit the Egyptian Governmentbut to do nothing that will turn them into martyrs. Self-governmentfor the Sudan is contemplated by the end of 1952.As regards Persia, there is still no agreement with Washingtonon. policy. The Americans would like us to make concessions to Moussadekas they believe that the: only alternative would be a Tudeh.Government.We believe that there is an alternative Government and that it would bebetter to wait. Meanwhille the refinery has been started up in a verysmall way.Nuri in Iraq has unfortunately stated that he will not discussthe Middle East Command until the Egyptian question is settled. OtherMiddle East States are wavering.T dined with Colonel Stratton, one of our ex-S.C.Os. Hetoldme that he had been invited to visit de COUROY at Alderbourne, onaccount of a remarlc that he ade about thderstanding the Communist mGnacesince he ha'd Communists in his factory and had worked in M.I .1.5 duringthe var. de COUROY had poured out his grievances at a tete-a-tete lunchwhich had lasted until four in the afternoon, and had mentioned thatM.I.5 agents were examining his banking account in Paris.Stratton had been subsequently asked to go for the vieekend, butie-refused on the grounds that he was going to Jamaica.I told Stratton that if he wanted. to know what de COURCY thoughtof M. 1.I.5 he had better read the October issue of his Digest, which Ineed hardly say was entirely inaccurate and misleading.180.16th November.Ewound up the police course and listened al to one w or twosuggestions. On the whole the course seems to have been wellreceived.17th November.The D.G. returned today. I met him at the airport andtold him and told him that no sign had been received from the P.M'Soffice, except on the question of the P.M's servant, a Swiss namedMEYER who seemed to have no adverse record, although of course it wasa bad thing for the P.M. to be employing an alien as his valet.I told him about our difficulties with the Middle East andthe suggested appointment of HAMERSLEY. and also about developmentsin the PEACH case.19th November.The D. D.G. ha s reversed my decision aboutafter sendingfor Hill. He rang up Reilly, saying that he did not wish to standin the way of a prosecution. In my letter to Reilly I had expressedthe view that ifwere 'called there was a serious risk that hewould be subject to cross-examination and that it woulaebecome apparentthat he had been paying agents in Egypt considerable sums of money.This might well lead to the closing down of bur office and wouldundoubtedly at a time like this seriously embarrass the Foreign officeand S.I.S.TheD.G. told Hill that as a policeman he had never stood in the way ofa criminal prosecution and that he did not intend to do D.now.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS1958.Aug2009.181.22nd November.At the J.I.C. (Directors) meeting to-day the D.N.I. who had justreturned from America, said that the Navy Department and C.I.A. weremore or less in line with us on Russian intentions and capabilities.The Air and the Army, however, were slightly aggressive. The Navyare worried about out attitude over China.'c' said that he had seen Dick Casey, who was violent about thestate of affairs in Malaya. He thought the situation extremely seriousand intended to say so in high quarters here.Drew stated that he was intending to change the L.C.S. lecture tothe I.D.C., which had formerly been on the activities of the D rganisatiorduring the last war; he was going to outline the general purposes andtheethods of L.C.8. and then talk about its possibilities.Heiscirculatinga copy of a synopsis of his lecture.In discussing the Perimeter Review it was stated that the Americanattitude with regard to Korea was that some troops must remain and thatit should be made clear that any breach of the Armistice would bring downdrastic retalliation and nev bombing north of the Yalu. If there was notruce a new situation would arise, possibly involving an extension of thewar. Meanwhile there is a steady build-up of land and air forces by theNorth Koreans and as many as eight airfields are in operation in any one dayin North Korea.Unemployment in Hong Kong is getting steadily worse and there is acertain depression, due to failure of the Korean Armiatice negotiations.We had a long discussion on defectors. Donaldson, representing theMinister of Defence, said that on instructions from sir Harold Parker, theP.U.S. he could not accept the defector commitment for the Ministry ofDefence. He was subjected to very considerable pressure from the Chairmanandother members of the Committee and did not seem to be very well briefedabout the whole problem. It was agreed that Reilly and T should go andsee Sir Harold Parker next week.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958Aug2009182.23rd November.I talked to Cumming and Winterborn about defectors and told themabout the attitude of the Ministry of Defence. since Reilly and I areto try and persuade Sir Harold Parker to appoint an officer to take chargeof this whole business if it is put on the open vote, I wanted to bebriefed as fully as possible. Parker's present idea is that the wholequestion should remain on the secret vote and that commitments should becontinued to be carried by M.I.5.24th November.THIs IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENTRETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1968. Ag 2009183.26th November.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958. Aua 2.009.( told the D.G. that Hollis and I were attending a meeting atthe Home office to discuss the removal of Immigration Officers fromthe Western Ports who were handling the Irish traffic. I said thatI was ntending to oppose this on the grounds that it was opening theback door into this country. and pulling down a piece of securitymachinery at a tire when the world was in an extremely unsettled state.The D.G. agreed to my taking this line.184.Hollis and I attended a meeting at the Home Office with Newsam inthe Chair. Howe and Burt vere present from S.B., Kelly from NorthernIreland, and Ruck, Hutson and Howard from the Home office.Newsam opened by saying that the Home office had received a cut whichinvolved getting rid of about 120 temporary employees. I said that itseemed a pity that at a time like this the cut should be applied toSecurity. It was easy to take any component part of security and argue thatit had not resulted in the detection of anything but a very small number ofpeople who might be attempting to enter this country for illegal purposes.On that basis you could get rid of security altogether. It had to beconsidered as a whole, since it was the cumulative effect of all securitymeasures that produced the result, quite often in an entirely negative way.In other words it was a deterrent. It was the old argument thatsecuritycould not be 100j there was no point in having it at all. If controlswereremoved, it would be possible for an allien to enter this country and residehere almost permanently without registration, since he could go back to Eireat the end of his two months and come in again. It was quit useless toplace any reliance upon the Eire authorities; the degree of co-operationdepended firstly on the political situation of the moment, and secondlyon personnel in the lower stratas. It was thue that both we and thepolice had useful contacts, but we knew from our opposite numbers that theImmigration and the police vere basically disinterested in the alien problemand were in a number of cases unreliable. In facit the Eire Defence Ministrywould not think of entrusting any of their more delicate cases to their onImmigration and police. There were many cases where we did not put theman's name on the Suspect Index, but obtained the necessary action throughour own Immigration and police, giving it the smallest possible circulationClaerly we should hot be able to do this with the Irish. Both the timefactor and their unreliability would make such a course impossible. Anyidea, therefore, that we could put a "ring fence"l around Ireland and the U.K.was out of the question.I was supported in this arguent by Ronnie Howe, but clearly the HomeOffice want to abolish controls and I have no doubt that they will get theirway.Newsam said that he would put up a note advancing alll the pros and consand would submit it to us before he paased. it to the Home Secretary.27th November.I attended a meeting to-day, by Sir Harold Parker, P.U.S. inistryof Defence, to discuss the proposal of the J.I.C. that the expense ofresettling defectors shoulld be placed on the open vote and that an officerof the Ministry of Defence should be appointed to take responsibility forthe work. Those present were Donaldson, Ministry of Defence, Searightof the J.I.C. Secretariat, Patrick Reilly a nd myself.Reilly opened the meeting by giving a brief outline of the circumstanceswhich had led up to these proposals. He said that defectors of the rightking provided one of the few sources of information available to the J.I.Con Russian intentions and capabilities. So far the number of defectorshad been disappointingly smallil. The J..I.C. felt thatif more publicity couldbe given to the conditions under which these people were living and thebenefits which they enjoyed, the flow might be increased. The SecurityService felt, and he agreed, that while the handling of defectors of highgrade Intelligence value might be a proper charge on their manpower andresources, they were not Justified in 8 cting as a kind of welfare organisation185.for low grade defectors and those who were no longer of any Intelligencevalue. The only object in bringing such people to this country was toavoid prejudicing the whole defector problem through their re-defectionto the Russians. Apart from this, the Security Service felt that if theexpense Were placed upon the open vote they could not as a secretdepartment become involved in the resulting publicity which would bedeteimental to the organisation as a wholle.Sir Harold Parker argued - I think with some Justification - froma statement in the J.I.C. draft report on Soviet and Satellite defectors,that as a number of measures for publicity had already been put intoforce, he could not see what further publicity by interviews with defectorshere could really do. How would the informatio reach other Russianpotential defectors? Surely the only publicity that was any good wasbroadcasting in the Russian language or a distribution of leaflets in theEastern Zone, which was already being done?Reilly replied that considerable increase in the broadcastingprogramme was contemplated, which would undoubtedlly give rise to questions.Parker thought that if the expense of resettling defectors were placedonthe open vote, there would be considerable difficulty in justifiyingthe whole policy. If it were the subject of debate in Parliament, howwould ve be able to explain why X was getting E5 a veek and Y 81O?Assuming, however, that Ministers were prepared to agree, Parker did notfeel that this was really a matter which should be controlled by an officerof the Ministry of Defence. His department was oncerned with the inter-Service co-ordinatio and carried as little administration as possible.Moreover, the Prime Minister had recently expressed the view that theMinistry was four times bigger than it should be.Parker sympathised with the Security Service point of view, that itshould not spend its money, time and personnel on welfare work, but hedid not see why it should be a ommitment for the Ministry of Defence.Reilly countered by saying that the J.I.C. had reached the conclusionthat defectors provided one of the best sources of information about Russia,and that their views had been endorsed by the Chiefs of staff, who workedto the Minister of Defence. It seemed logical, therefore, that theco-ordinating officer should be in the Ministry.Parker clearly thought that the only solution to the problem was forthe Security Service to be given the necessary establishment to carry theincreased commitment, but said that if his colleagues on the PU.S. levelwere in favour of the J.I.0. proposal, he woulld not stand in the way.Reilly undertook to put up a report on the present situation toSir Harold Parker for discussion by the Committee of P.U.Ss, which meetsperiodically to discuss Intelligence matters, in accordance with therecommendation in the Brook report. Meanwhile, it has been decided notto proceed with the report to the Chiefs of Staff.28th November.Taylor C.C. Leicestershire, came to see meHe seemed soundand enthusiastic. I gave him a tall on the organisation the principleswhichwe worked. He seemed keen to do anything he could to assist andhoped on that on a subsequent visit to London he could meet the other Directors.186.29th November.This IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS19582009.He had a general discussion about the overseas organisation, tor whenAlec was present, and,a far as I Colild see, in agreement. We felt thatNairobi could probably run on one officer, that Rhodesia was a dpubtfullcommitment, tha t Ceylon was now a waste of money, and that the Caribbeancould do with one officer instead of two. Further, tha t whatever D.O.S'srecommendatiors may be. Egypt does not want more than two officers, and thatthe post at Aden which is to visit Argeisha and the sudan, would be anunnecessany cotrmnitment. If D.0.S recommends such an appointment in Adenit will have to be filled by an attached officer.30th November.Isaw Tess last night. She told me that when she was at CambriageJudith FISHER-WILLIAMS. Jennifer Hart's younger sister, then aged abouteighteen, waB at the time, 1936, very much attached to a young Communistcalled Ian HENDERSON. aged about twenty. She had been approached and hadbecome a secret -- as opposed to an open - member of the Communist Party.Subsequently she had married David HUBBACK, who ts nov employed in quite animportant post in the Treasury.As far as is known, Judith FISHER-WILLIAMS is no longer active. andher husband is not belleved ever to have had any connection with Communism--in fact he is regarded as wholly Tory in his outlook.Tess would be prepared to approach Jennifer FISHER-WILLIAMS and askher whether she can give the namea of any other secret members with whomshe was associated in her Cambridge days. I said that T would hook upJennifer FISHER-WILLIAMS and let her know. Meanwhile, I would say nothingabout the case to anyone else.187.Howard of the Home Office telephoned about the memorandum on thecontrol of Irish travel which is going forward to the Home Secretary.I said that we should like to see a copy of it before it was presented,as we might wish to cornment. Howard said that Hutson had already mentionedthat he thought there VaS perhaps too much emphasis on the security side.I said thet nevertheless we should like to see it. Hovard undertook tosend me a copylst December.I discussed with Holllis a memorandum on Irish censorship in time ofwar. We are drafting a paper, the gist of which is to suggest that ifcontrol of cables, mails, air routes or sea routes can be organised viathe U.K. we are prepared to drop censorship between the U.K. and Ei reand between Eire and Northern Ireland, accepting the risk that nformationgetting into Eire may go out by illicit wireless. Personally I am doubtfulwhether any Eire Government would commit itself now. If it ultimately refusethe routeing of communications through this country, it will either benecessary to enforce such a policylby cutting their cables, sinking theirships and shooting down their aircraft. or else to impose full censorshipbetween the U.K. and Eire and Eire and Northern Ireland.3rd December.I attended a special meeting of the JII.C. (Deputy Directors) thisafternoon to discuss measures to. improve our Intelligence. Our viewsonthe subject were accepted.There was, however, a request by theChairman that a Committee, consisting of M.I.6., J.I.B. and ourselves, mightreview the existing machinery and any possible improvements for givingeffect to paparagraph, of the catalogue of recommendations submitted byDepartments Freganding the cover provided for international gatherings,particularly those behind the Iron Curtain.THISIS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS1958.Ago2009188.Burt tellechoned to say that S.B. were not anxidus to releasean officer, ATTRIELD (?) for protection duty to Mr. Eden. He had,however, made some enguiries about DIBDIN, which seemed to indicatethat he was a reliable officer and suitable for what we had in mind.Lth December.I had a talk with Brigadier Major, who has been filling a gapin Ceylon during Wagstaffe's leave. He said that the SingalesePoliciv yere clenrlly slow in their operations: they had not yet putthe telephone Equipment which we supplied into operation, but said thatthey intended to s0 before long. Their operations are in generalrather crude. They are, however, co-operative and frequently ask for ouradvice. Security in Government departmente is not thought to beparticularly good, although we have no realy opportunity to investigateit. We do x however, know that the Head of the Police 1s reluctantto send his telegrems through External Afeairs,o) security grounds.Major says that he gets quite a number of enquinies from the Australians,and also mentioned that the Amerieal Naval Attache WAF in fairlyclose touch with the police.Trincomallee was visited. It was found that the Admiral hadanumber of highly secret documents, which at times vere in the custodyof 2 junior Singnlese officers. Application: is being made to theAdmiralty for Enropean personnel. Similar dumps of secret documentsexist in other parts of the world for issue on general mobilisation.The general security question arises, which the Admiral is taking upwith N.I.D. Major seems to think that the 'S.L.0's S. L. position in Ceylonis justifiable and that to withdraw our representative would be regrettedby the local authority.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT1968Aua2009189.ORIGINAL THIS DOCUMENT IS A COPY RETAINED13 IN (4) DEPARTMENT OF THE PUBLIC UNDER PECORDS SECTION5th December.ACT 1958Aua2006th December.At the J.I.C. Directors meeting we had an interminablediscussion about the future in Korea and its effect on other areas.The more I think about the Armistice discussions, themore I feel that any cessation of hostilities must rea'ct to our dis-advantage. The onlly factor at the moment which prevents an attempt bythe Forces of the North, which are numerically superior, fro driving us190.our ot Korea, is their lack of air support fro bases in Manchuria;the MIG 158 are out of range. They have been endeavouring for manymonths to construct airfields in North Korea fra which they couldoperate over our lines, and have only been prevented from doing Soby the constant bombing of these aerodromes by the American Air Force.If there were a cessation of hostilieiss the Northern forces would b eable to construct these and other aerodromes with impunity and couldlaunch a suprise offensive at the appropriate moment, which, in theabsence of very much increased U.N. Forces, would stand quite a chanceof being successful. It will take the Chinese some time to build uptheir Air Force, which is being trained by the Russians, and there isno doubt that they want a breating space to do this. There is noparticul ar advantage in advancing the U.N. present line beyond a certainpoint, since it only brings it within closer range of Manchurian airbases.A further disadvantage in an Armistice WO uld be the releaseof Chinese forces to make trouble elsewhere; in Indo-Chins,y. Burma,Hong Kong and Malaya. If, therefore, we have got t.o fight the Chineseit is better to go on hitting them in Korea and hope that one day they mafeel that aggressive tactics do not really pay.7th December.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION.3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSAGT 1958. Aua 2009I was asked by Bevir to go and see the P.M. about MEYER.I asked whether the P.M. wished to see the D.G. or myself, and was toldthat he vished to see the person who had written the letter. I $0:informed the D.G., who instructed me to go to Downing Street.I had to wait a little as the P.M. had not come down after hiscustomary slesta: Eventually L was ushered into the Cabinet Room, wherehe was sitting alone contemplatinguth papers. He asked me to sit downand after what seemed to age, he said that he was anxious to knovia little more about the enquiries that had been made. He made itclearthat these enamiries had been made at his request and that the decisionas to whether MEYER stayed or went was entirely his responsibility.Itold him that as far as we knew MEYER had come here originally in 1947asa trainee at the Carlton Hotel; that he had gone back to Switzerlandin 1948 and returned here in 1949, when he entered the P.M's service.We had checked his name against our own records, against the policerecords in this country, and against the records of the Swiss police, in butall with an entirely negative result. We had not doneanythingnature of positive enquiries.1The P.M. immediately asked whether the enquiries in Switzerlanawould be likely in any Wey to react in a manner detrimental to MEYER.I replied that I did not think SO, but that we would do anything we couldto ensure that the Swiss police understood that we knew nothing to MEYER191.detriment and that in the circumstances our enquiry was purely a precautionaryone.The P.M. then told me that he had the utmost confidence inMEYER andin his integrity; he was an extremely valuable servant and managed thehousehold efficiently: the P.M. was therefore extremely reluctant to get ridof him. He thought the Swiss were basically good people, and here he remindedme that during one fthis conversations with Joe Stalin, when the latter wasurging the P.M. to overrun Switzerland in his D. Day of fensive, that "all theSwiss were swine and should be given no consideration"! This wasofcoursequite irrelavant to the point at issue!The P.M. then disclosed to me that he had four Swiss maids atChartwell, and that he had in fact, on the basis of our letter, in whichwe pointed out that an allien would not Buffer from the same inhibitionsas a British subject in betraying this country, since immediately after theElections MEYER himself had come forward to say that he would quite understandif his services were no longer required in view of the P.M's move to DowningStreet.I said that we had expressed the view about his having an alienservant, since Operation CICERO was very present in our minds. Further, wefelt that any alien in his service must be a target. He asked me whetherImeant a targetf the enemy or for the press. I said I had been thinking ofthe enemy, but that of course he would be a target for both.The P.M. said that he was s0 sure of MEYER'S integrity that he wasnot too worried about the enemy; he was, however, concerned about thepditical implications, which was a matter to which he would have to giveserious thought. In any case it was hiB responsibility.He could not have been more charming, and expressed his thanksand expressed his thanks for the trouble we had taken. Just as I wasgoing away he said: "How are you getting on over there?", I said thatwe were getting on alll right but that we were extremely pressed with workand had a really hard nut to crack, due to a large extent to the excellenceof Russian security. He referred to the position which gave the Russiansaccess to almost any part of this country, particularly to our factories.He said that a year or two ago he had given information on this subjectwhich he had obtained from some Naval Officer who used to be concerned withIntelligen ce in Madrid. The information rellated to the presence of Russianengineers in our factories; he wondered whether he had ever received this.I coulld not at first remember the Naval Officer's name. I thought itwaseither Hildred or Hildreth. The P.M. remarked that this was somewherenear it, and I then remembered that the name was HILGARTH. I said that ofcourse the Russians had been in the factories, but that there was noe lessbecasion for them than when they were busying themselves withtaking deliveryof the nene engines. He said: "Ah yes, the nene engines - terrible thing",withwhich I agreed. I said I thought it was a pity to teach them theirA.B.C. in jet propulsion.The P.M. then said that he was determined that those Russians who hadthe opportunity should see that this country was "like the back of a hedgehogand paunch of a rabbit", an expressio which he had used in his speechintherecentdefencedebate.Hewantedeveryonehereconcernedwiththevarious auxiliary services to be harnessedin to the defence machine and to takeapride in what he was doing. He again thanked me for coming over and I left.192.I hed only been back from the P.M. a few minutes and reported tothe D.G. when the D.G. himself received a call from Downing Street. Whenhe got there he found Eden and Strang.Eden was worried about the PHILBY case; he had evidently beenextremely badly briefed and had given the P.M. the impression that PHILBYmight escape at any moment and that another scandal would ensure similarto that in the case of BURGESS and MACLEAN. The D.G. explained that on thefact of it this was not at all likely. Eden was evidently unaware thatPHILBY had already been interrogated three times, although not quite on the lindof the proposed interrogation which is to take place on the 19th December, onthe basis of a number of subsequent enquiries.Eden and Strang Beeemed to think that this interrogation was going tolead to a prosecution. It was explained to them that the chances ofprosecution were extremely remote, since all the evidence amounted to was achain of circumstances which pointed to PHILBY'E guilt, and that all thesecircumstatanceswerewell-knowntoPHILBYhimselfonaccountoftheappointmentthat he had formerly held in S.1.8. The odds, therefore, were stronglyagainst any satisfactory conclusion of the case. tshould, however, beunderstoodthatwithoutacaseandwithoutachargeitwasnotreallypossibleunder the laws of this country to detain someone indefinitely upon a suspicion.If, therefore, PHILBY wished to go there woulld be nothing to stop him short ofa withdrawal of his passport, which would not necessarily be effective.The P.M. then said that he did not see why the interrogation could nottake place a't once. It was explained to him that all enquiries which seemedpossible had only just been completed and that the brief was with theinterrogating Counsel, who, owing to previous engagements, could not place hisservices at our disposal untin the 19th December. Meanwhile therewasnoreason for supposing that PHILBY would attempt to leave, unless he wasproceeding to India as a representative of the Telegraph to report on theIndian elections.The P.M. gave orders that the interrogation was to be held withina week.It was a pity that he had been so badly briefed.On the D.G'8 return, ick got into touch with Milmo and has fixedthe interrogation for December 12th.loth December,I asked Burt to come over in order that Dick and I might discuss wi thhim the PHILBY case. We gave him a brief outline of the evidence and explainedto him that we were merely working on a chain of circumstances, which in nosenseconstitutedevidencebutthecumulativeeffectofwhichseemedtoindicate that PHILBY might well have been a Soviet spy for many years.Both the Foreign Office and the Americans were very anxious to get somepositive view about PHILBY'E guilt, or otherwise, in order to know how theystood from the point of view of operations which PHILBY, by virtue of theposition that he had held in S.I.S., might have compromised. We hadtherefore deciided to get Milmo to interrogate PHILBY on a brief which we hadprepared and to give an impartial view. We thought that the chances of anyadrhissions by PHILBY were extremely remote, for the reason that he wasfully acquainted ith amost every card that we had in our hand, and, moreover,was thoroughly experienced in cases of this kind. There was, however, justa remote chance of a break, and should such an eventuality arise we might193.want a police officer to come in and take a statement: would Burt,therefore, make the necessary arrangements.Burt I think at first thought that if the police were coming in,they should come in at the ouset and presumably conduct the interrogation,but I think we convinced him that the case was really rather an exceptionalone and that the purpose of getting Milmo to conduct what was really ajudicial enquiry into a leakage of information was the more propriatecourse. He left us saying that he would think the matter over andcommunicate with us on the following day.Dick and I went to see 'c' about the arrangements for PHILBY'Sinterrogation. It was agreed that 'o' would ring up PHILBY on Mondayevening and ask him to come up on Wednesday at 10 'clock. 'o' would thentell him that M.I.5 had come to the conclusion that there had been aleakage of information and that they wished to interrogate him further.'C' himself had to go over to see the D.G and would bring PHILBY with him.Hill would do the forma] introduction and 'c' would urge PHILBY to submitto interrogation by Milmo. If by any chance at that stage PHIIBY feltinclined to say something to 'C', 'c' should listen and urge him to repeatewhat he had said to the interrogating officer at M.I.5.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT1968.Aua2-009-I spoke to Hollis about our memorandum on Irish censorship intime of war. It seemed to me that we ought to insert a paragraph whichwould make it clear that any arrangement by which the Eire Governmentassumed responsibility for their external communications,wi the U.KGovernment supplying a liaison officer to Trish censorship, would beunacceptableon the grounds that we could not possibly supply the Irish. withour secret Watch List and could not rely upon their political reliabilityor efficiency.I spoke to Winterborn about this and the memorandum is nov beingfinalised.194.l1th December.I gave the usual talk to another policy course.I saw Newsam and gave him a brief outline of the PHILBYcase and the action that we proposed. I told him that he would bereceiving a letter from the Foreign Office, on which we did not wishhim to take any action unless and until he received notification fromus as a result of the admissions abtained from PHILBY during interrogation.I gave a talk to two Austrians, Mr. Pammer and Dr. .Czedik-EysenbergTheyare concerned with Austrian security under the Ministry of theInterior. They have no executive powers, but are in a sense a partof the police. They can ask for action by the police, in the sameway that we do, and only if they met with difficulties would they invokethe assistance of the Ministry of the Interior.I explained to them the broad principles on which we worked.They said that they had many difficulties to contend with, particularlyfrom the Russians. Their police agents were arrested on false groundsof espionage, when they were merely conducting enquiries into evasionsof currency and trade restrictions.Brigadier Johnstone, D.D.M.I., came to see me about S.I.M.E.Owing to the demand by the GO.C. for a Director of Intelligenceresponsible to himself, he wanted to get clear in his mind exactlywhat the status of S.I.M.E. was.I explained to him the origins of S.I.M.E., why it was finallymade a responsibility of ours, and what its present statu was. Heentirely agreed with me that it would b wrong to appoint a Director ofIntelligence, that the existing collating machinery of the J.I.C. shouldbe adequate and that the collecting agencies - M.I. and ourselves - werealready wholly integrated.I said that I could understand the G.0.C's anxiety: he felt adearth of information and wanted some organisation which would tell himfrom hour to hour when an act of sabotage orsambush was likely to takeplace. Admittedly there was a dearth of information on this subject,due to the disintegration of the police and to the fact that outsidethe Ikhwan there was no organisation to penetrate. In the present stateof affairs, any Egyptian who thought he could get away with it would commitan act of murder, or throw a bomb into a house, in order that he souldsubsequently engage in looting. I did not, however, think that theappointment of a superstructure was likely to give the answer; it wouldmerely create new channels and cause confusion.Johnstone entirely agreed and said, off the record, he felt thatB.G.S.I. had rather lost his head and that a personal letter to him fromthe D.M.I. was necessary to readjust the position. The G.O.C., Iunderstand, wants to have someone "whose neck he can wring". The trouble18 that fust wringing necks does not produce good Intelligence!It isjust a question of getting informants and, in the present circumstances,the task would be an extremely difficult one. Onee again, Intelligenceis195.not a tap that can be turned on with a fulll flow at a moment's notice;there would only be a small trickle which can only be increased bylong, arduous and patient work.D.O.S. has sent in another long telegram about the appointmentof an officer at Aden to cover Argeisha in British Somaliland andKhartoum in the Sudan. Horrosks has shown this to the D.G. and a wirehas gone back to say that the base at Aden cannot be considered evenuntil we know about budget decisions. In any case, we feel on presentinformation that the base is not really justifiable.D.O.S. also wishes for a more experienced officer to be postedtoassistFfoulkes in Cairo. The D.G. has apparently agreed to this,although it is not very clear where an officer is coming from, or inddedwhetherin present circumstances,whe a diplomatic rupture is on the tapis,such an appointment would be advisable.Ronnie Howe rang me up to say that in the ordinary way he couldnot coutenance Burt being kept at our disposal during the interrogationof PHILBY, but that as a special favour he would do SOD in this case.He seemed to be taking the attitude that the interrogation ought to havebeen done by the police and that in fact we were doing it ourselves andwould only call the police in to clean up the mess. I told him quitefrankly that he had got the thing wrong; that this was no ordinary case;that there was in fact no evidence on which to work, and that the chancesof anything in the nature of a break were extremely remote. We did,however, want to take the precaution of arranging for a police officertobe available should by any chance something unforeseen happen.Hethen calmed down and. said that he quite understood.12th December.PHILBY turned up as arranged at 10 o'clock and his interrogationis proceeding. So far, he has admitted nothing. Milmo is bearing downon him pretty heavily.I was away during the afternoon but returned about o'clock.The interrogation of PHILBY has been completed without any admission,although Milmo is firmly of the opinion that he is or has been a Russianagent, and that he was responsible for the leakage about MACLEAN andBURGESS. Personally I feel less convinced about this last point.PHILBY'S attitude throughout was quite extraordinary; he certainly did notbehave like an innocent person. He took the view that the interrogationwas quite justifiable on the evidence which We had, but that if we thoughthe was a spy we were wrong. He never made any violent protestation ofinnocence, nor did he make any attempt to prove his case. As regardsbeing a Communist, he said that he had never been in the Party, and whenasked whether he was a Marxist he said tha he may have believed in parts0the Marxist creed, but not all. On the question of his wife's jounneysabroad, it was put to him that according to his previous statement he had196.said that she had dropped her Communism on return to this country andthat he and she were living on about E3 a week. He was then shownhiswife's passport and asked how her journeys to t he Continent had beenfinanced and the reasons for them. In spite of the fact that hehad only married her six weeks previously, he could only say that hedid not remember that she might have been going to visit friends andthat he did not know where the finance came from. He was asked tosurrender his passport and did SO willingly. Skardon returned wi thhim to his home again. His attitude throughout was perfectly friendly.I went to the party at the Yard, where I talked to Burt.He toldme he had been in the room when Howe rang up and that he was very worriedabout the attitude Howe had taken. He was particularly anxious thatIshould not think that he was criticising our action or that he was notwilling to help in every possible way he could perfectly well havedetailed an officer, but in the circumstances he felt he would ratherbe available himself.I did not have an opportunity of talking to Ronnie Howe, but Ihad a word with 'c' and also with Carey Foster on the results of theinterrogation.13th December.I attended the Directors meeting of the J.I.C. to-day. Thequestion arose of sending to SHAPE that part of the paper on the potentiantesof the Communist Party in the event of war which referred to the U.K.Itwas felt that it was too long for SHAPB, and we were asked to make a shortresume of about a page, which I undertook to do.I had a word with Reilly after the meeting a bout the PHILBY case.I said I thought it was of the utmost importance that we should handPHILBY back his passport at the earliest possible moment. To give itup on request might be rather humiliating.At the Appointments Board meeting to-day O.S. reported bn thegeneral position in the Middle East SO far as it had been dvised.TheBoard agreed that a reminder telegram should be sent to H/SIME for a fullreport.D.E./A. also reported on the position of Attached Service Officers.No further action on our part was called for.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT1968.Ava2oo(197.This IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 196817th December,Aug200Reilly telephoned to ask me to attend a meeting in Trend's roomat the Treasury at 12o'clock on Wednesday, when our finances would bediscussed. He knew thatMiss Constant was coming, but he thought thatsomebody ought to be there to answer questions about our Intelligenceactivities, if this became desirable, since we are asking for anincrease of about 246,000 over and above our last budget. This is dueto expansion overseas and to an litional Registry requirement due toincreased vetting.Reilly told me that as things were going he thought we shouldprobably be asked to take on the defectors commitment, since the majorityof Ss did not like the idea of thecharge being on the open vote.I talked to Malcollm Cumming about this. He showed me a note fromwhich he calculated the average cost per defector to be about E500 -in fact it varied from E70 to E1500. If we took on the commitment weshould want one more officer at the rank of Principal and another assistantwith cost a knowledge of Russian. At the present rate of defection this wouldabout $18,000 a year. If in fact increased propaganda, which cannotgo very far if the costs are to remain on the secret vote, were to step upthe flow, we might want as much as E50,000, or even more. Personally Idoubt very much whether the flow will increase. We still have $20,000in hand of last year's grant.I talked to the D.G. about a letter which he had received fromReilly on the case of SPROULE, the technician in electronics who is aCommunist.SPROULE'E services are being applied for by Russia, or oneof the Satellites. He has had no access to classified work for fiveyears but is a good workman:Reilly states that Eden had seen the papers and wishes the D.G.to talk to the P.M. about this and other similar cases. When he has done80, Eden proposas to say something to the P.M. himself.Hill is preparing a note for the D.G. and will make an appointmentwith the P.M. and draw his attention to the B1ll prepared by the LabourParty which is now with the Lord Chancellor, which empowers the S. of S.to make an order against an individual who wishes to travel and hasinformation which Would b be useful to an enemy. The Bill gives rightappeal to the Advisers but the Home Secretary's orderofisfinal.TheD.G. will say that even if this Bill were passed, it could hardly apply inthe case of SPROULE unless the liberty of the subject was to be gravelyprejudiced. No Appeal Tribunal could possibly allege that the informationin SPROULE'S possession, if passed to an enemy would gravely prejudicethe sacurity of the State; he is no more than a good technician inelectronics.198.At the D.G's meeting we discussed the further telegram froD.0.8. in which he emphasises that the post at Aden, whic is o.coverBritish Somaliland and the Sudan is of the highest importance. He thenproceeds to argue that as the post in Cairo has been cut by one, this csonly be offset by the appointment in Aden. This seems a very poorargument - either the post at Aden is necessary or it is not, and the sameapplies to the post in Cairo.The D.G said that he wished the Colonial Office to beconsulted as to whether they wanted a Security Officer in Aden, and gaveorders that someone was to be earmarked for the post if Shaw on nisireturnsatisfied us that it was really necessary to fill it. We all expressedthe gravest sceptisism about this.Hollis said that he had had a discussion about vetting. Casesarose fairly frequently of a man's relative being a Communist. We feltbound to tell the employing department and to express a view as to whethersuch facts had any real significance in the case of each candidate. TheD.G. was rather reluctant to accept this responsibility, but finally agreed.We were the only people who could express a view. and that provided it wasdone with due caution and the final responsibility remained with theemploying department, we should endeavour bo assess the vallue of thisinformation in accordance with the circumstances in each case.18th December.I saw General Dunlop, who is taking over security at theColonial Office. He is going to start travelling early hext year andis anxious to learn as much as he can in the meantime. I gave him aroughoutlineofthe office. He will be seeing Kellar, Hollis and the Registryand possibly Mitchelll and Furnival Jones. He told me that he had studiedthe regulation in the Colonial Office, which he had already found to bedeficient in a number of ways. He fully expected that things would beeven worse when he got overseas.Dick has completed his draft for the Americans about PHILBY.A copy willl go both to the F.B.I. and C.I.A., with a covering note makingit clear that there is no actual evidence, or in faot logic to supportthe opinion. We are expressing ourselves as being in agreement withMilmo'e findings. Meanwhile, 'C' is assessing the damage which in theworst case could have been done to his organisation. We are pointing outwhytit is arguable that PHILBY'B actions in recent years may have amounted tono more than betrayals. betrayalg,inhcasebewhere he thought they were necessary tosafeguard his own position.This IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDERS SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSor 19582009199.19th December.I attended a meeting at the Treasury with Miss Constant. Thismeeting was apparently a sequel to a meeting of the P.U.Ss, recommended byBrook in his report. as a suitable body to review expenditure by Intelligencedepartments. Presumably they found themselves unable to assess therelative importance of the estimates. and so delegated the task to Trendd..Reilly, in his capacity as Chairman of the J.I.C.With the exceptionof Reilly's presence, this is really a reversion to the old system, exceptthat Trend will have to report back to the meeting of P.U.Ss.We have an increase of something like E46,000 on our budget, which isin the neighbourhood of $600,000 The increased figures are due toincreased payments granted by the Treasury, an increase in overseascormitments, and a necessary balance of about E10,000 to cover those whowant to go from untaxed to taxed salary. It also allows for an increaseof staff to bring the Registry up from 150 to, roughly, 200 in order to meetour increased vetting commitment brought about by rearmament. We are nowvetting something like 5,000 cases a week. There will be no margin touincrease the officer strength of more than one or two. Trend asked one orquestions on the increased figures and seemed entirely satisfied with ouranswers.Reilly mentioned a possible additional commitment with re gard todefectors. It was agreed that we would hand back at the end of the financialyear whatever sum we had over, and that a sum of E25,000 would be set aside tobe given to whatever depar tment it was finally decided to carry the burdenof settling defectors in this country or in the Dominions.I mentioned, on the D.G's instructions, that we might have an additionalcommitment in Aden which Would cost roughly E3,000. We had had a telegramfrom Sir John Shaw about this matter, but the D.G. wished to know the fullreasons for this new commitment before making any application for a furthergrant.20th December.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS2lst DecemberACT 1968.huoof the J.I.C.2009-I attended another meeting/to finalise the paper on the "State of ourIntelligence and Methods to Improve it". There seemed to be a tendency tothink that if the various measures recommended, to drop people by parachuteor land them by rubber boat, etc. were adopted in a forward way, we shouldthen be able to adequately inform the Chiefs of Staff about Soviet intentionsand capabilities! I suggested some amendments in the wording here, becauseit seemed to me that a few soruffy individuals crashing into the fringes ofRussia and out again were not really going to tell us very much about theKremlin's intentions.200.I talked to Murrie on the telephone about the memorandum which isbeing put up to the Home Committee of Ministers on the abolition of controlof traffic to and from Eire. It was stated at one point that if itwere known that an individual, or individuals, had been allowed to enterEire and might be coming on to the U.K. special arrangement: coulld bemade for a temporary supervision at ports. It was not at all clear howthis was going to be done. Murrie told me that he himself had queriedthis matter; the idea apparently was that an Immigration Officer should betransferred from another port, but this seemed to be vary far from beinga practical arrangement. In any case it could only be carried out on thebasis of a photograph, since passengers would not be carrying any documentof identity.Murrie said he would look into this.S.I.S. are counter-attacking on Milmo's findings in the case ofPHITHY. We have carried them at every stage of this enquiry, supplyingtem with all the facts, and they agreed to the course of action which hasnow been put into effect. It was clear that at no stage did we contend thatthe case amounted to more than a chain of coincidences, the cumulativeeffect of which was very considerable. Milmo, after interrogation on allthe points, comes down - in my opinion slightly too heavily - on a positiveassertionofPHILBY'Sguilt.The S.I.S. reply is more or less a legalisticone, taking each item and trying to demolish it by Counsel for Defence. Theylost sight of the cumulative effect of all these circumstances: it is true,however, that they have demolished one, namely, that affecting the tighteningup of Russian signals security. They could, of course, have demolishedthis at the outset. Meanwhile, PHILBY has registered a complaint at theway he was handled, throughHe thinks he was trickedinto the interrogation and treated too roughly. The answer to this is thatif he was treated roughly, it was largely his own faullt: he had made certainstatements at his earlier friendly interviews which had subsequently beenproved to be untrue.S.I.S. are seeing Milmo and will be able to get direct answers totheir queries. Meanwhile, it 1s proposed that Jim Skardon should havea talk with PHILBY.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION22nd December.3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT1958.Awa2009S.I.M.E. seem worried by a telegram from B.D.C.C. Midde East,implying that the Chairman of the J.I.C. M.E. will have executive authority.The matter was discussed by the J.I.C. here, and it was agreed that Reillyshouldsand a suitable reply. The Chairman of the J.I.C. M.E. should haveno more executive authority over S.I.M.E. than the Chairman of the J.I.C.London should have over the Security Service. The Chairman can, however,review the state of Intelligence and discuss suggestions for its improvement.29th DecemberI listened to a discussion in B.2 on Skardon's talk with PHILBY.He had gone to the interview with the impression that PHILBY had beendeliberately evasive at his interview with Milmo, but was now inclined to201.e think that this was not SO and that PHILBY'S attitude was due more toforgetfulness and to a desire to be strictly accurate in such matters asthe precise definition of a Communist. Skardon did not find him in anyway difficult, and in the end PHILBY came to the conclusior that perhapshe had no real colkplaint against the way in which he was somewhat roughlyhandled by Milmo. He saw the force of the case against him and found itextremely difficut to prove his innocence. Skardon's mind remains open,but at the same time he is quite clearly shaken on the question of PHILBY'Sguilt.I have read annaccount of Winston's discussion with Adenaeur. Adenaeurseemed to have some idea that we might do a deal with Russia behind his back,and was much relieved in getting the P.M's assurance that at no stage wouldwe act without full discussion with Germany. The P.M. said that asituationmight arise, as the West gets stronger, where Russia might be willing torecedeandagreetoaunitedGermany,butinthateventitwouldbefortheGerman Government and the German people, in the first instance, to expressa view; and Great Britain would not move except in close consultatipn with theGerman Government. He went on to explain that he ardently desired to restorea tolerablle relationship with Russia. but he often asked himself why theRussians had deliberately antagonised the West. They might have easily fooledthe Western democracies with small concessions and valueless assurances. Whyhad they not done so? It was, he was convinced, because they feared burfrienshi] more than they feared our enmity. Friendship would bring contactsbetween Russia and the West; and this, in turn, would lead to the disintegratioof the wicked regime which now ruled in the Kremlin3st December.At the D.G's meeting to-day Hollis was not present so we did notdisouss the proposal to post an officer to Aden.This is to come up nextMonday.Shaw gave a brief account of some of the problems of the CanalZone and of the attitude of the G.0.0., MELF, who is thinking very much interms of Germany.Dick gave some account of his meeting with S.I.S. and Milmo on thePHILBY case, as a result of which we shall be sending an agreed viewpointto the F.B.I. and C.I.A. Basically Milmo's views are unchanged, althoughhe is prepared to make one or two slight modifications in his findings.Arthur Martin, hag made an extremely good analysis of the present position,which st1ll leaves a heavy burden of guilt on PHILBY, although it is necessaryto keep one's mind open. The idea is that Dick should take over the finalmemorandum on about the 1th of January and explain it in detail both tothe F.B.I. and C.I.A.Ian Carrell has joined B.l.E. having returned from Hong Kong andcompleted his leave. He seems keen and sensible. He seemed to he think was not thatMackintosh an was quite teefficient Carrel agreed as a policeman, with me that although if the of Colony course was beingprepared indeed on to any believe of the that Chinese the Chinese element in his force would be loyal to himself. wasattacked, easy character. not much reliance sould be placed in Hong upon Kong. the Mackintosh, Hong Kong Police, however, or202.I cannot see why they should be and experience has shown that theyare only too ready to fall in with the winning side, or what theybelieve to be the winning side.000000000000000000epd-oaCopieB of Minutes of D.G's (Tuesdav) Meetings.1951.Minutes of the Director-eneral'e Meetingheld an 2.1.51.l.S.L.B. told the meeting of the result of thePolice enquiry into the case of leakage of informationfrom the R.A.E. Farnborough, He said that the papershad now gone to the Director of Public Prosecutione forprosecutions under the official Secrete Aot of WEBB,MODEMETRIA, and GARDINER. He went on to explain thatWEBB, Public Rlations Officer with the Society of BritiehAircraft Conatruotors, had written to MCDEMETRIA, employedat the R.A.I. Farnborough, asking him to supply informationregarding aircraft developent, ete. MODEMETRIA had replied,but at the request of this office the Post office hadintercepted and held the letter. GARDINER had beenresponsible for inciting WERB and MCDEMETRIA to destroythe evidence.S.L.B. said that the S.B.A.0. nuthoritieB werenot in any way involved, an that they had dismissed WEBBat once.Later in the meeting, B.4 referred to the holdingby the PoBt office of MODEMETRIA' reply to WEBB. Hesaid that the D.D.G. had seen Sir Frank Newenm on thispoint, who had said that the ordinary warrant used forthe interception of such mail as indecent literature, eto.,would cover a case of this kind.2.8.L.B. 8.1 B. reported that there had been aa satisfactoryarms tratrio proseution Just before Christmae againstTOWLE, who was fined 82, 2,000nd Bentenced to 8ix monthsimprisonment. He said he did not think TOWLE wouldappeal, since there waa every lilelthond that if he aid BDthe sentence would be increased.S.L.B. Said it was interesting to note that SpecialBranch, rmed with the same facts, had called to bring abouta proseoution in this case some months ago, but that theOuatoms had been successful in D.doing. He said thatthe Customs were particularly good at this type of case.Minutes of the Director-General'e Meetinghela on 9.2.51.D.D.G. in the Chair.1.B.L.B. reported that a film about sabotage, entitlod"I Spy strangers" was being made by a subsidiary company ofthe Rank Oreanieation. Although this film purported to dealwith the work of M.1.5 and Special Branch, this office hadnot been consulted. The War Office were, however, backingdt by lending troops and by financial assistance.8.1.B. went on to Bay that the Home office took avery poor view of this matter, since they felt that therewould be questione in Parllament as to why the War officewas putting troops at the aleposal DY the Rank Organisation.As far aa we were concorned, we could not have anything todo with the project, since, apart Crop any other coneiderations,it would be inconsistent with Dur policy towarda the Press,nameiy, that our uotivities should not be publicisod.The script of the film, 1.1.B. said, v/aS at presentbeing scrutinised by Mr. Fenton. It deal with sabotageto Battersea Pover Station and apparently hits the neil fartoo well on the head.C.2 said that he had been rung up by the Chief PubllicityExecutive of the Rank Organisation, who had aBkced whether M.1.5had any obJection to technicians being put into Battersea PowerStations He added that he had been told by the BritishElectricity Authority that M.I.5 should be consulted, whichhad apparently aomewhat Surprised him. 0.2 had replied thatM.1.5 could give no ruling in a matter of this kind, and thatit was purely a decision for the B.EVA. to mnake for themselves.0.2 said he had also been aBiced by the Ministry ofSupply whether there would be any objection to a corrdior intheir building being photograpned for the film. He hadreplied that he could Bee no objection to this.The D.D.G. then aaked S.L.B. what action was beingtaken in this matter. He Said he thought the War Officeshould be told exactly what our view wore on the subject.S.L.B, said that he fully intended to do this and alBo toBay that, although we must refuse to give our approval in anyshape or form and would prefer that the film should not bemade at all, 1ve must be allowed to delete certain passagosof the Boript.2.P.L.S. Baid that Mr. Richards, Chief Df the RallwayPolice, was lunching with him. He wondered if any Dfficerswould like to see him.3.O.S. apoke about the indoctrination of S.I.M.E. and.I.F.E. integrated unite into S.I.s. symbola. He said hethought it waB a great advance that 'o' had agreed to this.As this WaB really a Registry matter, he and R. were to discussIt with Broadway.0.s. went on to say that S.1.8. hid taken the linethat report from S.I.M.E. and SI.FE. should not be collatedon the spot and that they Bhouid be sent back to Broadway forthis purpose, in triplicate. This, 0.8. said, was unsatisfactory,since one of the main reasons for integration waB that R.5 ofS.1.8. could be decentralised. In S.I.M.E. however, it habeen agreed that reports could be Bent back a5 finished products.It was agreed that Air Commodore Easton should beconsulted in this matter./B.2B.2 asked 0.8. what adyantage would be gained bybeing indootrinated into S.I.8. symbols. 0.S. explainedthat it would mean that in Future we should see a numberof papers which we had not been able to see in the past.slagaLuoLah8URTtsba Ao15.5hothtb 4d faticudMinutes of the Direotor--General's Meetingheld on 15.1.51.DUD.G. in the Chair.1.The D.D.G. told the meeting that the Foreign Office werenow pressing for the abolition of visas for the Argentine, Spainand Cuba. He said he had raised this matter at the J.I.0., whenhe had expressed the view that, allthough we Could not make outa case for each individual country, we viewed with alarm thegradual break down of what was virtually a first line of defencein security. He said that D.C. was drafting a letter toMr. Reilly on the Bubjeot.D.C. said that the position had in fact developed a little.Hehad received from the Foreign Office the papers regardingthe Argentine and Ouba. The Foreign Office have apparentlyrather grudgingly dropped the Argentine case on account ofour security objections, namely, that if visas were abolishedthe Immigration Officer here would be unlikely to have informationon which he could refuse an undesirable admission to this country,but if the visa machinery were working, the Passport ControlOfficer in the Argentine oY Cuba would have some power of makinglocal enquiries, eto.. and undesirables could therefore be weededout. As regards Cuba, however, D.O. said he would be draftinga reply to the Foreign Office. He said that 'c' was for somereason very much opposed to the abolition of the visa for Cuba,probably because a good deal of trouble had Started in thatquarter and it was also a jumping off ground for Communistpropaganda. The queation of the Spanish visa is still underconsideration.2.0.1 reported that the Ministry of Supply had been orderedto carry out their part of the defence programme. This wouldentail trebling their staff to about 300,000. A working party18, however, to be set up to discuss the vetting problem.D.C. said he had spoken to Mr. Jaggers on thie subject,when he had aaked the latter to let 1s know what the size ofthe problem waB likely to be. We could not, therefore, doanthing until the working party had concluded its deliberations.Two points they would have to consider would be: a) the securityof production figures, and b) whether low grade vetting could beoff-loaded on to local police forces. He said that the HomeOffice at present discouraged departmental references to the police,but he thought we should have to get the principle recognised,since it would relieve the burden on this office considerably.0.1 went on to say that at a meeting at the Home officerecently it had been announced that naturalisation figures weregoing up in respect of Poles, ex German Pa. of W. etc. D.D.G.said he thought Operation Post Report might be helpful in thesecases. He said that the Home Office were, however, being morestringent regarding the naturalisation of Germans, and mentio onedthe case of oone WALLRAFF which had been referred to him by theHome Office recently.3.P.L.S. asked if the usual cocktail party was to be givenfor the Special Branch course which was going on at present.Itwas agreed that this should be done.In this connection, D.0.8. said he felt that if partiesof this kind were to be given he thought Colonial police officersshould receive the same hospitality. D.D.G. said the mattershould be considered.lt.B.1 said that two Dutoh officers (Colonel Einthoven'smen) had Just paid a two day visit to this office, when they/had been given.ndetnatig 87a fairly extensive, tour of the office.5.D.D.G. said that the J.I.C. had expressed the viewttit66recently that the Russian "Peace' Committee was at theahentemoment a failure. He asked B.1 if he agreed with thisnoitview. E B.1 Said that it had certainly not come up tohot026Cominform expectations and that it had, on the wholle, beenRada failure in the West. thiot atot0047a1003In this conneetion, D.B. said that M. Berthauxhad mentioned at the recent S.1.0, meeting that the. FrenchCommunist Party was now following the line of peace, neutrality,thatthetthleto.Tpca675 5h24 TAT$2 iecn aunto2627 TheLondotlal04000 UFLER1O 0,0Fatlyhig DO 1135 1nbo.uetef 1,70the7012145 731 3415stray 0 fcui V2167 FoncBrrtanino0 1uoni d usalhoDfast but dose 3ltla 1.32 1510NTE1100.00 deenutaldot bare Ctheldrntd 1T.Ein tae 7ALI You-1alLecio otMEEELOUE BE61 Ttell han ifCobid Ehdonnt 80Lsherstnegi tomtyazi 03 mariE totleutt L4send forid01 t 1401 usabiscin 10050s Tugdaaln lvod o1lTIScece tat 124- 2udt0504 140 cnuvbedsitneme in LI tanob ithrbtiion it ald Hnticioty all god0ua bld5o 5oehlmnto Lmut LnithDotvntiaar pln 07 E.i,no1 alod hin bd thaMinutes of the Director-General's Meetingheld on 23.1.51.1.B.1 told the meeting of an interview which the D.G.and Sir Edward Bridges had with the Prime Minister last week.The Prime Minister was told about the provisionalconclusion which had been reached by. Sir Edward Bridgesand the P.U.Ss in the Service and other Departments, regardingdifficulties over the purge procedure arising from the dangerto our sources., particularly in London. It had been decidedto go slow on purgeing London Civil Servants, and tor do so onlywhen it was not possible to remove them by any other means -i.e. transfer to non-secret posts - and only to take a riskof overt action when securi ty demanded it.The Prime Ministeagreed to this.The second point put to the Prime Minister was thatthere were cases of Civil Servants, about whom there weredoubts but who did not come strictly into. the purge category,having access to matters of a highly secret nature. ThePrime Minister was asked if he would encourage Ministers touphold prima facie cases of this kind, in spite of any rulingto the contrary by the purge tribunal. The Prime Ministeragreed to this also.The D.G. asked B.1 to get into touch with Mr. Winnifrithand ask him to send over an account of this interview.2.B.1 said that the case of ohea youngstatistician in the Cabinet Office, had been submitted to thePrime Minister, who had found a prima facie case against him.3.D.C. said that the Services were thinking of havingshort training films for use in their units. We had beenasked for suggestions as to titles, themes; eto. and D.C.said he Would like sections to let him have their views onthis matter.In this connection, the D.G. asked what had transpiredregarding the film to be made by the Rank Organisation, "I SpyStrangers" S.L.B. said we had made it quite clear that wedisapproved strongly of the whole project and that we wouldhave nothing to do with it. This view was also held by theHome Office. He went on to say that the B.E.A. had apparentlygiven their approval for the use of Battersea Power Station, buthad then withdrawn it. The Rank Organisation had then rung upthis office, when they had been told that the B.E.A. were theonly body who could sanction the project, but that if Rank'swere not satisfied with this they should get into touch withSir Walter Citrine.It is not known, therefore, S.L.B. said,whether the film is to go on or not.4.The D.G. asked for information in connection with Communistein Key Flats, which had been reported to him by the Manager ofthe flats.B.1 said that a successful and interesting operation hadbeen carried out the night before, but he would let the D.G.have a full report as soon as possible.5.D.0.S. reported that through TABLE sources it had beendiscovered that the Bandmaster of the P. & O. liner "Corfu" wasacting as a courier for the Communists between this country andthe Far East. He was not, however, carrying documents.D.0.S. went on to say that it had been arranged that thisman should be kept under strict surveillance at such ports as/Colonboson EsemeD-odoos.g sds To no3umiirId hfodSingapore, eto. but that Bombay had not been on the list.We had, however, informed S.L.0. New Delhi, who had in turnpassed the information on to D.I.B. The man's cabinhadbeen searched, by. the Customs at Bombay, under cover of theroutine search for drugs, when his C.P.G.B. membershipcard had been found and impounded and also Some otherpapers. A full report is therefore. awaited from S.L.0.New Delhi. 901 As regards the other ports it had beendecided that no action should be taken, since the manoe3035 might now be aware that he was the subjec of observation.0800o ab 11oiLhobtosl6!2.6 dD.o.s. said that. a signal had been received fromS.L.0. Rangoon, to the effect that the Burma Police sawsia.i prospects of establishing S.F. in the Russian Legaion there-shtimwhich vas apparently moving to new premises shortly - anddesired our assistance in initiating the operation. 1o59snasAs, this appeared to be a somewhat hazardous project,and it wa's doubted whether the Burma Police would be competentto carry out suchan operation without jeopardising ourbechincal secrets, D.O.S. had cabled to S.L. 0. Rangoonasking for further particulars and telling him to do nothingin the meantime. boNaB aleni7lbmin ho adds 9to 80nnD lost emtig BIonersathalcnaIt was agreed by the meeting that this operationwould be an extremely dangerous one and that the BurmatftinadPolice were not competent to carry it out. D.O.S. agreedwith this view, but said he felt tha't if it could be achievedwithout danger of blowing our technical secrets, it Wouldhe af immense value.IN ORIGINAL DEPARTMENT THis DOCUMENT IS UNDER A COPY RETAINED(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS SECTION19582009Minutes of the Direetor Generalte Meetingheld on 6.2.51.D.D.G. in the Chair.1.D.B. gave the meeting a resume of our eriticisms ofDouglaa Hyde's book 'I believed This critique 18 beingprepared for the use of those officers who may haveenquiries on the subject from their Outside contaots, andve had also been asked by the Prime Minister and the HomeSecretary to comment on the book. The aritique will bein four parte:1)The open side of Party activity.11) The underground side of Party activity.iii) Espionage.iv) General conclusiona.D.B. said that the book is B useful document; Where thedetails come from HYDE'S own knowledge they are correet asfar BB we can cheok from our own Sources, but he is ratherapt to take a few facts and enlarge on tham to the detrimentof aocuraoy.B.2. asked if HYDE hnd given any pointers to otherpossible renegades from the Party. D.B. Baid he had not.From other sources, however, B.l. were interested in twopossible defectore rom the Party, Denis GOODWTIN andCInude COCKBURN.D.0 tola the meeting that at the J.I.0. Last week, itWaB asked whether the boolc could usefully be circullntedthrough the Forcoa as anti-Communist propaganda. It wasgenerally agreed that it would be very good propsgandn.D.0.0. said thet 8 body of the book and the critiqueshould go to S.L.M.E. ind S.I.F..D.B Baid that a much more detailed appreciation wasbeing prepared, but this would take some time ab HYDE wa Estill being interrogated. However, the Short critiqueshould be rendy to-day.2.B.2. had nothing to report.3.D.D.0. seid that he had just seen de Bardeleben who hadmentioned an appreciation which B.1. had done for him somemonths ago on the extent to Which the party were putting aspoke in the wheel of the re-armament drive. De Bardelebenwould be grateful if Bul. would check this appreciation andsee if there were any pointe which should be brought up todate.L.Referring to MP. Deakin'e recent speech, D.D.G. aslced ifit was poaBible to represent how damaging were theirresponsible statement about Communist interference inindustry ete. which appeared in the Press. The generalcomment was that moat of the people who made such statementswere ready to take any political advantage which presenteditaelf./5.- 2 -5.D.C. said that the Americans vere turning more and moreto us for contacts of a non-security nature which ought togo through the Foreign office. He had one such case at themoment of an American business-man sponsored by the StateDepartment and U.S. Embassy in London, whose name wasBALLENGER.6.B.4. had nothing to report.7.S.L.B said that he had learnt of another developmentin the progress of the Rank film on sabotage. The WarOffice had agreed to put up some money for the film/to allow/andtrooos to be used. S.L.B. had suggested to the D.M.I. thata higher authority should be consulted before anything furtherhappened. The Permanent Secretary, War office, has now givena ruling that the troops are not to participate and no moneyis to be put up.8.P.I.S. C.1.. R. and 0.S. nad nothing to report.9.D.C. reported on two meetings he had recently attendedat the Home office.(a) Italian Miners. A scheme has been arranged wherebyItallinns are being recruited to work in English coal-minesfor a period of up to two yeans. Previous experience ofcoal-mining does not appear to be necessary. It wasoriginallly thought by the Ministry OT Labour thatvrould come over but it now looks as though the number willbe nearer 3,c00. There is no possibility of a clause inthe agreement excluding communists, but the ItalianGovernent vould have no objection to our' vetting the minerschosen and excluding any we did not want.of P.o D.stated that they Would be able to eliminate a11 the ComunistParty members. He claimed that his own P.O.D. records Wouldserve to eliminate a Good many of the inerbers and for therest, they were on very good terms with Italian security.D.B. and D.O. agreed that this statement was irresponsibleand that the last claim in particular was contrary to all weknew of M.I. relations with Italian security.The Ministry of Labour will send out a team of sellectorsto pick the miners. This team will work with PassportControl. The miners yill come over in parties of about 30and will either be interviewed by immigration on arrival atthe port, or on a "Post Report" basis at their hostels.(b) Collective Passports. Parties of people coming herefrom al over Europe for the Festival of Britain are likelyto be granted collective passports. The passport containsa nominal roll of from 5 to 50 people, the advantage beingthat individuals do not have to pay for the price of apassport. The party must arrive here and depart together.Their maximum time over here, without registration with thepolice, is as usual two months. By agreement, thecollective passports have to be approved by the P.C.O. Thereis therefore a slight advantage from our point of view, asmany of the countries from which these people will come arethose with which we have a non-visa agreement and the P.0.0.would not normally see the passports.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED/10.IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSJulw2009- 3 -10. D.0. said that the Ministry of supply have raised againthe question of vetting of employees in view of thetremendous new intake which will result from the productiondrive. They have no figures yet but the number is thoughtto be considerable and they want to know how we are going totackle the problem. They cannot afford to wait the usuallfew days or f'ew weeks to clear 7 man after his initialinterview, as candidates will not wait but ED arter alterna-tive employment. The Ministry of Supply hnd suggested thatthey should take on people in advance of their being vetted.It was thought they would be able to fire employees, shouldthe vet prove unsatisfactory, without any trouble, providedthat a fortnight'e notice wa's given and that MInisters agreedto uphold decisions taken. The purge question wAB raised asthis might result in the machinery becoming very overlonded.Mr. Jaggers proposed that new employees might be taken on asix months probationary period, BD that B man could be firedwithout the purge being invoked. In aisoussion thisprobationary period was said to be too long and one month wassuggested instead.D.B. asked if, with increased staff, we could tae onthe normal vetting before employment. D.C s610 that wewould know more when ve saw the figures.D.0. said that the whole problem of vetting Governmentemployees must be faced. We could not any that we wouldonly vet certain secret establistuuente, ab the only resultwould be that more und more establishnonte would be declaredsecreteD.C. said that it might be poBBible to offload some ofthe more immediate new vetting on to the Police. He hadtherefore asked for Eeoeraphical aretB ab we1ll ab numbers.11. D.E/A. and D.0.S. had nothing to report.Minutes of the Director--General'g Meetingheld on 13.2.51.1.D.B. spoke about the docl strikes or Merseyside andin London which had pocurred since the arreat of the sevendockers' leaders. He said that two of the seven men, DICKENSand COWLEY, were Comnunists and that the other five were regardedby the first two as Trotskyists and therefore a dangerous element.DICKENS was in fact a member of the Executive Committee of theCommunist Party.Although we had not yet Been the charges, D.B. said, wedid know that all seven men weve moving about between London andLiverpool. It was therefore possible that a charge of conspiracymight be brought against them. We still held the view, however,which we had expressed before the arrestn, that in this inatancethe Communiate did not seek to instigate the strike Bince they Roolfelt that the time was innoportune.D.B. went on to say that the Communists oonsiderathatthe arrests had made a valuable contribution to their cause,and they were anxious to bring about a further strike on theday of the trial as a protest against what they callled theinfamous Act" under which such charges had been made. Apparentlyeight new "volunteers" all Stalliniats or fellow travellers, hadbeen appointed to the strike committees, which, D.B. said, woulldmean that the Cornmunist influence would be stronger than it wasbefore.D.D.G. asked if we would have given our recommendationshad we been asked to do BO. D.B. replied that ve could nothave done thia, since the matter was a purely political oneand involved the control of unofficial atrikes. S.L.B. agreed,and added that he thought the court would be welll advised to givethe -e Gerowao maximum sentenoen. bet olanied2.D.B. told the meeting that Arthur Deakcin had calledtogether some Bixty pressmen and handed them the terms of adocument headed "Agent Provecateur" which he alleged had beenbrought Dut by the Communist Party for distribution in merchantship.oilD.B. said that after consultation with the variousdepartments concerned it had been agreed that the dooument wasalmost certainly a fake, since the Communist Party would beunlikely to distribute anything of ita kind.P.L.S. Baid he had had an enquiry from the Cardiff Policeabout this document, when they had asked for our view. D.B.Said he thought the Police should be circularisedon the Bubjeot.3.P.L.S. reported that a further course for senior PoliceOfficers was to be held next week. He wondered whether theusual cocktail party Was to be given for them. The D.G. agreedthat the party should be given. P.L.S. suggested that it shouldbe held on Tuesday evening. This was also agreed.4.0.4 reported on progress made with regard to the Port andTravel Control Group. He said he had reported at an earliermeeting that the War Office Establishments branch had approveda higher establishment for the group. On this basis the TerritorialArmy establishment had been remodelled to facilitate mobilisation,which had resulted in getting a greater nurbe of Territorialofficers.0.4 Said he had also obtained 10,000 square feet in Londonwhich could be used immediatelly on mobilisation as E Headquartersfor what is now C.ht.The D.G. said these arrangements were very satisfactory./5.- 2 -5.D.C. reported that he had been asked by Mr. de Bardelehento have a talk with Mr. Ballenger, a representative of American"big business", who had been sent over here with the backing ofthe American Government to look into the methods used by Britishfirms during the war for dealing with hold-ups caused by bombdamage, eto. He had been touring round interviewing Variousmembers of Federated British Industries and had now acquireda good general picture from the industrial side. Mr. de Bardelebenthought that D.C. could give him a brief picture of the officiallside.D.C. said he had accordingly seen Mr. Ballenger, whenhe had told him something of subversive aotivities and strikeaction by Communists, and the steps that we should take in thatregard and also with regard to counter-sabotage planning.Mr. Ballenger, who was going on to the Continent tocontinue his researches, promised to let D.C. have copies ofany reports he sent in to his own Government. He in turn hadasked D.C. to let him have a number of notes on our legislationwith regard to the control of subversive activities, eto. S.L.B.was preparing these notes.6.The D.G. asked D.C. about the increase of vetting forthe Ministry of Supply. D.C. replied that he would be in abetter position to speak on this subject at the next meeting.In this connection, D.B. said that Mr. Philip Jordan,Press Relations Officer at Downing Street., had written toSir Edward Bridges suggesting that M.I.5 should do more towardsvetting members of the Press. Mr. Winnifrith had accordinglysent the papers over to this office for comments, with a coveringletter to the effect that, although it might seem to be a strangestatement for the Treasury to make, M.I.5 could not object totaking on this commitment on the grounds that they had not thestaff to deal with it, since this difficulty could easily beovercome by taking on more staff!D.B. explained that the question of vetting members ofthe Prese arose out of the case ofa Communist employedby Reuters and sent to Korea. He felt, however, that somedistinction should be made between the vetting of members of theNational Press and Reuters, although he was convinced that wholesalevetting of this kind would be neither safe nor desirable.The D.G. asked D.B. if Mr. Winnifrith was aware that he,the D.G. had already seen the Prime Minister on the subject ofpositive vetting. D.B. said that Mr. Winnifrith did not know,but that a note was being prepared for him on the subjectS.L.B. mentioned that he had attended a meeting at theForeign Office recently, when the question of De COURCY going toKorea was discussed. It was decided that if possible he shouldbe stopped from going, but that great cape should be taken as towhat information was given to the Americans regarding him, (theAmericans being responsible for granting permit for journaliststo visit Korea) since it would almost certainly get back to De COURCYHimself.7.The D.D.G. said that Mr. Howe had spoken to him on thetelephone recently about an artiole in one of De COURCY'E Digests,which stated that the "Chief of Staff" held the view that therewouldbe war in 1951. Mr.Howe could not believe that such aStatement had ever been made by any Chief of Staff and wonderedwhether anything could be done about it.the last issue of the Digest gave whatwas purpottea account of conversations between/Mr. Truman- 3 --Mr. Truman and the Prime Minister, when they appeared todisagree on every point, It had also been announced thatthe full story of the PONTECORVO case wan shortly to bepublished.It vaB agreed that nothing would be gained by pullingDe COURCY up again, since tthis seemed to please him and toboost the Bales of his Digest.8.The D.G. asked S.LaB. about AMOS and his public tions.S.L.B. replied that he did not in faot deal with the case, butto the beat of his belief it was ati1l going on.Minutes of the Director-General's Meetingheld on 20.2.51.D.D.G. in the Chair.1.D.B. spoke about the alien problem. He said therewere about a quarter of a milllion and D.Ps in thiscountry who vere at present being interrogated by ImmigrationOfficers. All the reports came to this office, where theywere being sorted by B.2.c., who had been made largelyresponsible for this problem pending the setting up of awartime seotion on the lines of the old E. Division Allthe report were being kept, and the Immigration Servicehad been asked to help uB in the sorting by stamping themin some recognisable manner.D.B. went on to say that we were now trying to preparesome overall policy for the treatment of these allens.Whenthis had been diacussed and agreed here, the draft woulld thenbe sent over to the Home Office for their agreement andsubsequent issue to Chief Constables. We would try to laydown the general principles upon which to decide whether analien should be put on the internment list or whether heshould be made subjeot to restrictions. ie. movement,employment, eto. It would then be left to the discretionof the Home office to decide into which category an individualmight fall. Thereafter, D.B. said, the Home office wouldcertainly expect us to consolidate the l1at of allens forinternment in the event of war. This we could not esoapeand it would have to be done from our own recorde and fromreporta received from the Police. AB regardstherestrictionl1st, D.B. said that if the Home office inaisted on ourconsolidating this also it would throw 8 heavy burden on thisoffice. It would be preferable if the Police could deal withthe Home office direct, if this could be arranged. D.B.aaked D.D.G. if in fact a Chief Constable could make the Ordersfor internment, or whether they would firat have to be issuedbythe Home Office. D.D.G. replied that under the Prerogativeinternment could be authorised by a Chief Constable, whoshould then immediately inform the Home Office. As regardsBritish subjecta, however, no internment (under 18B) could becarried out without reference to the Home Secretary.D.B. said that the Russians were continuing to send goodpropaganda material to E.V.W. campa, extolling the Joys ofliving in the Soviet Union. It was hoped, however, that whenit was found that an E.V.W. was disseminating this l1teratureit might be possible to apply for deportation of the individualconcerned.P.L.S. remarked that questions on this alien problem werecontinually being asked by members of Police Forces attendingthe courses here. He said that Mr. Thistlethwaite was toaddress the course going on at present on the Bubjeot.In this connection, D.D.G. said he had often noticed atPolice courses that these questions were aaked and that theleaturer had "passed the buck" by saying they would beanswered by the appropriate officer. The answer, he thought,had not always been given and he wondered if perhaps some recordshould be kept 8O that the appropriate officer would be briefedbefore his leoture. This, P.L.S.aid, was in fact now beingdone.2.D.B. told the meeting that New Zealand had recently sometolife in a security sense. A telegram from the U.K. ServiceLiaison Staff in New Zealand to the J.I.0. (London) had beenreceived regarding the case of LISSIENKO, a Soviet citizen/living- 2 -living in New Zealand who was alleged to have spoken ofhis recall to the U.8.8.R for mobilisation, and of hisespionage activities in New Zealand.We had answered, through the J.I.0.1 that we shouldlike to correspond directly ith the New Zealand Policeabout this case, and asked for the authority of the NewZealand J.I.0. to do 80. The New Zealand J.1.0., whoserellations with the Police on Security matters were believedto be bad, had given us the clearance we wan'ted and we werewriting forthwith to the New Zealand Police Commissioner.D.B. said this whole matter would, he hoped, enable UBto re-enter the New Zealand field, although suspicion apparentlylingered there still on account of the activities of oneMAWHODD, who during the war had been wrongly represented asa member of 1.I.5.D.D.G. suggested that perhapa S.L.0. Australia shouldgo to New Zealand to look into this case. D.B. Said he feltthat it should first be seen what was to be discussed beforemaking this move.P.A./D.G. mentioned that some time ago J.1.0. New Zealannhad complained of the lack of security 3n New Zealand, ara ithad bean suggeated that the British Security Service should beasked to advise them oi thie subject. Nothing more had beenheard of the project however.3.0.2 mentioned recent reports in the Daily Telegraph andThe Times regarding sabotage to a magazine in South Wales,which had been blown up. He said there was no evidence toshow that this was in fact sabotage, although the Police heldthe view that it was not an aacident.4.P.L.S. said he had received a telephone call fromBrigadier Lewis, Secretary to the Governor of Jersey, whosaid he had been approached by the Attorney General, who inturn had been approached by the Postmaster Generall, regardinga flood of Russian propaganda lliterature into Jersey. Thishad arrived in parcels with a Moscow postmark and was addressedto respectable citizens of Jersey. At present there seemed tobe no authority to ntercept and open these parcels.D.D.G. said he thought the Governor of Jersey would havepowers to deal with a situation of this lcind.P.L.8. went on to say that he had spoken to B.1.B. aboutthis and had suggested that they should get into touch withBrigadier Levis. Their view was that the literature mighthave been some form of propaganda againat German rearmament.P.L.8. wondered what route was taken for mail from Russiato the Channel Islands. D.D.G. said this could easily beaBcertained through the G.P.0.5.0.4 said he had had applications from six ImmigrationOfficers from Jersey and Guernsey to join his Port and TravelControl Group.Minutes of the Director-General's Meetingheld on 27,2.51.1.The D.G. asked D.B. for informatio regardingrestriotions placed on the movements of Hungariandiplomats, since, he said, the J.I.C. were very anxiousto know whether these restrictions had produced anydividends.D.B. replied that although this matter had beenunder consideration by the Home office and the ForeignOffice for some time, we had not yet been informed ofany decision. He said he would make enquiries and letthe D.G know what the position was.2.The D.G. asked whether there vas any evidence ofCommunist interference in the railway strike.Later in the meeting, B.1 replied that there wasno evidence to show that the Communist Party took anyparticular part in the strike.The D.G. asked B.1 to let him have a note on thissubject for the Prime Minister.3.D.B. spoke about defectors from the Comunist Party.He said the case ofwas being studied again,Since it was felt that his allegiance to the Party wasextremely shaky. It was possible, however, that he mayhave been brought to order in view of the faot that he wasapproached by the now notorious "Mr. Richardson'.The woman who was approached by Mr.Richardson",D.B. said, had not been heard of again and was apparentlynot disposed to co-operate, possibly because of her husband.D.B. then mentioned the case of Claude COCKBURN, whowas at present in Ireland and therefore temporarily outof our reach. It was thought possible that he was driftingaway from the Party and that he might have become a RomanCatholio.4.D.B. said he was putting up a note, by agreementwith the C.R.O. for a statement by the D.G. to J.I.C.Directors on the defection of the Czech Ambassador inIndia, formerly Czech Ambassador in London. It had beenagreed by the Home office that this man should be givenasylum in this country and he was due to arrive shortly.It was believed that he knew a great deal, particularlyabout contacts between the Czech Titoists and the Yugo-Slavs.5.D.B. reported that Boris DAVIDSON had been seen byMr. Skardon, when a certain amount of new information hadcome to light, which, if it had been available earlier, wouldhave hoped considerably in assessing the case. DAVIDSONtold Mr. Skardon that before he left Leningrad Universityin 1937 he had beer approached by the N.K.V.D. and had beenasked to work for them. Hehad apparently refused to dothis and had used his British ationality to protect himself.Since he left Russia he had had no contact of any kind withthem.D.B. went on to say that he thought DAVIDSON'S Storywas true, but the oase was difficult to assess in view ofthe latter's somewhat silent and insorutable mien./2.21-2-51- 2 -The D.G. said he thbught the Prime Minister wouldlike to know of this case. D.B. said he would put upa note for the D.G.6.P.L.S. spoke about the recent meeting of ScottishPolice, which had been attended by D.B. and himself.Hesaid that one or two points of interest had arisen.i) They were interested to hear about liaisonamong Special Branches in England and Wales, since thisdid not exist in Scotland at the moment.This ma tter was being taken up by the ChiefConstable of Glasgow, who considered that the mattershould be discussed at Scottish Chief Constables' meetings.He said that in fact Detective Officers in Scotland,particularly those who dealt with our work, only met atthe annual meeting in Glasgow.ii) The Chief Constable of Edinburgh had expresseda desire to send his Detective Superintendent here toattend a course, and we had agfeed.7.P.L.S. said there were indications that we shouldbe asked to address Police Officers to a greater degreethan we had in the past. The Chief Constable of Hampshirehad decided to appoint nine officers in his district todeal with securits work, and had suggested that they shouldall come here for talks.P.L.S. said he had put this up to the D.D.G., withthe suggestion that the problem should be met.8.B.4 explained that C.P.R. used this positive vettingangle, even though they Would not expect an adverse tracein a case of this kind.9.D.C. spoke about the possible increase of vetting fortheMinistry of Supply. He said there had been discussionsin this office on the advantages or otherwise of decentralisinglocal vetting to the Police, when it had been decided thatthis would not be practicable in view of the fact that toomany people would be priDside the purely local districts, andthat we should not get adequate coverage unless we did agreat deal of cross-referring from one police district toanother. He said he proposed to inform the Ministry ofSupply of this decision, ask them to let us have their listsas soon as they could, and also to try and circumscribe thelists as much as possible.D.C. said there was a possibility that the Ministryof Supply would take people on before they were vetted, inwhich case, he said, they could only be got rid of throughan adverse vetting trace or by putting them through thepurge procedure. He said it was hoped that a probationaryperiod could be arrange, would, if an individual provedto be unsatisfactory, obviate the necessity of putting himthrough the purge procedure./3.- 3 -10. In connection with the purge, the D.G. asked what theoutcome had been regarding an ob section raised by Sir FrederiokLeggett, one of the three advisers, that we had been goingbehind their backs to the Prime Minister.D.B. said that the D.G's reply, that he could givehis personal assurance that there was no intention of goingbehind their baoks and that any interventio by the PrimeMinister would be post hoo and not ante hoo, must have beenaccepted Bince nothing more had been heard of the matter.11. D.0.8. Said that arrangements were going ahead forthe Commonwealth Security Conference, which was scheduledto take place in the middle of May and woulld last for aboutten days. He said that the Peime Minister had written tothe Commonwealth Prime Ministere, including those of thenew Dominions, asking them to send Security officers totake part in the Conference. B.0.S. said that officerfrom here would also be asked to attend.D.0.S. vent on to say that the agendas were incourse of preparation and that the 0.R.0. were in chargeof all the adminiatrative arrangements.He thought,however, that a party should be given during the Conference.This waB agreed.Minutes of the Director Generalis Meetingheld on 6.3.51.D.D.G. in the Chair.1.D.B. Bpoke about the problem of allens in time ofware There were some 429,000 in this country; 300,000 ofwhom were "enemy aliens", He said there were a largenumber of interested departments and it was thereforeessential to get aliens' names and particular Bortedout into some form of comprehensive record which wouldbe available to the departments concerned, and whichcould rapidly produce the information required for thechanges of polioy which were bound to take place in timeofwar. He said that in B. Division they had come tothe conclusion that the best way of meeting this problemwould be to try and persuade the Aliens Department of theHome office to keep these recorde on the Hollerith system.This, D.B. said, would constitute a rapid and easy wayof breaking down any particular category which at anygiven moment appeared to be vital, and would also relievethis office of the task of putting into our own recordsany more than the names of those individually who presentedasecurity riak. The interested departments would haveto be oonsulted collectively to discover that they mightrequire of a Hollerith index of this kind and to designa suitable card.After a great real of disoussior on the subjeot,it waB agreed that this proposal was a sound one. D.E./A.then suggested that ag the Hollerith Bystem would certainlybe used in the forthcoming census, the Registrar General'tdepartment might be approached and asked to punch two cardsfor each alien. The duplicate card could be sent to theAliens Department, giving them a good Start in their taliSince they would then be provided with cards for all aliensin the country.D.B. said that Mr, Howard of the Aliens Departmentwas to visit this office Shortly, when he would talk to himunofficially about the proposals.D.D.G. agreed but thought that more considerationshould be given to the technical aspects of the ppoject.2.P.L.S. told the me eting that Air Vice Marshal Graham,head of the Soottish Police College, had visited this officerecently when he had seen both the D.G. and the D.D.G.Hehad expressed a wish for a member of this office to leotureto the refresher courBes which he runs at the College forex-Btudents. These courses would consist on an average ofabout thirty people. This request was to be made in writingin due courBe.D.D.G. said the matter would have to be consideredwhen Air Vice Marshal Graham sent in his formal request.3.D.E./A. warned the meeting that the Office of Workswere putting fire resisting tubes over the energenoy lightingapparatus and that this would probably be a somewhat noisyjob. He said that anyone who found the noise unbearableshould get into touch with A.l.Minutes of the Director-eneral's Meeting heldon 10,4.51.Ntdrtonon 1.0l.The D.G. opened the meeting by asking Mr. Mitchell,0.3., to give an account of his recent tour in South Africa.2.B.1 reported that the Gommunist Party had for someconsiderable time been tightening, up their security precautions,as a result of which the products of, our regular letter andtelephone cheoks. were diminishing rapidly; In answer totheD.0., B.1 agreed that the Party was making much use of couriers.Although this state of affairs had greatly eased thepressure of, work on B.1.A., B.1 said, the position was likelyto get worse and it would therefore.be necessary to get theinformation we needed by other means.D.C. asked B.1 how this would affeot ourrent membershiprecords. B.1 said these were coming in at the moment, butthat this would not last long and that it would be necessaryto improyeo agent facilities. In thia connection, the D.G.asked what the position was with regard to agents. B.1 repliedthat the agents were operating effectively, but there were notin fact enough of them.D.C. said he thought the effect of losing these sourcesof information would be to render our vetting less watertighttha it has been hitherto, while we had claimed that we werevery well informed about the membership of the Party and hadused this as a basis for our argument in justifying vetting onour records. He said that if in future there were seriousshortcomings in the records of Party membership, the whole matterwould have to be reviewed.P.L.S. then asked if better results were being obtainedfrom the provincial Police Forces in this respect. B.. repliedthat the results were certainly better and he hoped that thePolice would be able to fill the gap in the provinces, and thatthey would be encouraged to use agents as much as possible.The whole problem was, B.1 said, being given carefulstudy.3.B.. referred to the trial at present taking place ofthe seven dockers. He said that on the first day of the trialabout one-third of the dockers had come out in sympathy withtheir colleagues, and that they threatened to come out againfor one month if the men were convicted and received that lengthof sentence. They also hoped, apparently to bring out workerson one of the Festival sites at the same time.In answer to a query by the D.G., S.L.B. said that theAttorney General had been informed.4.A. said that the Treasury had sent out a fairly stringentnote on the question of economy in the use of Btationery. Heasked that officers should keep this well in mind.5.A.1 asked that officers who wanted their cars overhauledby the garage should put in their requisition through him.6.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINPDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS19582.009- 2b.lon 5 ord 1o7.0.1 reported that there had been a large increasein vetting aa a result of the rearmament programme. Hesaid, in answer to a gyery by theD.g., that Sthis had-notyet bedome toD heavy a burden for hi's section to carry.9toa IOt In this, connection, D.c. Said that 1etter hadanbeen received from the Ministry Df Supply. They wereErsodtrying to. indude us to take up with the Home office the.31010ooqueation of local vetting by the Police of any new sintakeinto Ordnanoe Factories, otc. They w anted the Police! tooddhave first clearance of people who were locally engagedvlonhland 1ocally resident. If there was-no ad'verse trace thePolice should so inform the factory concerned, fithereoddwas an adverse trace the matter U shouldbe Sreferred to thisoffice.a10oI onto d oboson OW gohjamiotod od:hrospdost JO'D.C. went on to say that this was not as Simple asud it sounded, since the Ministry Pof Supply had made pt ClearO. eYToEnE that they did not really propose to l1mit their heirivetting vetting topeople engaged on seoret work; but wanted it to carry3- 2 -7.0.1 reported that there had been a large increasein vetting as a result of the rearmament programme. Hesaid, in answer to a query by the D.G., that this had notyet become too heavy a burden for his section to carry.In this connection, D.C. said that a letter hadbeen received from the Ministry of Supply. They weretrying to induce us to take up with the Home Office thequestion of local vetting by the Police of any new intakeinto Ordnance Factories, etc. They wanted the Police tohave first clearance of people who were locally engagedand locally resident. If there was no adverse trace thePolice should SO inform the factory concerned, but if therewas office. an adverse trace the matter should be referred to thisD.C. went on to say that this was not as simple asit sounded, since the Ministry of Supply had made it clearthat they did not really propose to lmit their vetting topeople engaged on secret work but wanted to carry it further.This was, D.C. thought, probably to guard against industrialunrest. We would, however, challenge them on a number ofpoints, the and the Home Office and Police were trongly againstproposal themselves. A Home Office circular had in faotbeen drafted some months agonon the subject, which had not yetbeen finalised but which practically forbade any departmentalvetting being carried out by Police Forces.The whole matter was, D.C. said, still underconsideration.8.0.4 told the meeting that two courses had been heldfor Territorial Officers at the Intelligence Corps Depot,Maresfield, recently. They had been a great success. Afurther course was to be held in Norfolk in June.9.P.L.S. said that the last Police course fot the winterseason was to begin on Monday next. He said that in the lastfew months the most important Forces had been covered.During the summer, P.L.S. officers are to speak atvarious Police conferences in the Police districts.P.L.S. said that the usual party for Police courseswas to be held on Wednesday next. The D.G. agreed to thisand said he felt it would be more convenient from every pointof view if these parties could be held in the canteen. Heasked P.L.S. to arrange this.10.C.3 gave an interesting account of his recent tour inSouth Africa, where he had received a most cordial reception.He said that South African security leaves much to be desired,but that he had given a series of lectures and had hadinnumerable conversations with various people concerned onthe sabiect. He said he was writing a full report and thathe would pass it to the D.G. as soon as it was finished.11.D.0.8. reported. that the Commonwealth SecurityConference was due to start on May 15th and Would probablylast for about ten days to a fortnight. He said he hopedto circulateathe agenda shortly.12.D.0.8. said that the C.R.O. had been inf ormed by theU.K. High Commissioner in Karachi that the Prime Minister ofPakistan had now agreed to Security Service representation inPakistan.It was hoped, however,that details might be worked out with D.I.B. Palistan when thelatter came over for the Commonwealth Security Conference./D.0.S- 3 -The D.D.G. asked whether there was any questionnow of a Pakistani representative coming here. D.O.S.replied that this had originally been one of the conditionsprescribed by the Pakietanie, but in fact D.I.B. Pakistanhad not at the moment anyone he could send.. It was agreedthat this was just as well, since it might lead to othercountries asking for similar facilities and this ve didnot want.13.D.0.S. reported the arrival of Mr. Simkins fromCentral Africa on transfer and ultimate posting to London.Colonel Stephens had also arrived from West Africa on transferto H/S.I.M.E. vice Mr. Magan, who was being posted to Londonon health grounds. The latter had informed D.O.S. thathe could not get a passage to the U.K. before 9th May.14.S.L.B. spoke about the leakage in the Daily Telegraphregarding the Egyptian situation. He said this story wasthought to be a combined effort of one Ashley and Gordon-Lennox, formerly diplomatic correspondent of the Telegraphwho stin works for the paper but has no official position,and who in the past had been responsible for leakages ofService information. He is a member of Brook' Club andprobably gleans items of information from Service members.S.L.B. said this was not a Cabinet lealage, but wasone of those cases where documents were given a widecirculation and pieces of information were picked up hereand there. He said that nothing further had been heard fromthe Foreign Office in this connection.15.S.L.B. said he had attended a meeting of the Sub-Committee of the North Atlantic Treaty Powers regardingthe application of our security law to contracts placedby foreign Governments with British firme. He said thiswas a difficult situation, since the Foreign Office wasinclined to Beek a revision of the Official Secreta Actsto include this Atlantio information as secret Inforationcovered by our Acts. S.L.B. said that both the Direotor ofPublio Prosecutions and himself were loth to see any amendmentto the Ofr'ioial Secrets Acts, since their interpretation waswide already. S.L.B. said he hoped we should get throughthie difficulty without any amendment to the Acts.16.S.L.B. referred to the case of leakage from R.A.E.Farnborough. He said the three men concerned, WEBB, MeDEMETRIAand GARDINER, had all been convicted. One of them hadappealed against convictie and the other two had appealedagainst sentence, but both had been upheld. An appeal hadnow been lodged against the fines, but the result of this wasnot yet known./17- 2, -17.D.C. reported that Sir Philip Vickery and Major Stonehad departed for Washington on the first stage of the securityinspection by the Tripartite Working Party of N.A.T.0. Theirterms of reference vere Go inspect the security arrangementof the countries concerned, particularly France, and to dreawup propoaals for any improvementa thereof.They will becarrying out a Security inspection in Londonea' the beginningof next month, after which they will be EDing to Paris.D.C. said that sir Philip Vickery would be making areport on American and Frenoh security for DLLIT own Information.18.D.C. said that the new section, 0.3, was now launchedunder Mr. Mitchelll. He saidit would be possible to give moredetails of the world the Beotion would have to carry out whenMr. Mitohell has had time to Study some of the problems.Itwould, however, take over departmental security work on theinternational side, formerly carried out by C.I.0. and wouldalso cover COSMIC and METRIO security.Minutes of the Director-General'a Meetingheld on 24.4.51D.D.G. in the Chair.1.D.C. reported that the Tripartite Security WorkingGroup, on which Sir Philip Vickery and Major Stone wererepresenting the U.K., was still in Washington but wasdue to return at the end of the month in order to startinvestigations in this country on about the 3rd May.The American delegation would consist of nine people,but the size of the French delegation was not yet known.They woulld be visiting the Ministry of Defence, J.I.B..the Air Ministry, the Foreign Office, the Admiralty,the Ministry of Supply and this office.As far as this office was concerned, D.C. said,S.L.B. would play the principal part. There would alsobe a tour of the Registry, but they would not be allowedto see our P.Fs. They would, however, be able to see thesecurity vetting reports of the Departments concerned.As regards the investigation in Washington, D.C.said that he had been informed by Sir Philip Vickery thateverything was being carried out on a somewhat grandiosescale, with security films, eto. D.C said he did notthink we could aspire to this standard here.2.D.0.S. said that as the agenda for the CommonwealthSecurity Conference had now, he thought, been seen by thoseconcerned in this office he hoped that they were making thenecessary arrangements to carry out their commitments.3.C.2 spoke about a project of some importance, namely,the storing of orude 011 in brine pits. He said tha't pipelines were now being laid in Cheshire, where it was hopedto store some 1,000,000 galllons of crude 0il. He saidthat we had been approached by the Ministry of Fuel andPower as regards security measures for this project, andthat we were now going into the matter wi th I.C.T. whoown the brine pits, and with Shell, who own the oil.D.D.G. asked whether this was in fact to be theonly storage plage. C.2 replied that there might be otherplaces but that this one in Cheshire would certainy be themain one.4.C.3 said that we had been requested by the B.B.C.to undertake the inspection of certain of their premises,both inside and outside London, from the point of view ofdepartmental security and the risks of sabotage.He saidthat Mr. Fenton had carried out inspections both in andout of London, and that he, 0.3, had had talks wi ith officialsof the B.B.C. as regards Secrets to be safeguarded and theprecautions taken to do s0. There only remained Bush Houseand a building in Oxford Street to be visited, after whicha report woulld be Bent to the B.B.O. making recommendationsfor their consideration.5.S.L.B. said that there had been a message from theHome Office aaking whether we were interested in a site atHam Common, not Latchmere House. They said they had hada request from the War Office as to whether they wanted toclaim the site in question on requisition.It vas agreed that this office was not interestedin the proposition./6.- 2 -6.S.L.B. referred to D. Notice procedure in thecase of Clayton-Hutton'e book. He said that the publishershad stated, quite rightly, that they could not go behind theauthor's back and ask the Department concerned whether infact the book had been approved, since this woulld be liableto involve ther in a case of breach of contract. S.L.B.explained that layton-Hutton had approached the Air Ministry,who had approved the book after making certain cuts, and anintroduction had been written to it by a high-ranking AirForce officer. The publication of the book had, however,subsequently been turned dovn by the J.I.C.S.L.B. went on to say that the only possible coursewould be to ask the Director of Public Prosecutions toprosecute Clayton-Hutton, although this was difficult inview of the faot that the latter was at present in Americaand it was not known whether he was coming back to thiscountry. In the meantime the F.B.I. were also trying tostop an American firm from publishing the book, but itwas not yet known what success or otherwise they had had.D.D.G. said that cases of this kind should not bedealt with through individuals in Ministries and that theyshould be centralised through the J.I.0. or some similarbody. He asked S.L.B. to take this matter up when theClayton-Hutton case had been disentangled.7.8.D.B. said there was to be a further conference at theHome Office this week in order to try and determine the sizeof the problem of the control of refugees in time of war, andalso to consult with the Foreign Office as to whether therewas any possibility of restraining the movement of rerugeesby agreement with the foreign Governments concerned. Heexplained that this whole question was not yet detailed enoughto Concern C.4, but ultimately there would have to be aconference in order to consider what machinery should be setup to control the flow of refugees.S.L.B. said he hoped foreign Governments would notbe discouraged from sending over their technical experts.D.B. said that evacuation plans were at present being studiedby the (ilitary Committee of the Brussels Treaty Powers.ORIGINAL THIS IS A COPYNDEPARTMENTDOCUMENTRETAINED(4)OFTHEPUBLICSECTION1968RECORDS20o9