A A The National Archives (c) crown copyright Catalogue Reference:kv/4/471 Image Reference:1 POL F 53-24-90 SAV18 LIDDEIL DIARIES FILE CLOSED D O S Form 924 SEE ALSO LIST INSIDE COVER Star Star Serial No Star Designation Date Serial No Designation Date Serial No Designation Date KV K V 1 7 esg G60 Edn2 POL F 53-24-90 FILE/GL GSED itt Aa nor 122 nd tshir 7 We Even L lie 1.. 1949. lst January. I saw the New Year in with Tormy Harris. It is fficult to say whether my prophesy about 1918 being an all time 1ow has worked out; on the whole, I am afraid it has. I am not sure that 1949 wont produce an all-time- lower! I am rather reinforced in this view by a series of broadcasts being given by Bertrand Russell on "Authority and the Individual. He makes a historicall survey of all the various civilisations from the paleolithib age onwards, and, although he has several leotures still to go, he seems to be coming to the conclusion thet the present trend towards rigid central authority is killing initative and progress and is bound to end in lstlessneBs and OBBification. The logical conclusion, he thinks, 16 a complete break-up followed by a period of anarchy, the stress and strains of which will reinvigorate the human race and restore initiative to the ordinary man. He will be scussing in further lectures whether there is any possibiliity of mitigating the evil tenets of the present trend, or whether disaster is inevitable. At home ve seem to be continuing to "feed the dog on its own tail", and I doubt whether the ordinary citizen, and the ordinary workmnan, realises that what N he i8 getting in Foodisubsidies and social services, some of which he neither appreciates or warits, he has to pay for heavily through indirect taxation on his beer, cigarettes, and in fact everything he buys, quite apart from the direot taxxation on his earnings. Stafford Cripps, I think, still believes that he is leading the country to state cocialism, which differs little if at all from Communism, by evollutionary means, ,-thussavolding the violence of revolution. He is. however, ignoring the human factors, which Bertrand Russell so clearly states. In Europe there: is perhaps a slight easing of the situation, although this may be only temporary. The air lift s.been maintained in Berlin,and the Russians show no immediate signs of deliberately provoking a war, They have: devastated their own zone and are clearly feeling the draught. Having been wholly obstructive on a11 matterss of quaaripartite control, they lose no opportunity of distorting the facts and arranging matters so that it shall appear to the Germans that we are responsible for their surferings. At the moment I think that the German people are with us, but they are cleary ready to play off one against the other in order to hasten the wi ithdrawal of all forces from Germany. The Russians, having established,wi with the aid of Faullus and his Communist indoctrinated felllow prisoners of war, a Gestapo for the eaatern zone, show signs of pressing in the not far distant future for the -withdrawall of all Allied Forces. This would leave them free to spread Communism throughout the whole of Germany. If we refuse to withdraw, they will make us appear to the Germans as the oppressors. The stablishment of a Federal Government for the Western zones is eeting with quite a number of difficulties, and there are already signs 2. of a certain amount of arrogance on the part of the Germans. They have been granted permission to set up Special Branches for the Laender Governments. and discussions are now going on to meet an inevitablle demand for a Federal Security Service. The fact is that once you allow ther to have a Government, it isdifficult to deny them an intelligence service to protect them against Communism withinntheir territory and poasibly Russian agreesion from without. On the other hand, we have the experience of what they did after the 1914-1918 war. Already by 1920 they had a State (?) Service in Prussia, which was shortly afterwards followed by a Reich Service for the whole of Germany. Ostensiby its purpose was to combat Gommundam, but it vas not long before it was actively implicated in evasions of the Versailles Treaty, and a party to the "Unholy Alliance" between the German General Staff and the Soviet Government, by which arms and aeroplanes were manufactured by branches of Krupps and Junkerg in Russia and filtered back into Germany, contary to the terms of the Peace Treaty. When the German dock workers at Stettin protested at having to unload these arms, they were told by the Comintern to "pipe Down', There is to be a conferenceeon this matter at Herford on the 17th Provisionally we feel that a Federal Security service should be resisted, that the Lander S.B.8 should be organised on the zonal basis and poasibly products from each zone might be integrated on a nationality basis in Frankfurt. The argunent that if you don' give the Germans their own Security Service they will have 8 clandestine one is, in our view, not altogether Bound. If you give them a Security Service they will merely use it as a cover for clandestine activities. There seems to be Some slight improvement in the situation in France, which has recently weathered a serious Strike by the miners, liberallly supported by "voluntary" contributions from the minera of the satellite countries. They have also got through some pretty drastic financial reforms. Unfortunately, in Erance, the passing of a budget does not necessarily imply that the Government are going to be able to get the money. There is no doubt that the Communist Party has had ca set-back, and it is to be hoped that the oentrall Government Will be able to hold the position. Alternatively, de Gaulle might ultimately play into the hands of the Communists. It has even been said that the Cominform now favours his aavent to power as they feel that he would be a spoke in the wheels of western Union. There 18 an "uneasy" peace in Italy where the Comnunists are still powerful. The Government seem to have forgotten the despicable part that their country played during the war and are full of indignation about not having their colonies returned to them. While we are ready to give them back Somaliland we are, for the moment at any rate, standing firm about Cyrenaica and Thipoli. The Scandinavians are showing some signs of getting together on matters of derence, but Sweden has not finally made up her mind. Meanwhile the result of the Brussels Treaty are beginning to take Some shape in the form of committees for this, that and the other. Montys H.Q. is being set up at Fontainbleau which, of course, exists only on paper, and at a meeting that we had at the 3. L.C.S. a few weeks ago to discuss deception, the remark was made that Western Union itself was one huge deception plan which might be worth backing. Me are implicated in two ways: firstly by what is known as the Metric Committee which is struggling against considerable odds to enforce some sort sort of security in the passing of secret information to the Brussels Treaty Povers, which is essentiall to them in the planning of defence measures. So far America has not finally committed herself, but there is a general feeling that she will give ber backing, both economically and in manpower. Grants under E.R.P. have been approved on the economic front.. India and Pakistan are beginning to show Some signs of composing their differences in Kashmir where it has been agreed to have plebescite, and Hyderabad has been subdued without inflaming communal strife. In the Middle East a serious situation has arisen over the reversal suffered by the Egyption forces, and a task force has been mobilised on the Egyptan frontier to prevent incursions by Israeli troops. The position has been further inflamed by the recent shooting dow of 5 British aircraft who were on reconnaissance over Egyptian territory. In Indonesia the Dutch have taken the bull by the horns and reoccupied the whole country without reference to U.N.0. observers. The matter was taken by vigorously by Hoagson, the Western Autralian delegate to U.N.O. and Nehru is holding a conference of Asdiatic people, to which he hes invited the Australians and Nev Zealanders. It is cllear kxrexia from his publie utterances that he wishes India to lead the Asiatie peoples, and that he is bent on getting alll Europeans out of Asia. Personally, L have a great deal of sympathy with the Dutch who under endess provocation have decided to set their own house in order without reference to U.N.0. They maintain that Indonesia is a purely domestic affair; their only mistake was to alllow UN.O to take any part in the first instance. They only aid this under pressure from ourselves and other countries. It is difficult to see that Indonesia is any More a matter for U.N.0. than Malaya where we are operating with military forces to restore order. While there is a slight improvement there, the situation is by no means under control. MacDonald has been making criticisms about S.I.F.E., the role of which he does not really understand. He feel a general lack of information, but the rimary colllectors of suc'h information on Malayan territory have, of course, been the Malayan Security Service, formerly under Dalley., but not split up into S.B.S of the Malayan union and Singapore at last. It will take Some time before these S.B. get into their stride and the flow of information improves. I think everybody is at last persuaded that there is no post for Dalley in Malaya. The whole situation. has been much 2| agrivated by the success of the Comunists in China. Efforts are being made at some compromise government; it seems fairly certain t. the country w111 ventually go under Communist domination. This may well aggnivate the situation both in Hong Kong and Malaya. Burma is extremely unstable with both the Communists and the Karen in rest. Broadly speaking it may be said that while there is perhaps a slight rally on the Communist front in the west, considerable rogress has been made in the Fast. At home ve are finalising our War Book. AS soon as this is one we shall proceed to make survey of our own dommittments. It is, I am sure, essentiall that every seetion in the office should know what they are to do in the precautionary stage, and what increase of staff they willl require. We can then calculate what ex-members of the office will be required and exactly what they will be callled upon to do. J.I.C. calculations are based on a. war in 1957 with the possibility of something Blowing up in the intervening years due to Russian miscalculations or failure to realise that there is a limit to cold war activities. ThlIs IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENTRETAINED ORIGINAL IDEPARTMENT 3rd January. OF The PUBLIC ORECORDS ACT 1958 We had a long meeting with the D.G.; myself, Kelary Mor Dick and Horrocks. Kellar has just returned from Singapore. He give a general account of what had happened after MacDonald sent his telegram criticising S.I.F.E. and S.I.S. He himself was away at the time in Rangoon or Hong Kong. On return he found that the S.I.S. man, had, on instructions from his office, applied to S.I.F.E. for details. AS Kellar was away he had gone to MacDonald's Secretary. MacDaonald was extremelly annoyad that what he regarded as a personal telegram in which he said he was merely "thinking aloud" should have reached S.1.S. or indeed Kellar. He refused to show a copy. Meanwhile Kellar had returned and seen the Cs-in-C who were extremely annoyed that an organisation which they regarded as having responsibilities to themselves should have been criticised by the Governor General without reference to them. Kellar had made the position clear to them as to the precise role of S.I.F.E. and then went on to see the Commissioner General. He told MacDonald that he was very surprised that this criticism had not been made direet to him. MacDonald tried to excuse himself by saying that he was only "thinking aloudr and then reiterated his criticism that S.I.F.E. should be staffed by people who had local knowledge of the area. He kept harping back to Dalley and it became cllear that what he really vanted was someboay to whisper little bits of information into his ear about what was likely to happen within the next 48 hours. He did not seem to realise that if the information was not good it was better not to have it at all, and that the criticisms e.was hurling against S.I.F.E. should really be hurled against M.S.S. or at its 5. component parts which were now under the Commissioners of Police Singapore and Malaya. Kellar made this very clear to him and said, moreover, that it was far more important to have a hend of S.I.F.E. with a knowledge of Security Intelligence work than to have a man with local knowledge. If the two could be combined so much the better, but such people were difficult to find. He then explained in minute detail the role of S.I.F.E. which is to cover the wider area of S.E. Asia, to bring kxk to the local authorities our general experience on Security Intelligence Work and on the activities of Communists and the Russian Intellllgence Service, and to take out of the area anything that had a bearing on these subjects which Would be of interest to London. In SO far as the gound-work in Malaya was concerned he must look to his own S.B.s. The meeting was quite friendly and MacDonald was, on the whole, apologetic. There was to be a meeting of the Defence Comittee when a decision would be reached as to whether any drastic re-organisation of the intelligence set up was necessary. Kellar's view was that it was early days to expect very much fror the two S.Bs. Obviously they had an enormous task and it might take them months, if not years, to get into the saddle. The D.G. had, of course, offered to go out, but it seemed that MacDonalla vas not particularlyanxious for him to go, he would clearly be on the side of the Commanders-in-chief. There is, however, to be a meeting after Kelllar's return when the whole position will be reviewed. Meanwhile we are trying to meet the criticism that the officers have not got sufficient local knowledge. We may be able to reinforce Cowan on the Chinese side by getting the services of Thompson, late of the 3.B. of Hong Kong. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION (4) PUBLIE RECORDS ACT 1958. He told me that A.V.M. Atcherley, is going out to command the nalistan Air Forces. "e agreed that thereuwould be no very useful purpose in his seeing us, as by agreement with Palkistan we coulld not have a liaison officer there for another six months. I tolld Pendred that I had told Atcherley that D.I.B., was an extremely experienced officer and had our confidence. Censorship, who are malcing their war plans, want to discuss our Watch List requirements. I had a meeting about this with Dick and others today. Sections are to be asked to state their requirements. 6. 4th Januany. D.G Meeting - see folder of minutes. Dick and I attended 8 meeting in Mr. Dean's room at the Foreign office to discuss the setting up of Federal Security Service in Germany. T said that as ve had had no time to consider the matter, we should like to do So in order to satisfy ourselves that we could really be of assistance to the meeting in Germany. I told the meeting of the developments inGermany after the last war, which are recorded at minute 30 SE.75/Germany/7), and stated that in our view any service that was set up now might well be used as an instrument for causing dissension among the Allies, and ultimately for getting us out of Germany. Apart from this, it would depend entirely upon political developments as to whether such a service would make a valuable contribution towards providing information about Russian intentions. It seems that So far no request has been made for a Frederal Security Servic'e, but that such a request is confidently e xpected. The present proposal, therefore, is to examine the consequences of acceding to such a request. From what was said by Dean, it seemed farily lear that there would be C onsiderable difficulty in imposing restrictions on the activities of the organisation. There woulld be no vetting of the personnel and only in extraordinary cases any right to demand the dismiaal of those who were unco-operative or directing their efforts into wrong channels. We should, in fact, be almost entirely depenendent uponthe good will of the Germans. This might be difficult to obtain, particularly if under Allied control we were obliged to concede points to the French. It is not at all unlikely that the French may say that unless there is complete Allied control of the organisation it is not to exist at all. I asked what the powers of the Federal Government were, if at any time, for example, they thought it desirable to proscribe the Communist Party. Dean seemed to think that they would have a perfect right to do this if they considered it necessary. T then asked what povers we had to order the Germans to proscribe the Communist party It was felt that we could do S pon the grounds that it was a menace to the security of the Armed Forces. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED INDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. Mach 20i0 7. 5th January I lunched with van Moyland. I told him aboutthe high level Securitot Conserenee in London, the moving spirit of which was of the French Surete. Fock va s attending on behalf of Holland. It seemed to mne a pity that the Department of Justice was not represented. I told him that a movement was on foot to set up some sort of organisation in Paris of a permanent kind for pooling information on Communist activities. This did not seem to us 8 good idea. We are recomending ad hoc meetings every three months,: in order to review the procedure for exchange of information through normal channels. We might also put in papers on general subject such as Communist finances ete. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Maxch 2ci0 6th January Jack Easton and came over to discuss with Dick and myself the question of S.I.F.7. S responsibility for the CO--ordination of security Intelligence In the area. It was agreed that the pattern of S.I.M.E. should be adopted. The further question as to whether we should have any representation in Indonesia or in Bangkol on a purelly overt basis was left for discussion at our general meetings with S.1.8. which are to begin shortly. The job of hesemeetings is to try and narrow the differences between the two organisations. I had a discussion vith Perfect and Oughton about the function of Pollice Liaison Officers. oughton thinks that the purpose we have in mind would be better served if B.1.A were SD staffed that they could get up frequently from their desks and go and lecture to C.C. S or their S.B.s on a really informed basis. This, of Course, was on the assurpt ion that 95 of the work which we are asking C.0.8 8. to do on our behalf is concerned with Communism. oughton seemed to have in mind the attachment to this office of Police Officers from the various districts who would Work in B.1.A. Personally, I do not think this is a good idea. Ve have been very lucky in getting someone like Mann in Scotland, but Mann will not be with us for ever, since he will have to take his premotion and we shall have little or no control Over the appointment of his successor. If ve had Police Officers from a number of forces passing through this office, they might be of the type that would be more interested in building up theor own police files froin information here. While in some ways this would serve useful purpose, we have to remember that police files are open to the whole Police Force, and that the risk to security woulld be considerable. The question to decide is whether to reinforce B.1.A to carry Police Liaison or whether the liaison function should e/separate one confined solely to putting oil into the wheels. This IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED INDEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION 314) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 March 2Dic Kellar.he gone back to Singapore. T dined with hey wene both extremely friendly and E am sure that 11 we had a free hand we could make a vast improvement in the flow of information between ourselves and the French on erpionage activities. 7th January The D.G. has seen the P.M. with and Bevin. The imnediate purpose was to try and find some way out of the present deadock which had been reached oving to a refusal by the Americans to pass any infor- nation to us on guided missiles unless we give an absolute guarantee that it would not reach the Australians. It was disclosed at the THIS GOPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED NIDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 9. 3(4) OF THE PUJBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 MARc oo meeting that the P.M. had just had 8 letter from Chifley stating that Shedden was paying a visit to this country to renew his former contacts and discuss, amongst other things, the question of security. It seems to alll that if the Americans could be persuaded to disclose to him the basis of their apprehensions about Australian security it would be well worth his while to come to this country via the U.S. It was agreed that the F.0. should draft a letter to Truman setting out the impasse that had been reached and the serious effects of the American action which not only rendered our co-operation with the Dominions almost impossible, but put a real spoke into the wheels of allied co-operation. The Australians had spent a lot of money on their long-range rocket range and if they could not have the information they might abandon the whole project. This would be serious since Australia was one of the few places where experiments could be safely conducted. If a favourable reply is received from Trumen the P.M. will write to Chifley making the suggestion that Shedden should come via America, and pointing out that it would go a long way to satisfying the Americans if Shedden could say that the various measures previously mentioned by Chifley had actually been put into operation. It is also proposed that if a favourable reply is received, either the F.O. or 'c' could obtain approval from U.S.O.I.B. for Shedden to be suitable briefea by Hollis before his departure from Australia. 10th January At the D.G. meeting he outllined the position with regard to Australis, and Dick spoke about the Western Union conference at which he had been in the Chair. After a good deal of talk from ve have got agreement tto three monthly ad hoc meetings. There is to be a permenent Secretary who will prepare the agenda and papers on certain aspects of Communism which will be submitted for discussion. Nigel Yatson'e Job as Charge Affaires in Luxembourg has come to an end. It is generally felt that it would be difficult for him to start again in this office. It is possible that he may be offered further employment at the F.0. It was agreed that Hemblys Scales should go to the Middle East. A suocessor for Thistlethwaite will have to be found as his term in Washington comes to an end in May, unless he is anxious to sign on for another two years. He have had an enquiry from the Ministry of Town and Country Planning about the loss of certain aerial photographs covering the industrial area. The Police are going to look into the matter in the first instance. 10. 11th January. Dick, Irvine and I discussed the proposal that the Germans should be allowed to set up a Federal .1.5. and M.I.6. organisation. We came to the conclusion that Dick would have to attend a meeting at Herford on the 17th, and that we should recomment against the Federal organisation under German control. We thought that the Leande S.B.E might be organised on a zonal basis and that the zonal irormation might be pooled in Frankfurt between the three Allies. on the basis of this advice could be given by the Allies to the Federal Government. It seemed to us that the Federal organisation would merely give them cover they required to conduct a clandestine one. I saw suot. Adams and supt James of Jamaica and Trinidad respectively. I gave them a short account of the structure of the office and the work that we are trying to do. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINES D.G. meeting - see folder of minutes. IN DEPARTMENT UNDER BSEOTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 MARCH 2010 T saw Sir Norman Brook. He said that he had been discussing with Bridges the question of our being informed of matters in which we were interested which were to come before the Cabinet. The situation arose from the fact that we were not in any particular Ministry. Heiwe, for exemple, been under the Ministry of Defence, we should automatically be notified when matters came up in the: Cabinet which were our concern. They both considered, however, that ve were on the whole more suitably placed under the P.M. Brook thoroughlly appreciated our difficulties and proposed that Donalason, who is acting for Bridges in quite a number of activities affecting intelligence work, would be the most suitable person to hold a watching brief for ourselves. He is proposing to notify Donalason about this and agreed with me that it would be good thing for Donaldson to become more acquainted with the officers of this department and the work that we do. I have established with the D.O. and Horrocks that for the time being perfect should take over Kirby Green'e duties in addition to his on. If this became too ongrous we should have to consider finding him an assistant. 11. 12th January. THISISACOPY This COPY ORIGINAL DOGUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT LINDER SECTION 3(4) OP THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 ARIL 2010 'c' telephone to me about Burmese B.J.s It seems that Tulloch is bringing a libel action against the Daily Worker, owing to the publlication of certain data about Tulloch' activities, passed to them by a renegade Burmese in this country. The Daily Worker are anxious to prove that Tullock and his friends are operating with the full backing of M.I.5. and 1.I.6. The accusation is, of course, wholly untrue, but there is nothing that we can do at the moment except to watch the situation. The people really at the back of Tulloch are the Daily Mail whose correspondenb Campbell got arrested by the Burmese and has recently been released without trial. The Daily Worker are merely trying to maice inischief for the British Government. 13th Jannary. Stratton telephoned to say that the calandars which he had printed for the Ghana Trading Co., were reaay for despatch but that no money vas forthcoming. He intended, however, to send the goods off as whether they were paid for or not they were no use to anyone ellse and if the delivery was accepted there the matter would lie. Meanwhile, He wants to write to the Colonial Office stating the full facts and inserting a paragraph to the effect that action was taken with our approval. I told him to send along a copy of his letter. I said that I was uncertain whether he was wise in writing to the Colonial Secretary who would only pass his letter down the line; it might possibly be better if we tackled the question on a lower level. Hollis talked to me about Lachmann. We are recommending against his naturalisation. I see no grounds for thinking Lachmann is loyal to this country. We feel that in an emergency he would be easier to deal with an alien than as'e British subject. Incidentally Hollis has had to do most of the work on this himsellf. 12. ORIGINAL DOCOMENT RETAINED 15th January. IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS Mitcheil came to tell me that a Fascist AlleB8MOAT, who has been given notice of transfer under the Prime Mimmister ruling, had said that he was not a member of the Fasicst Party. although he was a member of the Union Movement. The Treasury are trying to take the line that as he has admitted his membership of the Union Movement there is no case for him to go before the Tribunal. They have, however, asked us to give them proof that the Union Movement is the successor of the B.U.F. Graham Mitchel has produced convincing evidence on this point. While we can say that membership of that Party might in certain circumstances cause us to have reasonable doubts about a man's reliability, if we were asked to what country he would be likely to pass his Government information we should have no answer. For political reasons the Fascists were included by the Government in the Prime Minister's statement, and they will now have to face the consequences. We think that MOAT should be allowed to go before the three Advisors. If not there is certain to be an outery that Comunists are given this opportunity while Fascists are not. I had a long talk with Join Marriott about GARBO and about the general progress we were making in our enquiries into Russian espionage. I thought that for the moment we should forget about GARBO and consider what positions woulld be most advantageous to us if we should find ways and means for holding them A lot of useful ground-work had been done with regard to the Military Attache's office and the Trade Delegation and our general impression, but no more than an impression, is that the Military Attache's office is largely concerned with the collection of information obtained from technical journals and other overt sources, and that members of the Trade Delegation who Visited factories submit anything that they think of interest from an industriall mobilisation point of view. The Communist Party Executive does not put espionage on behalf of Russia on its agenda. on the other hand, there are certain members who, vith the possible connivance of someone on the Executive, are prepared to work independently for the Russians. other may do it knovileage of the Party at all, since the party clearly does not want to give the Labour Government and the Trade Unions any ammunition which would assist thein in their general commotion against the C.P. What is important to discover is who are the Weissi.sin or contact men in the present set-up. Experience shows that these people are not necessarily Communists at all, and that the motives for working for the Russians are often monetary or due to blackail. WEISS at the outset may not have been conscious of what he was doing. He may have thought that he was merely in charge of an Import and Export firm. It vas only later that he realised when he received a visit that he was really intended to act as a spye It was then that the element of black- mail came in. Experience showed, further, that when people of this type were recruited it was very often months, if not years, before they were taken on in an important capacity. It was no good, therefore, thinking that we could obtain results quickly. 13 THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Aic PoiO 17th January Hollis and Paynter came to see me about a request from the Senior Air Technicell Liaison Officer at the U.S. Embassy, Lt. Coll. Maward Paine. He had been sent from Allec Coryton to ask whether could be put into touch with someone who would talk to him about could the security be no objection of our latest to this designs provided in aircraft there was We no attemtp agreed that to conduet there an er uiny into our security, which would lead to the Americans refusing to alllow us to manufacture or make use of devices of American origin. 18th January D.G. Meeting. - see folder of Minutes. I had a meeting with Curnning and Mann about Operation HAPPY RETUPN which involves a visit by the Russians who are returning battleship, two submrines and tvro destroyers lent to there during ule war. The Admiralty think there may be defectors ana want ellaborate arrangements nlade. 14. Burt came to tell me that he had had a visit from Lennox who was asking about NOCARTIVEY and Bevan. Burt had stalled told him that Lennox was clearly meddling in something which was no business of his or of ours, and that he would be well advised to tell him nothing. Lennox was quite capable of intimating that he vas acting on behalf of 'C' or indeed of myself. I said that since I was concerned at any rate, he could tale it that Lennox was not, and would not be employed in any way.. He then told me that Lennox had talked to ZIGYAG, who apparently gave him some enquiry on these lines. In Burt's view nothing could be more ill-advised since ZIG-ZAG was capable of double-crossing anyone if it might in any way to his advantage. Hutson telephoned to say that although he sympathised with us in Our views about LACHMANN. He thought that the Home Office would have to naturalise him. 19th January. Thomas came to tell me that there had been several cases of sbotage affecting the Navy and that he had been asked to go down and investigate. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 20th January 3(4) OF THE PUBLIO RECORDS ACT 1958 AReiL DOo At the J.I.0. (0 & S) we discussed the problem of MAULLARDS manufacturing certain American valves. The Amenicans had raised objections on security grounds in view of MULLARD' connections with Phillips of Eindhoven. Phillips have clearly wide ramifications on the Continent and at one time had branches in Poland and Csechoslovakia. Although MULLAPD'S have one Dutoh director on the Board we think that ve can tell him the contract has to provide reasonable security. Me are sending a copy of the contrast to the Americans in the hopes that they will agree. If not Jobnston may have to go out and argue the case. Boucher came to see mne about a luncheen between C.I.G.S. and Philip Noel Baker at which the latter had suggested that Slim shoula consult with his opposite number in the U.S. with a view to finding a solution to the Greek problem. Noel Baker took the view that this matter coulld be Fairly easily solved and that the majority of people in Greece were not Communist minded. Slim had aamitted that Noel Baker' wife had big interest's in Greece and that this 15. might bet the explanation of these aavances. I told Boucher that I knew somebody who could probably give me the answer, but that the position was rather delicate. I thought, in any case, that if the wife had property in Greece, she probably had a fairly lively correspondence with friends in that country. They might well have implored her to do something to bring about a settlement which would ease the present state of unrest. Travis came to. see me about two things. First of all, he wa.s worried about his staff. He thought there might be a leakage about his Russian activities; could be put anybody into G.C.H.Q. who woulld give him the answer. I said that first of all this would be against the spirit of the Prime e.Minister's instructions and secondly I doubted whether such an operation could produce the answer he wanted. Inevitable somebody put into G.C.H.Q. for that purpose would become known and the repercussions both on Travis and ourselves would be considerable. For the above reasons I said that I was afraid we could not help him. He then said that he was extremely worried about the nysical security of the premises; coulld we sena down anyone Jo give him aavise, regardless of expense, as to what should be done. I said that we could send done Collard who vas concerned with the security of atomic research. He welcomed this suggestion. 21st January THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 APRIL 2010 16. THIS THISISACOPY ACOPY A IN ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED 3(4) DEPARTMENT OF THE PUBLIC UNDER RECORDS SECTION ACT 1958 APRIL 2010 24th January Bunt told mhe that he might possible be taking Young's Jos as NO. 2 to Hove. He wanted me to know about it, but did not mant the matter to go any further. I gathered that Hatherill had been suggested as his successor, although Burt thought that Tommy Thomson is fully qualified to do the job. I could not draw Burt on Hatherill. Personally, I have never very much liked the look: of him. Burt's departure will be a great blow to us, but I am glad that he has been offered promotion. D.G. Meeting - see minutes I had a meeting with Bennett, the two Hills, Baynter and Mitchelll to disouss the question of warning factory managers in the case of technicials who were dismissed on the grounds of subversion. e came to the conclusion that either the Adriralty or the Ministry of supply should conmunicate in writing a note of warning to other factories sho might be inclined to take the man on, or alternatively that we should give such a warning on 17. on their behallf by word of moth. The whole position is rather delicate for various reasons. on the other hand, it seems futile, having got rid of a technician from one factory where secret work is going on we then have to purge him out of another one. our views will be incorporated in a memorandum being put put up by the Ministry of Defence to the Government to inform them on the procedure for dealing with Communists in industry. 25th January D.G. ifeeting - see folder of minutes I had a talk with Jack Morton about his new job, which I am sure he will carry out with efficiency and success. 18. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDERSECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Apa 2O10 26th January 28th January Hayter, 'C' and T discussed the ashington case Of leakage from our Embassy there in 1945. It has been established from GLINT that certainly two top secret documents of a: Cabinet level were sent to Moscow. We transmitted O.T.P. So it must have been someone inside the Embassy. It has already been established that one RANKIN, believed to have been responsible for leakage from our Embassy, in Pome, was at the material time employed as archivist at the Embassy in Washington, but why he was ever allowed to go there is a mystery. We know, too, from the WEISS.. case, that BARON, who is now under observation here and at one time had a Soviet esbionage commitment, was also at the Embassy in Washington. Hayter finally agreed, somewhat reluctantly, that we should be in charge of the case in its wider aspeets, particulary owing to its ramifications here and possibly elsewhere. He thought, however, Bobby Mackenzie ought to be in charge of the enguiries in the British Embassy in Washington. '0' was to draft a telegram to Marr Johnson which would be agreed by us all. Jack Easton, and the Establishments Officer of S.I.S. met myself, Dick and Horroeks for our first liscussion on the relations of M.1.5. and 1.I.6. We decided to exchange papers and agreed the various subjects which we wanted to discuss. When we had had time to study the papers we would meet again. 19. Newsam asked to See me. He had received Orme Sargent's letter which expressed the view that the F.O. maintenance officers under Gambier Parry should be given in order that they could make the necessary tests in our Embassies abroad. Newsam wanted us to draft a reply. He thought we should say that the Home Secretary had a grave responsibility on these matters, and vas opposed to spreading the knowledge unless it was absolutely necessary. There would be no economic case as the Post Office already had a commitment for Canadain Embassies. 'o' telephoned to me his draft telegram. It did not place anybody in charge of the case, and I got him to insert certain paragraphs. He expressed some doubt as to whether Hayter would agreed 29th January. I got in 'C's absence, to sent me over a copy of his telegram. She told me that she had not sent it off as she did not know whether it had been approved by the F.O. When it arrived it was clear that the sentences I gave over the phone had not been included. THIS IS COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 31st January. 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 ARi 2o1o We have redrafted 'o's telegram ane then Went over E to See him: He said he had given an assurance to Hayter that the telegrain would go off on Saturday. He said it should have been sent and it had been drafted by the F.O. Hayter had insisted on taking out the paragraphs which I had inserted. I tola 'c' that this was unsatisfactory, since it could only resullt in undless mnuddle and confusion. Apart from that I thought that we should rightly be in charge. The F.O. security department was only a nuts and bolts department and not qualified to investi- gate espionage. I therefore proposed to see Hayter. I saw the Lord President at his request. T showed him the note at 52a in PF. 7.61365. He said that it coincided th hin ovin views about ZUCKERLAN. He had formed the opinion oat ZUCKERHAN was more interested in his own career than anything ORIGINAL DUUU RETAINED 20. IN DEPARTMENT ONDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 AoQi D01 else, and mentioned the fact that when a proposal had been put to him that he sould devote his whole time to Government work, he had expressed the view that it was important for him to continue his research work at the University if he was really going to achieve a position in the Scientific world. At the moment ZUOKERMAN is acting as number two bn the Sedentific Advisoby council and should normally be confirmed in this appointment. If this were done he would, short of any major reason to the contrary, automatically take over from Sir Henry Tizand when the latter retires in two to three years time. The confirmation of his appointment cannot, for various reasons, be delayed for more than a forthight. I told the Lora President that in Dur view it Would be a mistake to confront ZUCKERMAN with the. evidence at 26a, as such a course might make Us all look rather foolish. The authen- ticity of the document could be quite easily denied and we should really get no further. If he felt constrained to say something to ZUCKERMAN, I felt that he should merely approach him on general security grounds and question him 8S to his association with members of the Party. The Lord President said that he had already done this, on two occasions, and that each time he had receive the same answer, namnely that ZUCKERMAN had of course met members of the Communist party, but thet he had no time for politica and was far too abeorbed in his Work. It was left that if we had anything further to say within the next fortnight L would let the Lord President know, failing which ZUCKERMAN would be confirmed in his appointment. I attended a meeting at the Home Office callled by Newsam at the request of the Admiralty, who were nat satisfied about the arrangements for possible defectors at Rosyth from the Russian cnevs who were bringing back Ships which we had lent them during the war. A dril was finally agreed Which was satisfactory to all parties. E saw William Hayter there and expressed to him my misgivings about his telegram. I thought that the only way in which We Could put this right would be in a telegram to Thistle, which I should be quite prepared to submit to him for his approval. With some reluctante he agree that we should be in charge of the case, provided all enquiries within the Embassy vere done by Bobby Mackenzie. I drafted a telegram accordingly and got it agreed by both Hayter and 'o'. The telegram is to be shown to Hoyer Miller, our Minister. 21. Hayter told me that he had been responsible for having a passage erased from 'c's telegram. D.G. Meeting - see minutes. Geoffrey Patterson and I lunched with Bruce Henderson,ov General of Dakar. He was at first a little suspicions of Stephen's activities, but ve calmed him down and he then become extremely friendly and co-operatiot, THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOGUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 1st February 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 ARIL 20o D.G. meeting - see folder of minutes. 2nd February. Kirby Green is leaving for the rar East and came to say goodbye. Graham Harrison of Downing Street tells me that a favourable reply has come from Truman about Sheaden' visit. 3rd February. A tellegram from Truman has come in. It iB cooperative and welcomes the suggestion of a visit by Shedden to Washington on his way to the U.K. in May. Through an American journalist, Kingsbury Smith, who posed certain questions, Stalin has now offered to meet Truman either in Warsaw or Prague. Dean Acheson has handled the situation well and has pointed out that in al the matters in which Stalin has offered co-operation, the Soviet hade shown memselves to be intransigent, and that the machinery is already existence by which quaari-partite discussion can take place. 22. Moreover, America does not intend to be drawn into unilateral discussions which concern the other Allies. therefore necessary or desirable. NO meeting, EPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED Ii DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS A propos the Washington leakage case e,iiatle has APRIL telegraphed to say that both Hoyer LiIler and Bobby Mackenzie are away. I passed this on to 'o' and to Hayter. Perfect came to see me about a Secretary. He tells me that the Police are. extremely weak in Manchester, partly due to the disinterest of the Chief superintendent, Page, who prefers crime to 8.B. work. I have seen a paper on the Aplrift to Berlin. It seems that it can be maintained at, of course, considerable cost, ana it looks as if the Soviet had banked on its being certain to break down during the winter months. David Boyle came to see me about one who has returned from his unit in the American Zone to the Post Office. He is anxious that this man should be looked after as far as possible I have put Boyle in touch with Allan. I lunched with nMoyland. I told him that I thought Hoosens should be represented on the Brussels Treaty Security Committee. and Marriotth Martin have seen Carey Foster on the Washington case. Carey Foster is co-operative but a bit light-hearted about the security aspects. I had a talk with Dick about our forthcoming discussions with S.I.S. He told the line that we have really got almost everything we want, and that all we want to do in a general way, is to have our position recognised and get rid of the attitude of the F.O. and S.I.S. whereby any demands for relations vith This IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 23. 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECOROS ACT 1958 ARRIL 201O overseas Security Services are regarded as an encroachment on their preserves. S.I.ME. have informed us that they have been given a letter by J.I.B. representative marked Top Secret and Personal which reached the Middle East from London through the open post. There is some suggestion that it has been ppened by the Egyptian authorities, and indeed this would not be surprising. The Permanent Commission of the Bruasels Treaty Powers have endorsed the setting up of the Information Committee on which Irvine and will be the joint secretaries in London. Lth February. I attended the J.I.C. D.M.I. expressed a desire to establish a Military Attache in Jerusalem. The F.O. have turned this down, but are looking into the matter. This raised, in my mind, the question of sending a S.I.M.E. representative back. I have asked Dick to sound Bill Magan. Pendred suggested that J.I.C. should write a peper on a possible collapse by the French in Indo-China. Hayter announced that the Foreign secretary seemed likely to approve the cold war. This is, of course, a reversal of his previous policy. A telegram has come in from Kellar about representation adjacent territories such as Siam, Indo-China and Indonesia. He is anxious that we should take this up as soon as possible with S.I.S. on an ad hoe bases. Holllis has telegraphed about an interview that he has had vith Chiflev. He made it very clear that unless something was done Tairly soon all information on defence and research natters as between ourselves, Australia and America would be 24. likely to ary uo. Chifley, while still maintaining personally that the whole thing was boloney gave orders that priority should be given to the setting up of the new service under Evatt. He did not want to have it himself as he now neplised that it dealt not only with counter-espionage, but with political matters. The new service is to be under the Cover of O.I.S., but will have a separate head. Travis came to see me. We discussed the Washington leakage case. He said that he did not want to put Thistle in direct touch with Marr Johnson. He gave no very valid reason, and on my pressing him, said that we might take the matter up again with Eddie Hastings. I told Travis that my experience in dealing with the case in Australia had shown that unless an officer on the spot could see the actual documents be was at a very great disadvantage. In fact, there was much of the material that we simply did not dare send to Hollis in case we might be misleading him. It is only the person that has access to a11 the local relevant information who can really interpret the texts. I wished that Travis, would discuss with Hollis in Melbourne when he got there on 9th February, the question of approaching U.8.0.I.B. for permission for Hollis to brief Shedden before his departure to washington. Travis himself would be in Washington about 1st April and would like us to write to him there stating exactly what we want him to do. 5th February. The F.0. have sent over a draft telegram to Chifley., It seemed to me unsatisfactory. They do not state that the P.M. had taken the initiative in writing to Truman. I felt sure that Shedden would discover this when he visited Washington, and that 1ere might be an accusatioo a lack of frankness. T have allso inserted in the uelegram a paragraph stating that it would go a long way towards allaying American anxieties if Shenden could say that the Various measures outlined by Chifley in his letter to the P.M. of October Lith had beenput into effect. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL NDEPARTMENT UNDEB SECTION DOCUMENT RETAINED 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 APRIL THIST S A COPY ORIGINAL DOGUNENT RETAINED 25 IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 7th February Dovning Street have sent over the telegram to Chifley amended in our sense. I spoke to Archer when T told him the position. I had a meeting with 'o' ana Cockoroft. IVe discussed the application of radio-activity and security. He says that it is quite possible to impregnate paper, metall clips or ink with radio-active substance and to install either unaer the floor boards or in a door post, or under the ground outside an apparatus which will register if anybody goes out of the building with a secret paper So impregnated. The individual would have to pass within three or four feet 0f the recording apparatus. 'c' is rather anxious to apply this system to Dastcote. There are certain snags in that if a file of papers was impregnated were lying in somebodys draw there would be an accumulative radio- active effeet on the health of anybody sitting in the vicinity. It would at the outaet produce extreme lassitude and later a loss of bllood counts. No serious harm would result if the papers were removed and the symptoms detected. To counter these 11- effects it would be possible to introduce some self-destroying materiall. This Would mean that after the lapse of so many weeks the radio-activity would cease. Another snag is the wrist watch will illluminous dial which of course contains radio- active substance. The apparatus would certainly record anyone passing it with such a watch. It Would be possible to have a portable recording set which might be extremely usefull on occasions when it was of paramount importance to know when man leaving a certain building, or walking in the street, had, in fact, got the secret documents on him. I said that I thought we wanted time to consider how this new discovery could be applied and that probably it should only be used in particular cases where we already had some prima facie evidence. If it vere used n/general way it would soon become know and Would therefore cease to be of any value. 8th February. D.G. Meeting - sec folder of minutes. 26. COPY ORIGINAL DOCAMENT RETAINED INDEPARIMENTUNDER SECTIO SECTION IN 8(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 AfRI DO1o Desmond Vesey came to see me about the Courtenay FOOTE book, certain passages of which had been queried by Hollis. It did not seems there was very much point in altering any of these since I gather that the bool was already appearing in serial form on the Oontinent, ana that the Americans had the proofs for publication in the U.6.A. The American proofs could be amended, but this would only draw attention to certain aspects Which might be better left along. I asked John Harriott to ensure that the book had the agreement of S.I.S. Vesey talled about the recent visit he had paid to Paris where he had attended one of the sessions of the FPAVCHENKO trial. He had actuallly spoken with KRAVCHENKO who is apparently anxious to come to this country, and I believe to bring an action ngainst the Daily Worker. He would, however, be prepared to do this only if he were given adequate gugras. I told Vesey that this would really be a matter for the F.O. and H.0. and depended whether there was any percentage in it from a cold war point of view. It was perhaps EY bit erly to sny whether HPAVCHEITHO was coming out well in the traa in paris. If not there was no particular point in his coming to London. 27. Sir George Abbiss came to see me. The Malayan Union were pressing the Collonial Office to send out someone to re-organise their Registry. We were not in a positior to sent Potter when asked to do so last November. The 0.0. had therefore applied to the etropolitan Police through the Home office. The Commissioner had agreed to send a junior clerk, whom Abbiss thought unsuitable, and was reluctant to sent an inspector Apart from this alll sorts of questions of payment had arisen. He wanted to know whether we could now help in any way. T spoke to Horrocks and suggested that ve might sent a Palestine Police Registry officer from the Middle East, who was in charge of S.I.M.E.'e Palestine records. We have telegraphed Kellar accordingly asking whether this would be-aeeeotable. THHIS COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 9th February. 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 AORIL Dalo I have had a letter from Poger from Which it appears that nothing had really been done until his arrival. He had had a talk with Bailey and tolld him that the matter was really urgent since if nothing were done it would hot be long before communications, not only between ourselves and Australia but between ourselves and the U.S. on matters of defence policy and research, would be dried up. This was brought about by the fact that our information was so interwoven with American that it was impossible to disentangle it. If, therefore, the Americans continued their ban on any of their classified material going to the Australians, this Would impose the same restrictions on our material. Bailey was evidently glad that Roger had spoken so frankly. There folloved a meeting with Evatt and Dedmen, and then 8 meeting with Chifley, who gave orders that the setting up of the new security Service was to be treated as a matter of urgency. The new Service is to be under ovatt as Chifley had not comprehended it would deal with political matters as well as counter-espionage. It willl have a separate head and willl only use 0.I.S. as a cover. C.I.S. is to be confined to law enforcement. Hollis has telegraphed about cover for Courtenny Young. The High Commissioner is prepared make him an Assistant Secretary on his staff. This is equivalent to the F.O. First Secretary. The approval of the C.R.O. is required. Malcolm Cuming has told ne about a new Post office system of line broadcasting which is likely to be introduced. The reason 18 that in war time air broadcasting provides a beam py which hostile aireraft can get their bearings. The effect of this new system willll be to broadcast the conversations of any 28. people it is hoped that the engineers will be able to get round this difficulty. I saw Archer and gave him the latest information from Australia I also told him about Countenay' new position for which he will endeavour to obtain approval. I saw Nevsam and gave him our draft answer to Sir 0. Sargent on the question of divulging to Gambier Parry'e engineers which it was alleged they required in order to give our Embassies the necessary protection. The answer is that the G.P.O. are prepared to do this ork and that the spread of knowledge is umnecessany and undesirable. The question of expense does not arise as the G.P.0. already have a comitment on this question on behalf of the Canadians. I also showed Newsam the Ministry of Defence paper on the policy in regard to Communists in industry where secret work is going on as he would ultimately have to brief the S. of S. He agreed that the paper, but thought that where a dismissal was found necessary, the Government should refund the compensation for breach of contract. He thought that this would aot as a deterrent on the Ministry of Supply and the Aamiralty in taking too light-hearted a view in forcing the issue Where dismissal was the only remedy. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 10th February 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 ARRIL 20o I saw Brigadier Cochrane who is going as Chief of Staff to East Africa. I told him more or less how we were situated. He understands the D.3.0. position ns he w9s formerly Chief of Staff in Palestine. Tin came to tell me that his job in the N.O. had fallen down owinE to a general policy of cuts instituted by Slim. Apparently M.1.11 Colonell and D.D.M.I. (0. &: S) are to be abolished and their functions taken over by other sections. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED 29. IN DEPARTMENTUNDE SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 APRIL Shield Smith of the Aliens Dept. rang me up about an employee of the American Embassy, CLAPT. who has been dismissed and his passport removed as he was proposing to marry a woman who was coming from Hungary. CLAPT apparently has a certain amount of knowledge of the air side, and this liaison is considered suspicions, although there appear to be no concrete grounds at alll. The Americans have taken away CLAPT'S passport and want us to deport him. S.B. are keeping him under observation. T telephoned relating to Communist activities iin the vancouver area. The information had come from a member of the canadian D.N.I. staff who seemed Worried that nothing was being done. There was some suggestion that a British ex-naval officer in Vancouver should investigate further. Itmade tclear that this woulld be most undesirable and, that if the Canadian officer was really worried his only line was to get permission from his own D.N.I. to go and see the R.O.M.P. either Nicholson or nccllellan. I spoke to Allan about one of David Boyle's employees in the Midale East who is returning to the Post Office. I arranged that D.B. should give Allan the details. Haldane Porter came to see me about a letter sent by J.I.B. London to J.I.B. Midalle East, Top Secret & Personal, which had arrived in Cairo through the normall. postal channels. It seemed not unlikely that it had been opened. This point was being gone into. Haldane Porter has discovered that the real trouble lies in the Ministry of Defence mailing system. They have two trays allong side each other, one internal mails for J.I.B. and the other exterm I maills. Clearly this particular letter had slopped over into the internal mails tray. T sent to see Val Boucher about Tim, He said that while he would keep his eyes open, the present job had clearly come to an end. The prospects in M.I.11 no longer exist. T took this opportunity of expounding to him my views about the permanent civilian nucleus in M.I. as part of a wider loosely knit intelligence scheme comprising similar nuclei in each ORIGINAL DOLUMVENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENTU UNDER SECTION 30. 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 APRLnod APRIL D0 Service Department S.I.S. ourselves and J.I.B. This seemed to be desirable if a suitable field of promotion was to be provided for intelligence generally instead of the narrow one which at present existed. It was difficult to Met good people and more difficult to keep them. Boucher seemed extremely keen about this proposal. He thought there were at least 20 jobs which could perfectly welll be carried out by civilian ex- officers. I then dre' his attention to the present system by which young conscripts with high academic qualifications were just wasting their time filling in forme as army clerks. It seemed to me that these young fellows might be more profitably employed on intelligence duties and at the end of their training they would either provide 8 useful recruiting ground for ourselves. or B.I.8. or at least be earmarked for intelligence duties in time of war. Boucher seemed enthusiastic sbout this idea Ss well. 11th February F.J. and Thomas came to see me about the enquiries into 6 on 8 sabotage cases in the Navy. Thomas seemed to think that the Communists were behind them. I said that ie he was referring to the C.P. Executive, or even the local Party Head- quarters, I felt this vas unlikely. T could, however, well imagine that a few disgruntled elements, possibly with local Party contacts, had taken upon themselves to comnit these acts. Party Headquarters I felt would realise that if they became implicate they would only be adding to the coals of fire descend- ing on their heads from the T.U.S and woulld further prejudice their chances in the elections for which they propose to put up 100 candidates. I saw the Vice Chiefs of Staff at 11 o'clock on the difficulties with the Amnericans about placing a contract for V.T. fuses with MULLAPDS. Although the invention is largely ours the Americans regard it as their own as they have made certain minor improvements. They think that as MUTLARDS is a subsidiary of Phillips of Eindhoven, a firm with international ramifications, the security of these fuses woulld be jeopardised. We have framed a contract with MAULLARDS which ve think should provide sufficient safeguards and have sent a copy to washington. washington now want us to send out an officer 31. to argue the case, I said that before doing so the Amnericans should be drawn into stating precisely what their bjections are, otherwise the officer may be wasting his time. This wa's agreed, and a telegram is to be sent accordingly. At the J.I.0. the D.l.I. stated that the Americans wanted to take part in C.S.D.I.C.. Salonika. It was agreed that we had better alllow thern to do so otherwise they Would start one of their own and the usuall fight for bodies Would ensue. Hayter said that a report had come in from the Americans on information supplied by the Czech F.O. derector This would be circulated. It showed the measure of control by the RuSSians over the activities of the Czech F.O. D.N.I. mentioned a case of sabotage in the Navy. I gave him my views, but said that ve should be looking into the matter further. mentioned that a Russian agent had been captured in the British Zone. He had got what was thought to be a phoney story as an assignment, but had told a stool-pigeon that he was really there to sabotage the air lifti. Further information is expected. Dick has produced his first paper for discussion with S.1.8, It realtes to our representation in foreign territory and our liaison with foreign services. H1lD tells me that it has now been discovered that CLAPT is a Canadian born citizen. There can, therefore, be no question of his deportation. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 12th February 3(4) OF ThE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 MPeNL Do I spoke to Mitchell about the sabotage case and found thet he had not been consulted before the report was sent in to Aamiralty. This I think arose from certain separatist tendencies n the sabotare seetion who think that they are acting purely as dmiralty representatives. In fact, any such report ought to be 32. assessed in the light of all the information we have in this office. Mitchell tells me he has identified one of Burt's informants. Burt submitted a report which itchell is anxious to have cards on the table with Burt. Donalason telephoned to say that the Cabinet meeting on Communiats in industry has been cancelled and the paper with drawn owing to legal objections by the Admiralty to the clause which suggested a warning being given to other firms who were incllined to take the man on. He wants to discuss this at a meeting on "Ternesday. There have been a lorge number of leakages in the press re Western Union military pllans. This is not altogether surprising since in the casetof the French, the Finance Hinistaer gave details to a Parliamentary Committee on which Communists are serving. According to a report from one of our attachete in Sweden, the Swedish Chiefs of staff have recommended to the Minister of Defence that Sweden shoulld join the Atlantic Pact. They do not believe in the argument that Swedish neutrality will have any effect on Russian action in Finland. 3.1.8. have produced an interesting report on the economic and political situation in Yugoslavia, and allso one on the break UD of the Tudeh Party in Persia which has resulted from the attempted assassination of the Shah. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION 14th February. 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 PRiL 201 At the Directors Meeting we di Betesee the situation. Horrocks said that he had heard from Bill Magan that he was satisfied with the position of Hackeot Pain in Amman for the time being. He did not wish to offer him to. S.I.S. S. until we knew what our representation in Palestine was likely to be T drew attention to two cases where it seemed that the Soviet consul and the Soviet Attache (1ilitary) were interested in 33. the recruitment of individuals from the criminal classes. We have not yet ascertained precisely what their motives were, but it seemed to me we should take every possible recsution hona In regard to attempts at purglary. Horrocks Said he woud loal into this. ORGINAL DOCUMmNI INDEPERTMENT SECTION THE PUBLIC RECOFDS AOT 1958 Aenl 2010 Burt came to tell me that one of hi's informant had been given a job as P.R.0. to Pan American Airways in Canada or the U.S.A. He said that had had an interview with Bob STELART. that he had been told to hand in his cards, but that he would still continue to pay his dues through a Miss What actually caused Burt to tell me this at this stager doereroxnt not Now. It may be that he thought that as bis informant had been to King street we might have heard something and tied the information up vith a previous S.B. report, which, of course, ve had. T did not tell Burt this, but I propose to discuss it with him after talking to Grahar Mitchell. This man is not Burtis best informant, whose name he might tell me one day. The meeting was at my request as I wanted to talk to Burt about his suecessor and considered what he told me retarding hs on transfer, and that Hatherill will probably take his pllace. T said that T thought this was a plty. I reminded him of the re-actions of S.B. to when he and his officers were posted to M.I.5, .5, namely that the Branch vasloosing promotion and that after the war he and his officers would take over the important posts in S.B. This had come true in s0 far as he himself was concerned. Personally, I do not regret it because We could not have wished for any better arrangement, and he obviously had the personality to live down any unpleasantnes or difficulties that he might encounter in S.B. I wondered, however, Whether it was altogether fair to pass Hatherill over from O.I.D. instead of giving the job to Tommy Thoason. We Would much prefer Thomson as head of the Branch. This moreover Would probably lead to Jones being moved up to Superintendent. I said that T was quite prepared to ttalk to Howe about this, but this was impossible since officially I knew nothing about Burti'e depnrture. Could he not perhaps suggest to Howe that he should have talk with me about his suecessor? Burt said quite frankly that he doubted whether they could avoid giving Hatherill the job vlithout his feeling that he had been passed over and that he himself would much prefer to see Thomson take over. There was also another snag, namely that if Hatherill were considered unsatisfactory they might decide to leave Burt where he vas and put Hatherill in as Deputy Assistant Comnissioner, C.I.D. I said I doubted whether Hatherill had the personality. I think Burt doubted this too. 34. He e-knew, moreover, that Hatherill had always been skeptical about the work of 3.B. He had done his best to correct this attitude. 1 had a meeting with the D.I.I. and other officers on Operation BPITTANIA. I suggested that the D.M.I. Should give the Tecture on security and that where he iminged on M.1.5. sotivities a representative of our office Should be on the platform to enlarge on the subject and to answer questions. I had 8 discussion with Dick and Mitchell about Burt's Visit. They seemed to think that he had not come entirely clean. I propose to see Burt and suggest to him that if we knew the names of his informants we might be able to help him considerably. I had a talk with F.J. about sabotage and the submission of reports to the Admiralty. He entirely agreed with me that they should be thoroughly integrated and assessed in the light of B.1 information. He thought there was a tendency by the sabotage section to take the view that B.1.A were too academic and divorced from realities. This view was, of course, thoroughly erroneous. 15th February. Perfect tells me that S.I.B have been urging local members of the Police Force to take executive action. A particular point in question was where they vished to recover certain documents. Chief Constables have intimated that they do not like this procedure. T have told Perfect and Hilll of C.2. that our advice to the Military shoulld be that hin cases where executive action was asked for, Chief Constables should be approached in the first instance. ral> At the D.G's meeting to-day Hill said that the Cabinet Officer are worried about the pecuriity aspect of 35. Chunchill's memoirs, which ae being printed by the Chiswick Press. Nobody has vetted the employees of that firm. The roofs are submitted and EO back blue-pencilled to the firm, who thereby have a clear indication of whatis of security inte:est It has been agreed by Ceylon that Waestaffe should be known locally as S.L.0. attached to the H igh Comissioner's staff. Mitchell stated that Bowen and Leggatt, two of the Advisers on the Purge committee had become rather restive about some of the Ministry of Supply cases, which although falling within the P.M'S ruling, might by their weakness bring the whole procedure into contempt. Mitchell satd that about 113 prima facie cases had been put forward and that 30 or 40 of them had had notices served. In 140 cases we had advised that there was no prima facie case, but neveithelless an element of doubt. I attended the Hollis Cornmittee, which vas concerning itself more with organisation in time of war. At the conclusion Df the meeting General Hollis raised the question of the Press publication of details about onr armaments - or the lack of them- and that under these circumstances deception was becoming increasingly difficult. I said that from our experience in the matter of D. Notices, I did not think that we were likely to get much help from the Press in a matter which they would consider to be of the highest national importance. Moreover, nothing that we could do could prevent Winston, or other Members of Parliament from attacking the Government on the paucity of our armaments. Hayter agreed with this; he thought the only thing to do was to accept the position and endeavour: by decepticn to persuade the Russians that our secret weapons would compensate for our deficiencies in manpower and other equipment. THIS IS A COPY ORICINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEL INDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 Aprl 2010 36. I had a meeting with Hayter about KRAVCHENKO, who David Vesey tells me is anxious to pay a visit to this country. Before taking up the matter with the Home Office, I am anxious to know whether from the "cold warl point of view the Foreign office think that such a visit should be encouraged. l6th February. I attended the J.I.0. Denuties meeting. There was a criticism of our D.S.O"S report on cyprus, which was thought to have been unduly alarmist and a further report has now been called for. It was pointed out, however, that although the D.S.0's recommendation that AKEL leaders should arrested was considered to be too drastic astep, three of the leaders had, for one reason on another, been locked up and that the position was now considered to be relatively quiet. It seemed to me that perhaps the D.S.o's advice had not been 80 bad after all. Trafford Smith, to whom, T spoke privately, was inollined to agree. Brain said it was now certain that Norway would joint the Atlantic Pact and turn down Russia's order Of a non- agression pact. He also mentioned that the Greek Minister had told Sir Orme Sargent that the Americans have asked for permission for U.S. naval pe sonnel to use certain Greek islands as a training ground. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 Aprul 201o Hill and T went over for a meeting with Donaldson and legal advisers from the Treasury, Ministry of Supply and Admiralty. The Admiralty appeared to be worried 52, about a clause in the Government memorandum on Communists in Industry, by which some advice should be tendered to firms when a high-grade technician had been discharged from another firm on Communist grounds. It was eventuallly decided to confine activities solely to the contractual clause and to leave itlto Chance in 60 far as the man might obtain employment in another factory where Government secret work was going on. To take another course might involve the Government in accusations of victimisation. If, however, a firm asked us before engaging an individual, it would be permissable for UB to say tha't that man had been discharged from a previous firm under a contractual clause. T had a discussior with Hill and Irvine on the memorandum produced by the Security Comnittee working party on what the Russians were likely to know fror publications in the Press and from document circulated to Western Union powers and to "leaky" Dominions. I thought that the paper had rather played the risks down, and it seemed to me that the Planners should be called upon to say what the extent and seriousness of the Press Leakages were. They should also be aware of the fact that the case of the French a considerable amoun't of information was given by the French Finance Minister to a Parliamentary Committee on which Communists sat. Vickens have refused, on security grounds, to have Russian inspectos engaged on passing extrusion presses in their works. After a good deal of resistance the Russians have given way, on the understanding that this work will be done by Lloyas at Vickers expense. ThIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMVENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 17th February. 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT T1958 CRIL 210 Colonel Jeffreys of M.I. and Colone Munn of S.0. came to see me about Operatio Britannia. As a result of the discussion, we are to send a representative to the Exercise prepared to argue the case of a possible sitedown strike and saboitage in nRoval Ordnance Factory. E have juat received the first tabled docuent from S,I.8. on the question of our representation with foreign Security.Services. It is in our view an extremely bad docume nt which does not take much account of the de facto position by which ive are already in relations with security bodies in Western Union in London. All the arguments put forward seem to have little reality. Perfect came to talk to me about County Police. He thought that in view of the widespread area over which they operate, it would be useful if some of their C.I.D. detectives, who occasionallly have to handle S.B. matters, could attend S.B. meetings. This Would be a better arrangement than our giving a lecture to all County detectives. Sir Geonge Abbiss telephoned to me about sending someone to organise the registry of the Malayan Union Special Branch. I told him that Gray Was not anxipus to have the ex-Palestine policeman and that we were now enguiring whether Potter would be acceptable. THIS IS A COPY 18th Februaxy. OBIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION I attended the J.I.C. 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 HERRIL DOO came to see me about a Czech family called BECVAR. living near his home at Uckfield. He was worried because these people, who had lived here for a long time, aopeared to entertain the Czech Ambassador and members of his staff. has apparently got a strong anti-Comunist complex, but he differs from others of his kind in being consaious of his own obsession. He was formerly a distinguished Consul General. I saw the D.G. who returned yesterday, and told him about Australlia and the Washington case. 3" 19th Februany. To more letters have come in from Hollis. It does seem that the Australians are really trying to get a move on. THIS IS A COPY RIGINAL OUCUMEN RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 ARi Did 2lst February. Desmond Vesey has sent mne a letter about KRAVCHENKOE visit. He, KRAVCHENKO, wants to broadcast, interview prominent M.Ps, have a film taken of himself, and speak at meetings in industrial areas. He insists that if he comer he shall have at least two guaris permanently in attendance and to be put up in a suite in some such hotel as Clnridges. In addition, he wants permission to reside here under a false name. This last request wont have much reality if he stays at Claridges! II have passed this on to Hayter, with a request for an answer by Thursday, when Desond Vesey will be revisiting Paris. B1ll Vritht came to see me. He wants a job in this country as a Chief Constablle. He left us because he did not think there was sufficient scope. At the G's meeting to-day we discussed the position of Tim Ainy, islter Bell, Gale, Clayton and Thistlle. The D.G.. gave an account of his visit to the Caribbean, where he said the conditions under which the Police work ere about as shocking as anything he had ever seen. Johnson has sent im a report-al about the Police in West Africa, which evidently leave much to be desired. 40. I sav the Lond President at the House of Commons about one, who wants to be employed in the Central Office of Intowiation. A certain Dr. Adler there had told him that he would get emplloyment, subject to approval by M.I.5. We advised against his appointment, owing to his past record in the International Brigade and the fact that he had until quite recently been employed by the Ozech Ministry of Information which at that time wa's under Communist control. Morrison, who read the papers carefully, entirely agreed with our view. He said. however', he was likely to be attacked by Norman Dodd, who he thought was a "fellow travelleri, and to whom had lodged a complaint about M,1.5. He was quite confident, however, of being able to deal with Dodd. He said he would be very grateful to have a list of "fellow travellers" from us, as he intended to 'siooke there out of the Labour Party. T dodged this one, but if pressed I should have had to tell him that such a list was in the hands of the P.M. miAis i copy ERGINAL RETAINED DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 22nd February. 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORS ACT 1958 ARIL Dio The D.G. told his meeting that the P.M. whom he had seen, was anxious to know about MOSLEY' recent activities. He also stated that he was listrubed about the Punge, which he thought might be going too far. The D.G. invited him to come round and have a drink at the office, which he condially accepted. He 1s, I gather, to cbme on March 16th. Norman Brook and Bridges are to be invited as well. I talked to Mitchell, His and F.J. about the case. This manis a Cowtnunist, 1s causing labour troubles at one of the atomic energy plants. We came to the conclusion that we could not move him until the Dabinet Committee had reached a. decisd.or about action against Cormunists in industry. could be got rid of under the Ministry of Works contraett but the clause in such contracts is not primarily designed for political cases. Although case is somevhat different from the one which the Cabinet are discussing, it is sufficiently cllose to it to cause the whole issue to be raised in the House, particularly if a Strike were to result from dismissal.. ait. I talked with P.J. and Boddington about kes moints. It seemed to me that some consideration should be given to the question of arming the civilian guards. In talking to Skardon subsequently, I llearned that the difficulty of arming Police was got over by enrolling members of utility undertakings in the Home Guard; this entitled them to have a riflle. F.J. and Thomas came to tell me that a curious approach had been made to an ex-Naval rating in Portsmouth. It seemed that,with the assistance of certain dockyard maties, sabotage material Was to be got on to one of H.M. ships. At the moment, however, the information is somewhat vague. This IS A COPY 23rd February. ORIGINAL DOOUMENT BETAINED NDEPARTMENT ONDER SECTION There was no J.I.C. to-day. 3(4) OF THE FUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 ARRIL DQLO We had our first meeting with S.I.S, which lasted 3a hours. It vas-net possible to reach any agreed decision until much more ground had been covered, Generally speaking we felt that S.I.S. woud be accommodating about the de facto position, provided we could get agreement about housing both departments in the same building in London, which woulld ensure close integration and production. They went SO far as to suggest that if this were possible appointments abroad for liaison on C.E. work might be made either from M.I.! or M.I.6 as appropriate The meeting was quite friendly, but T made it clear that we were rather tired of having any constructive suggestions put forvand put forward as an encroachment upon the preserves of M.1.6. I also asked S.I.S. to state at their next meeting whether they had any complaints about our liaison on foreign territory as at present constituted, and whether they considered that they themselves derived any advantage, for example, by having Jaek Morton in Baghdad. Was it a matter of complete indifference to them whether the post was maintained or not? Personally we thought that Morton's position had been one of veny great value to S.I.S. and we could advance arguments in support of our belief. 42 We have had a telegram from Kellar in Which he says that Dick Ellis thinks that there is a case for our having representation in countries adjacent to the Malayan Union, owing to the fact that there are several organisations in each of these countries handling C.E. matters, and that this difficulty can only be overcome by local representation. This, of course, is precisely the opposite argument put forward by S.I.S. Head Office in their memorandu. THIs IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DERARTMENT UNDER SECTION 24th February. 8(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 AneRIL Dolo At the J.I.C. to-day the question was raised by the Foreign Office of Jews formerly employed in posiitions here where they had access to highly secre't information, who were now serving in the Israeli Government. A serious case Was one affeeting G.C.H.Q. A former employee of theins who had aecegs to almost everything is now the Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs in the Israeli Government, and still has a brother at G.C.H.O. There are also other cases of people who were in the Services during the war. There was some attempt at the meeting to suggest that we should try and obtain lists of Jews with Zionist sympathies at present employed in Government departments here. I said that while T realised there might be such cases, I thought that we were Dn extremely dangerous ground, since our enquiry would clearly touch Ministeriall circles. I thought, therefore, that for the time being we ouzht to confine ourseles to the Foreign Office suggestion and ask departments to notify the Secretary of any cases where they actually knew of former Government employees who were now in Israeli service. I had a word wi th Carey Foster after the meeting about the Washington case. He has called in several Foreign Office officials of Counsellor rank to try and obtain from them some information about the general set-up at the Washington Embassy at the time of the lealage. He says that at the moment it is difficult to see how we can make much probress, since there is apparently no comprehensive list either here or in Washingtor of the people employed. I gather that the papers which ane known to have leaked were circulated,amongst others, to Security Co-Ordination. This makes another starter. The D.P.P. came over and gave a talk on the kind of evidence that he required in espionage cases. 13 Hoilis has tellegraphed to say that a lawyer named REED, has been appointed as Head of the nev Security organisation in Australia. He has asked for permisaion foY this man to be indoctrinated. T told the D.G. about yesterday'e meeting with S.I.S. I left, with Oughton for Glasgow in the evening to attend the Chdef Constables Conference. 25th Februany. In Glasgow I gave a talk on the international situation as it affects day security, which T interpreted aG meaning "hat are the Russians trying to do, and what are the chances of our being involved in another warit. I said that although this subject was tosome extent anybody guess, I thought that it was possible to draw attention to certain basic factors from whiich it might be permissable to arrive at tentative conellusions, The important thing to remember was that the Russian Revolution had been going on for over thintyone yeans in complete isolation, and that those in control up to the age or 45 oP 50 had been brought up on Marxian dpctrines to the nigin excllusion of all others. There was contact with foreigners in Moscow and there vas 1o possibility of accurate reporting by Soviet representatives outside, since they would only dare to say what they thought Moscow would like to hear. From this it followed that the Rusadans vere likely to have implicit faith in the fundamental doctrines of Marx, which would cause them to believe in the inevitable demise of capitalism, with the possibility of an attack by capitalism in its death throes. This caused them to tighten up the Party line in Rusaia and intensify their revolutionany activities abroad, with the object of creating round themselves an ever-widening protective belt. T then outlines the various tactical moves which were going on to give effect to this basic political strategy. After trying to weigh up the pros and cons of Russian chances of sussess, I said that in ten fiftenn years time, if Russia developed at her present rate without serious set-backs, she should have a colossal war potential, and that she might attempt to get by over agression what she had not been able to get in the meantime by subversion. Meanwhile, she coulld clearly obtain what she wanted much more cheaply by subversive methods, and in any case she could not wittingly risk agressive war as long as the Allies had superiority in weapons of mass destrtotion. This 44. did not, however, mean that the risk of war was wholly eliminated. Russia might, through her ignorance, become involved in such a war if she carried her subversive activities too far, particularly in places like Persia or Turkey, which were vital to Allied defence. Oughton followed with an extremely good lecture on the general trends of the Communist Party since the beginning Df the war, the dangers of it, and the nature of the work which we wanted Chief Oonstables to do. Although no questions were asked at the beginning of the lectures, I gathered from Mann, tand also from other officers of the Glasgow Police, that they vere appreciated. I think the gathering w1ll have carried away an impression of the possibilities of war and the consequent importance of doing scmething about the Communist Party, but T should have been doubteull about the results if each member of the andience had been asked there and then to write down a short Bynopsis of what we had been tallcing about! Our reception could not posadlly have been more cordial, and there is no doubt that the Glasgow Police are very much alive to the problem. They have an excellent S.B. officer in the person of Kerr. 28th February. Murrie of the Home office rang Up to say that he vas having a meeting with Howe to-morrow about alliens changing their names. This matter is apparen'tly to be discussed n the Cabinet and arises from the STANLEY case. I said that long as there Was some kind of recona by which we coulld subsequently ascertain a man's real name, T did not think we could press for any maintenance of the wartime order by which aliens were not allowed to change their names. There is, T think, a proposal that it shoulld be made an offence to do 80 without notifying the proper authorities. Hill is to attend the meeting to-morrow. Gardiner rang up to say that there had been a complaint by the Minister of Defence, Sir Harold Panker and Sir Henry Tisard about our failure to Bolve the petroleum leakage case which Occurred last November through publication in the Daily Telegraph. He wanted Some ammunition from us to shoot this down. The fact is that you cannot tse the Official Seerets Act in Cases of this sort, and that in many cases you can do no more than interrogate a Large number of people in the Ministry whic may act, to some extent, aG a deterrent. We have not got time the manpower to do this and it should really be done by the curity Officers in Ministries. Hill is preparing a note for Gardiner. Vie have received the S.I.S. paper with which we ane not very impressed. It begins by stating their Charter, which completely ovenaps our own. It will be interesting to know where this Charter came from! THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT BETAINED NDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION lst March. 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 APRiL Colonel Munn came to see me and brought me a synepsis of his leeture for Exercise Britannia. At the D.G's meeting to-day I told them about the visit to Glasgow by Oughton and myself. I told the meeting about a conference being held at the Home Office. which Hill was attending, regarding the question of aliens changing their names. I said I thought this was really se e a criminal matter, but that we could really have no objection provided we could easily trace the individual concerned when necessary. I spoke about Security Officers doing their own interrogatione in leakage cases in Ministries. Mitchell spoke about the purge. He Said he had attended a meeting at the Ministry of Supply last Week on the question of extending the purge procedure. They said they were proposing to 8o exceedingly slowly and carefully on the question of industrial employees,and intended to talce into account not only the possibility of industrial repercussions, but also political ones. They have practically decided to place all their outstations in the secret category. In connection with this, Dicl White said that firms will not be able to wait much longer for a Cabinet decision regarding industrial employees. that Dick tolld the meeting that Hollis has reported the formatior Of an Australian Security Serviceif now under way and that a man called RREED has been appointed the finat Director. He is a t distinguished lawyer and a Judge of the High Court in South Australia. - Ha has now, however, had any other experience. At the Appointmnente Bound we selected several candidates, who were altogether a better lot than we saw last time. THIS IS A COPY DRIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED 2nd March. DEPARTMENT SECTION (4) THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 APRii 2010 Burt came oven to see me, I thimte primarily. to ask me to give his boy a testimonial. I took the opportunity of talking: to him about the base. I told him that on looking into it I had discovered that we had had various reactions from our on sources about this man. The Party seemed to trust him, but regarded him as rather a poor fishe He was not prepared to stick his neck out too far if there was likely to be trouble. I then asked Bur't about mission in America. As we undenstoot the position. he had been told to keep his eyes open for information about aircraft. If this were so. it is perhaps important before he reported anything to the Party that he had seen in America. we should have a look at it. It might be that we should want to out some of it out, or possibly to pep it up a bit. another: point as regards the Americans. If had been an agent of ours we should probably have told Mickey Ladd. with whom we had Worked on a basis of Corplete confidence. If had been making contact with Communists over there, it might well be that Ladd would white and ask us about it: we should then be in an extremely embarrassing position. Burt entirely agreed, and said that he would like to consider whether there woulld be any objection to our informing Ladd. This brought me to another point. It was clear from the case of that we could, from our sources, give Burt some quite valuable reactions from the Party as to how his informant wa's going dovin. The same would apply in another important case of which he had spoken to me previously. If we knew the man's name we might be able to help him. Burt said that there was absolutely nothing that he would not tell me, but he. nevertheless, had difriculties within his own branch. The old-timers, like Thompson, were desperately jealous and allways wondering whether M.I.5 would L not be claiming kudos for something that they had done. He thought the whole thing was entirely ridiculous and that we ought to have complete cands cn the table and, in so far ab I was concerned, this is what he proposed to do. Such was the position, however, that he Would not tell Tommy Thompson that he had done it. I said bhat T fully appreciated his position and that T had not been in S.B. for 12 years withouthlnowing that everything he told me was true. He said that he 47. wanted to look u centain rtieulaits about this informant and t at he would then speak to me again, Meanwhile, he mentioned that he had gueressfully miked the C.R. conference at Beaver House. He had at first intended to do this through the loud speaker apparatus, but at the last moment they decided not to use a loud speaker; this had presented him with a certain difficulty, but it had been overcome. Nothing of a very sensational nature had been said, but the report had been, neverthelesa. interesting. I had a discussion with Dick, Horrocks, Mitchell, M.E. Marriott and Martin about our meeting with S.I.S. in the afternoon. It was arranged that Mitchell would deal with the Communist side, and that ME. and Marniott should deal with the foreign intelligence organisatirns. I would raise the question of the Charter. At the meeting with S.1.S. I started by quoting from our Charter, which seemed to constitute a complete overlap with the Charter Eiven by S.I.8. in the document they had tabled. They said that by charter S.I.8. was charged with: (i) the invesitgation and study of alll potentially subversive movements in foreign countries which are, or are likely to become, detrimental to British interests and/or are, or may become, vehicles 02 media for clandeatine operations (including espionage, sabotage, and the exertion of underground influence) on the pant of a foreign power; (ii) the investigation and study of the organisation, personnel, objectives and activities of foreign intelligence services. I asked what the date of this Charter was and from vh om it had been received. This clearly caused some confusion in the minds of the oppositior and distinct signs of uneasiness. Easton finally said that it was rather a matter of history and that it could be gone into if this was considered necessary! It was quite evident that there was no Charter and that S.I.S. had said to themselves; IVhat ane we doing?t and had then sat down and written a charter to cover it. Since the whole of their subsequent remarks about their duties were based on this charter, it seemed to us that it was important to know about its origin. S.I.S. promised to make enquiries. I pointed out that if in para. 1 after "foreign countries they said "other than matters affeoting the defence of the realm" it would be more or lens in accordance with our Charter, but that as it stood it definitely conflicted. I did not press S.1.3. unduly, I felt that e were really there to discuss what S.I.S. and ourselves were actually doing, the necessity for oLY actions, clarification of what 8.1.S. mean by "collation and counter- eespinnage", and the extent and necessity for any overlap. We therefore drew a line and proceeded te disouss these matters. We pointed out, and it was agreed, that in many oases where S.I.S. referred to "collation". they really mean't what we would call "case work". It was agreed that neither party could claim paramounoy as regards Communism. Both sides had a contribution to make, but neither could be a final authority. since other aencies, such as the Foreign Office, obviously made B considerable contribution. The final word bn this subject should really be given in a combined paper produced by the J.I.S. to the J.I.C. AB far as foreign intelligence organisatiorswere concerned it was agreed that M.I.5 should be the final authority for the purposes of the defence of the realm. When we got down to the exact meaning of C.E., it seemed that S.I.S. regarded C.E primarily ab an investigation to satisfy themselves that their own organisation vas not being penetrated, and that any agents they were employing were not in fact double-agents. who were really working for the enemy Our interest was to obtain as much knowledge about enemy inteilligence organisations and the activities of their agents, in order that we could counter them in any cases which affeet the defence of the realm. This seemed to be the major purpose for Which a study of foreign intelligence organisati n should be made. We then discussed what could be done to reduce what seemed to be a necessary overlap. We all thought that the Close proximiity of the two organisation in one building and some linking of the records, Would go most of the way, but that owing to difficulties of accommodation it might well be impossible to bring this about for two or three years. Meanwhile, we thought that some exchange of laison oficers, and some attempt to get records on to similar lines, should be undertaken. We are going to discuss this in detail at our next meeting. The S. S.I.S. view seems to be that if they can get closer integration at home, certain of their ob bjections to our having direct contact with our opposite numbers abroad would be eliminated. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED DEPARTMEDIT UNOER SEOTION 3rd March. 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. Arril 2010 Bunt came to see me. He had obtained furtht atromiars about He was quite prepared, if ve thought it advisablle, to give nS access to this man and to brief him. 49. He would even hand him over lock, stook and banzel. On the whole, however, he thought it would be better for us to run him through S.B., a's he might ultimately revert to his former position, in which case he would be of considerable value to S.B. I said I would consider the matter and let him know. He then gave me the name of his principal agent. He said that only three people in S.B. knew this man's name, and that in vi view of the inind o1 prejudice that existed in the Branch, he would nnt be telling Tomny Thompson that he had passed the name to me. If we got any reactions here, he would like me to pass them to him personally. I told him that I should have to take Graham Mitchell into my confidence, as there might be material in that section which I should normally not see myself. He seemed quite happy about this. He is quite emphatic that it is highly deairable for ns to work on these lines and he Quite understands (this came from him without any prompting from myself) that there are certain sources of information here which we could not disclose to S.B. THISIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 ARIL 000 60 THISI A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 APRIL 200 The I.D.0. are holding a kind of Brains Trust on the Icold" war on Thursday next. and want a representative of this department to be present to answer questions about C.P. activities here. I gather that Gladvyn Jebb and Earner will attend the meeting on behalf of the Foreign Office. Baker of the Home Office was asked to attend, but could not do SO owing to a previn engagement. I told Winter, who rang up frorn the I.D.C., I. that I thought Franke Newsam ought to be there, bht he did not seem to think it worth while reopening the matter. I explained to him that if any "cold" wan measures were tontemplated in the U.K. they Would primarily concern the Home office. I had a long talk with Dicic, Martin. Marpiott and M.E. about yesterday.'e meeting with S.1.8. Marriott and M.E. seemed rather disappointed that we had not challenged the S.I.S. charter more vigourously. I said that unless they were proposing that the non-validity of the S.I.S. charter ruled ther out of court completely there seemed no particular point in challenging the charter more vigourously at the outset. What we were really trying to dbseover wag the real reason and justification for certain functions We had all agreed that they had certain nterests 1n woH wnch we were doing. When we had established clearly the points on which we agree, and those on which we did not agree, ve shnuild obviously have to core back to the charters, which would need amendment. It Would be quite useless for us to go to the Prime Minister at this stage. He would see that there was a conflict of views, which he would not understand, and the whole question would inevitably be thrown over again to the inexperit Yorking Party. The only people who coulld undorstand thes matters were S.1.8. and oursellyes. ile must, therefore, sift them to the bottom and establish cleanly for any arbitrator that) Daint of agreement are and the pros and cons of any disagreement. Ni Dut this we should never get any settlement. 51, 5th Manch. I saw to-day the Minutes of the Inter-Departmental Liaison Meeting called by M.I.2, ar Office, on 19.1.49 regarding the Far East. Lloyd of the Foreign Office tated that the situation in Burma war becoming increasingly obscure nov that the Karens appear to have consolidated their position both in Central and North Burma, as well as in the South. Accopiing to Lloyd the Burmese ame only in complete control of the immediate area surrounding Rangoon at the present time. In such conditions it is difficult to see how the Burmese Government can hope to carny out their proposed elleotions in March. According to Scarlett, Foreign Office, the shooting Har in China appears to be virtually over for the timne being and a political game of poker is now in progress. In this game the Co Communists hold all the trump carde and are just biding their time while the K.M.T. Govenmentall machine disintegrates. Largely on the basis of the C.C.P. documents captured in the Special Branch, Hong Kong's rapid on LIN KUN' house in December, 1948, the Foreign Office have become increasingly onfirmed in their view that the Chinese Communist Party must be considered as completelly orthodox, mabure and highly organised at the hither levels. In these circumstances the Foreign Office consider that atapartifron a honeymoon period owing to tactical considerations, we can expect little satisfaction oly from any Coalition Gove nment which may be formed in China as the latter must be expected to pursue an entirely ruthlless Communist policy. THISIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIO RECORDS ACT 1958 APRi DOO 8th Manch. For minutes of the D.G. meeting held to-day, see folder in D.D.G. Sec. tray. Viv came to see me in the afternoon about vetting. S.I.S.. receive a certain number of recruits through the Civil Service Commissioners, but the Matter in their application forms refuse to asl Tor sufficient particulars to enable uIS to camry out a satisfectony vet. It was agreed that we would take this up with Howard. I went to the Special Branch Athletic Olub annual dinner. and found all members past and present extremely agreeable. 9th March. Me have got rather an interesting Polish case which we are running in conjunction with the Laneashire Police. A Pole called BALUSZ has informed the nolice that he has received a oueseonnaire bearing on military subjects from another Pole in Manchester called KACZMAREK. We are going to arrange for further meetings to be covered. KACZMAREK appar ntly visite London periodically. He seems to have other contacts. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 APRAL Do0 53. The D.G. attended the Cabinet Committee which wag called to discuss the paper on Communiste in Industry. The Cabinet felt that there ought to be some form of tribunal on the lines of the three advisers and at Bridges' sugrrestion Sir Harold Parker was asked to Chair a working party which would set out the arguments and an other difficultir which such an arrangement might entail. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINFD lOth March. IDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OR THE PUBLICHECOFDS Burt came to see me about ACT 1958 eril 2010 has offered information about a man called OREFE. Said to be coming here from Canada to visit MOSLEY. There vias some suggestion about his getting MOSLEY'E funds out of the country. Burt was suspicious and wanted tD no whether we new anything about the story. I asked Grnham Mitchell who said that we were aware of 0' KEEFE'E visit, but we had no idea of the purpose for which he was coming. Burt, 1 think, decided to turn down and said that he did not pay Dut money unless he was going to get something for it and in this case he thought that waB putting up rather a tall story. I attended a discussion at the I.D.C. on the "cold" war. Jebb, Denning, Ralph Nurray, Kirkpatrick, the Ds. of I and myself wore on the platform with Air Mansha Slessor in the Chair. Various. groups in the I.D.C. put forward proposals. Pat Reilly spoke on Greece advocating that some action. either by the Fleet 0P 3.0.E. might be taken to prevent Albania being used as a base for the rebels. Another officer spoke on Malaya, urging that Comciandos accustomed to jungle fighting should be formed into a special Corps to reinforce the military and police. The third speaker dealt with the situation at home and expressed anxiety about the legality of the Commurtist Party and its potision in the Trade Unions. The fourth spealer made proposals about a Minister Without Poftfolio to control the cold" war assisted by an inter-departmental committee. o After the atudents had made their comments, these on the platform were asked to speal in reply and at the end Gladwyn Jebb sunmed up by stating what the Government had been trying to do since Potsdam. was asked to say something about the legality of the Party and the Trade Unions. I said that aG long as the Party did not constitute an immediate threat to internal security, we preferred to sse it remain legal. Tt vas easier to deal with in that way and in faot it had in the past acted aa quite a useful safety valve. The Party had in faat recently shown a deeline in membership Awe know this from secret sources, that the re-regist ration for 1949 shows a membership of between 35 and 36,000 while the census of last year showed a membership of 13,000). This seemed the more nemarkable since the only people at the moment who were telling the workers to do leas work for more money were the Communist Party, the Trade Unions being identified with the Government and the "boss ollassll. As regards the control of Unions, about which one speaker had expressed considerable anxiety, I said that: this was quite a serious matter but really one which colald be handled better hy the Trade Unions themselves than by anyone else. At the moment the electrical Trades Unions and the Association of Scientific Workers were wholly under Communist control, and there were strong Communist elements in the Miners Union, the A.E.U. and the Transport and General Workers Unions. There were, however, no grounds for thinking that those in offic within the Unions were particularly representative. I quoted an instance where the boilermakers. who numoened Some 80,000, had revoked a previous resollution prohibit.ing Communists from becoming office bearers in the Union. Out of 80,00 members only $,000 had voted and the Communists had obtained a majority of about 300. Had even hallf of the members of the Union voted the resolution would never have been revoked. The fact was that they were, generally speaking disinterested. It was up to the T.Us to coPrest this attitude. Meanwhile there was a certain element of rise in the evert of a crisis. We were. however, fairly condifent of being in a position to deall with it. In sunming up Jebb said that he thought the existing machinery for the prosecution of "colat var waf adequate and that it must be closely co-ordinated with foreign policy and therefore remain under the Foreign Office. The Foreign Office were always thinking of ways and means of improving our position, but were neverttheless glad to have been present at the discussion and to listen to the various ideas put forwand. He would welcome any further discussions Df the kind. l1th March. T read a lonE reront by Magan on Cuprus. He strongly supports the D.$.0. in his view about the long-term risks of the 5. of the situation. He says that we shall have trouble in the island as sure as God made little apples! He puts down the present lull in the situation to the resignation of the Governor, for which AKEL are claiming the credit, but he does not think that this lull can last very long. Personally I am more inclined to think that the lull may be due to the fact that several of the AKEL leaders have since the report was whitten found their way into gaol for contravention of local Orders. They may, therefore, think it unwise to continue acts of sabobage until the local elections have been held. The D.S.I. is rendering a further report. Hill and I went over to a meeting at the Ministry of Supply with Sir Harold Parker in the Chair. Winnifrith told me at the outset that the three advisers had flatly refused to handle Communists in industry. This meant that if there was to be a tribunal at all it would have to be composed of different people. I said that if buch a tribunal were set up there would be strong pressure from the T.U.C. to support it and possibly also for legal representation. This would be extremely difficult $o resist, Even if we got one satisfactory Trade Unionist, he would ofore long need to be replaced and a precedent would have been created. I would be impossible for us to go on turning down people put up by the T.U.C. We could not possibly table our information and sources to such a body without the gravest risk to security. This would affect not only our information on these particular cases, but our information generally. If we were unable to table our sources it would be impossible for the tribunal to come to a satisfactory conslusion. Sir Harold Parker seemed to think that this was a valid objection. We then discussed the legal position. It was clear that whatever the tribunal advised they could be overridden by the employer. Hankey, the Treasury Solicitor, felt that some employers would not like to pass on the information for fear that they might be invollved in an action for slander. This could, however, be done by handing them a letter and asking them to deliver it to the particilar employee. Alternatively, the Government could warn him themselves. It was agreed that the Secretary would put up a draft which would be submitted to us for consideration. I have read a paper written by Michael Serpell on the Garibbean, from which it is recommended by the D.G. that we put an officer in Jamaica and Trinidad. It is admitted that the problems are largely indigenous, but it is felt that our presence in the islands would go quite a long way to stimulate police activity which is sorely lacking. The state of the police forces in some of the islands is lamentable. Serpell saw in Washington and C.I.A. have more or less agreed to collaborate with us whole-heartedly. The D.G. made a statement on our proposals to the J.I.C. and I raised the matter in our discussions vith S.I.S. last Weanesday. Easton expressed no interest in the area and appeared to regard our presence there as something of a "swan". I explained to him that although we did not expect to get much of a dividend, we were being increasingly pressed by the Exxxxx Colontal Office to establish stations in the colonies. The real fact is that the-Colonial Office have been So frequently let down by their Governors that they regard our presence in the colonies as something of an insurance. This IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENI UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 AFRIL DoiO 14th March. At the D.G's meeting to-day we discussed S.I.M.E's responsibiltiles in time of war. They will, of course, become militarised to quite a large extent. I said, however, that I thought it was important that they should not drift back entirely to military control. The experience of the last war showed that there was an immense amount that this department could do for S.I.M.E. which no other department had the requisite knowledge to carry out. S.I.M.E. suffered considerably in the early stages of the war through having to deal through military channels and through having no-one in the War Office here who really understood the nature of their problems. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 AfRi DoO Ronnie Howe came to see me about a friend of his who has been doing a certain amount of night club work with the Yard. This was was formerly employed by the Indian Police. His rvices have been satisfactory in every way but he is now at loose end. I said that we would consider him. I subsequentry asked Vickery to make enquiries about him and if possible to give him an interview. Jagger of the Establishment Branch of the Ministry of Supply telephoned to say that he had passed on our information about BLACKETT to Rowlands with a recommendation that Rowlands should see Sir Harold Parker, who is by way of having the whole matter under consideration. 15th March. For minutes of D.G. meeting held to-day see folder in D.D.G. Sec.' tray. Dick White and Ronnie Reed told me that there has been an interesting development in the case of Dorothy WOODMAN. She was pung up the other day by a woman called Mrs. STEVENS, subsequently Aentified as Rita STEVENS, an American, who delivered greetings som a man and his wife in the U.S. whom records show to have been indirectly tied up in the Russian espionage case known as "Rote Drei". This does not, of course, necessaryily indicate that Dorothy WOODMAN is still active. It is, however, for consideration whether the checks on Dorothy WOODMAN should be allowed to fun for a. bit longer before we interview her. The D.G., whom I have consulted, is agreeable to this if we think it advisable. If not, he would like me to discuss the ca case with Ronnie Howe and suggests that a police officer might accompany Skardon. shonebxtkexbxlrxaxteterxthxixnssenttn texeariimerxahnwxtkk I showed the D.G. a letter that I was sending to Gardiner about the investigation of leakages. There had been a complaint from Sir Henry Tizard that no progress had been made with the petroleum leakage case which occurred at the end of 1948. In my letter to Gardiner I made it clear that the solution of such cases depended to a large extent on our being informed immediately. If this not done we cannot use our journalistic contact, who might within the first twenty-four hours reasonably ring up the paper concerned and say that he wanted to follow up the story and Would be glad of any leads. This might have the effect of narrowing the field of enquiry to some particular Ministry or firm. In the case of the petroleum leakage we only heard about it a week after the event. This whole matter raises the question of our responsibili with regard to leakage cases. We are committe to investigate Cabinet leakages,bu as regards those from departments we must rely to some extent on enquiries within the Ministry about the distribution of the documents and subsequent interrogations.b by either the Establishment or Security Officer. When we know the distribution we can vet the names of those who have received any particular individual it may be desirable for us to be present copies of the document. If the results of our vet pin-point at the interrogation. otherwise the Ministry should conduct the interregations, callling us in if any suspicious circumstances come to light. THISI COPY ORIGINAL DUCUMENT RETAINED The D.G was in agreement with this line DEPABTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF The PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 APRIL 2olo I saw David Boyle, who is sending me a note about I then undertook to go and discuss the case with Birchall. on He thought it might impressed be a good upon him thing the if desirability Birchall saw of keeping his mouth arrival shut and about the work he had been doing in the Middle East. Bill Magan has written a long report on security Out of in 64,000 the Canal Zone, which seems to be lamentable. Americans, Greeks, Maltese, Cypriots, Italians, Poles, Egyptians Roumanians in British empty 220 see confidential documents and 38 see secret documents. In two cases a Greek and an Egyptian have seen top secret documents. The matter has been brought forcibly to notice by the fact that the Egyptian Security Officer on the Canal, has told our local representative that he knows of the existence of Plan SANDOWN BIGOT and that we might be wise to enlisteEgyptian support for any such plan. Magan has further evidence of leakages from Service circles which he is also bringing to notice. A special enquiry is on foot to tighten up security. 16th March. I attended the J.I.C. We discussed a paper on the possible scale of attack by Russia on British Colonies. It was expressly stated that no account had been taken of the internal security position. I said that such a paper seemed to me to be somewhat unelastic, since the possibility of overt agsoesion against any of these colonies in time of war seemed S ewhat remote, at any rate at the outset, but that internal security would be a matter which would have to be dealt with and might form the bulk of any military commitment. This was generally agreed and supported in particular by the Colonial Office. It was decided to send a copy of the document to Governors and to J.I.0 J.. Cs Far Bast and Middle East with a request that they would give some assessment of the internal security position in their areas. THIs IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECOROS ACT 1958 Afi Too THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL IN DEPARTMENT OF THE DOCUMENT PUBLIC LINDER RETAINED BECORDS SECTION 3(4) ACT 1958 ARIL Qoio The P.M. came to a cocktail party with Bridges and Helsby, where he met senior officers. He was in extremely good form, firing questions at everybody and telling stories. I dined with and met who had just arrived with The two latter are engaged in Communist activities throughout the French Empire and Communist activities in France respectively. They were all extremely cordial and are to have talks with sections to-morrow. COPY D01 ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED 17th March. IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS Skardon tells me that KAOZMAREK has sent a Ctebegram to BALOUSOZ stating that it is indavisable for him to meet again and that he will be writing. This seems to indicate that KACZMAREK may have spotted that he has been under observation in Manchester by B.6. He is, nevertheless, coming to London where we hope to pick him up. +I gave lunch He has no cases in hand which are actually being operated by the Russians. He hae, however, some evidence to show that M.G.B. activities for Western Europe are directed by a particular individual in the Soviet Embassy in Paris. Dick attended the Junior SIGINT Board. It appears that there is a certain amount of trouble oven the volunteer interceptors. The present proposal is to liquidate them and then re-establish the organisation by re-recruiting the good and leaving out the bad. In private conversation with Eddie Hastings it emerged that buth 'c' and Hayter are always sniping at M.I.5. There is a tendency to say that we are trying to extend our tentacles too far, to indoctrinate too many people, and to make demands to SIGINT on the basis of the need to know, which are considered unnecessary. It seems that is in the habit of writing in to G.C.H.Q. requesting an explanation as to why a particular telegram has been circulated to M.I.5. This attitude is particularly irritating and I am rather inclined to have it out with William Hayter,when he returns, and 'C'. Boucher rang me up to say that yet another approach had been made, this time to the General commanding the Territorial Airborne Division, to attend a cocktail party given by the Soviet Military Attache. He was accepting and would be told to report in detail. I looked in at the dinner given to at the Hyde Park Hotel. An interesting conversation developed over the powers under French law for journalista who disclose Cabinet information. The law exists and the only need is to establish it in practice. This may be possible in the case of FRIEDLAND, a French Cormmunist, who has been arrested, leaving the Communist Party in possession of a carbon copy of a document 62. which an expert will say concerns national defence. This raised the question of the disclosure of western Union information and to feeling that some declaration should be made by the Brussels Treaty Powers to the effect that their deliberations are, collectively speaking, matters of national defence, and that the disclosure about the affairs of one country will be regarded as a disollosure of all those countries who are a party to the Treaty. 18th March. Admiral Inglis has at last replied to our letter. He is arranging to put Thisile into touch with someone who is indoetrinated in the F.B.I. This will enable us to discuss freely the case of MILNER, and I hope also details of the Washington case, but for the latter we shall have to rely upon Travis. Emery came to see me. He is going back to Cairo to take over from Geoffrey Jenkins who is retiring. Dick, F.J., Graham, Hill and I had a discussion on the draft report of the Working Party set up to consider the desirability of having a tribunal to deal with Communists in industry. We felt that sufficient emphasis had not been placed on the Security Service objection to disclosing sources of information to a tribunal which is almost certain to be composed of Trade Unionists. There would at least be strong pressure for the Trade Unions to be represented on any such tribunal. 21st March. At the D.G's meeting to-day it was decided to send Walter Bell to East Africa owing to the difficullties about accommodation in West Africa. Someone else, therefore, will have to be found to support Stephens. Patterson is to replace Thistle in Washington. I had a further meeting with Dick, Graham, F.J. and Hill on Communists in industry. We are now submitting a revised draft of the Working Party's report. THIS COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER ER SEOTIO 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 APRIL 2o(0 22nd March. For minutes of D.G. meeting held to-day see folder in D.D.G. Sec's tray. 26th March. Colonel Munn came to see me about BRITANNIA and lent me a copy of what it was now proposed that the D.M.I. should say on behalf of S.0. Sinclair has, I understand, declined to appear on security grounds. This has not created the best impression. 28th March. I went to see Birchall about who had been employed by David Boyle in the Middle East. The purpose of my visit was to get Birchall to let him dow as lightly as possible ance, if he became disgruntled. he had a good deal of dangerous knowledge on the Birchall said that he would do his best, but that his case was Similar to a great many others. He had had many Lieutenant Colonells returned to the Post Office and they had not unnaturally felt the drop rather acutely. He would, however, speak to Radley at Dollis Hill where is nov to be employed. Birchall told me that he would be retiring in a few months' time and he got in his successor, Barnett, who seemed an entirely satisfactory person. I saw Newsam about the case of Dorothy WOODMAN. He appreciated its delicacy and said he would like to have a note on the case which he could show to the Home Secretary. It was the Kingsey Martin connection which really worried him as, indeed, it has worried us. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED NDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Hpru 2010 THISIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMET IRETAINED INDEPARTMEIFT UNDERSECTION 3(4)0f THE PUBLIC RECOFDS ACT 1958. 2010 I then discussed with him the forthcoming meeting of the Cabinet Committee on Communists in industry. I told him of our objections to another advisory body being set up We preferred that these cases should not be dealt with under that system at all but that, if this were inescapable, the information should not go outside the three Advisers who were dealing with the Civil Service cases. Newsam saw all the implications and at my dictation wrote a note briefing the Home Secretary. 29th March. Burt telephoned to me to say that was again visiting the U.S. He had not yet seen the Party, but intended to do SO and woulld want to tell them something. Could we help? I said that I thought it was necessary for the informant himself to put something down on paper which he could say of his own kowleage We would vet this and, if necessary, amplify it. At the D.G's meeting today, F.J. discllosed that the patent rights for a new and epoch-making type of aircraft had been given in 1945 both to the Americansand to the Russians. This, after the approval of the Ministry of THIsIs SOPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 GfeiL Supply had been given, apparently on the advice of Sir Ben Lockspeiser This type was now regarded as the aircraft of the future. We were now somewhat pathetically to try and safeguard the development of this aircraft in the U.K. Dick and Martin discussed with me the report on our deliberations with S.I.S. Jack Easton has written the report expressing S.I.S's views of the conversations and this has somewhat tied hands. We were therefore making a re-draft. On the question of representation abroad, S.I.S have put forward about 8 arguments which they dvanced against the project, but there is no indication that we torpedoed all these arguments. In fact, the impression is given that we thought they were sound. Our idea is to cut the report down considerably and to talk as little as possible about the arguments Which led to our conclusions. These can be referred to if necessary. Dick, Graham and I had a meeting with D.G. in order to brief him for the Cabinet Comittee tomorrow on Communists in industry. D.G. will oppose any Tribunal but, if pressed very hard, will fall back on the existing Tribunal as his GHQ line. 30th March. Hinchley Cooke came to talk to me about his private army. He has apparently recruited a large number of Captains and O.Rs, 23 majors and 3 lieutenant colonels. I am bound to say that this rather shocked me. He said that Harry Allen had given him carte blanche to go ahead and he only wanted to know about the 3 or 4+ senior officers. I explained to him that we were getting out our War Book and considering expansion and personnel to fill the vacancies in time of war. I thought, therefore, that we ought to know something about the kind of people he was taking on. The Appointments Board might want to inter- view them. This obviously did not go very well, but we agreed quite amicablynthat the question should be brought to the notice of the D.G. at the next Directors' meeting. THIS IS A COPY 66. ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAIN IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 ARRiL DO I had a further meeting with Dick and Martin about the S.I.S. recommendations. It was agreed that we should not be likely to get very far at today's proposed meeting and that it woulld be better for Dick and Easton to have a discussion and clarify the position. Dick went over and was met by Easton and The latter strongly pressed Dick to reconsider the question of a joint organisation in one building or the other or in some joint office to be selected. Dick said, and rightly, that he did not feel he was able to go back on the previous decision. point of view seemed to be that if we did not make this concession, we should be unlikely to get what we wanted in regard to. representation overseas. This seemed to me a most improper suggestion. We were not a set of Orientals bargaining over a carpet, but had met together in order to find the best solution to our difficulties and the most efficient method by which O.I. could be run. Apar from this, I thought that if, as appears, we are alll agreed that a joint building is in a large measure the solution of our difficuibties, we should to some e tent be giving a point avay to the authorities if we compromised by settiing up a joint ection in one or other department or elsewhere. They would merely let us stew in that juice indefinitely. In the afternoon I saw Gilbert Laithwaite and Garner. I told them both about the case of Francis STUART who was applying from the French Zone for facillities to visit Eire to attend the wedding of his son. The danger was that if he landed here he would be an obvious ernbarrassment since in many ways he vas a worse traitor than JOYCE. Not only had he broadcast against us, but he had aided and abetted the G.I.S. Added to this the Eireanm Government had strongly protested against his return to Eire as they thought he would be used to hot up the I.R.A. over the anti partition issue. In actual fact we do not rate him very high and believe that if he were to take over the I.R.A. he would be almost certain to make a mess of it. Laithwaite was not averse to his being allowed to return to Eire but thought it important that he should not co me via this country. So far we have had no reply from the Control Cornmission as to the possib of STUART going to Ireland without touching the U.K. I told Laithwaite about our connections in Eire. He was articularly anxious that we should keep them up even though we had few common interests at the moment. Laithwaite, who is a Catholic educated at the Jesuit School in Dublin, seemed quite alive to the anti-British attitude fostered in the past by the Church, and it seemed to me that he intended to speak to the Archbishop of Dublin in RETAINED fairly frank terms. RSECTION PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Apt 2c1c D.G. attended the Cabinet Committee on Communists in industry and put up a strong defence of our position, stressing both the legal complications which might ensue and which had been outlined by the Solicitor Generall, and also the dangers of disclosing Security Service methods to any outside body. He had previously seen Alexander who was in the chair. The seales were finally turned by Chuter Ede who felt it would be impossible for the Government to get away with it in the House of Commons unless there was some form of appeal. He was emphatic, and so indeed were the whole Committee, that the existing tribunal dealing with civil servants should handle the industrial cases. D.G. made it clear that if we had our way these would not amount to more than about 30 at the present time. The matter now has to be referred to the Cabinet as a whole. We have yet to see whether the three Advisers will accept the commitment under pressure. Furnival Jones and Johnstone came to discuss the case of Phillips of Eindhoven. is arriving here on Monday and he is rather on the warpath and anxious to see some representative of M.I.5. It is difficult to assess his precise motive in pressing this case. I am a little inclined to think he may have a financial interest in Phillips whose name he is SO anxious to clear, not onlly in the eyes of the Americans but also the Brussels Treaty Powers. I have spoken to 'of about this. I said I thought that no very useful purpose could be served by our seeing as there was really very little that we could say to him. I suggested that when he visi ted S.I.S. they shoulld endeavour to calm him down, explain to him, as he probably knows already, that our war equipment is very much mixed up with that of the Amnericans and that in placing contracts for equipment in which we have a joint interest, ve have to walk in step. S.I.S. could then say that we were doing the best for Phillips that we could and that any intervention by the Dutch at 68. this stage might only have the effect of prejudicing our discussions. Inactual fact reports about Phillips" contacts behind the Iron Curtain are not too reassuring. In our negotiations with the Americans, however, we are relying on the ringed fence which we have endeavoured to set up round Mullards. 3lst March. I have arranged with Trafford Smith for Magan to discuss Cyprus with representatives of the Colonial Office. Archer of C.R.O. telephoned to say that he was going on leave and subsequently retiring. His work is to be done for the moment by Garner. Hordern, .C.Lancashire, came to see me. He had been a bit worried by the BALOUSCZ case. He felt that the Manchester Police had been rather ham-handed and possibly also ourselves in covering the meeting with KACZMAREK in Manchester. This had caused BALOUSOZ some anxiety. I got Dick and John Marriott in. They were not inclined to think that the case was quite BO bad as BALOUSOZ thought. Nevertheless we all agreed that it might welll have been handled better. C.C.Lancashire could not have been nicer about it. He said that his one desire was to do whatever we thought was necessary and we told him about the proposal to liquidate the case in spite of the fact that we had no definite lead So far into the Polish Embassy. one of our main reasons was because so many police forces were now involved that we felt there was a danger of a leakage and that we might get more by arrests and searches. If we watited too long and some- thing went wrong, the documents might all be destroyed. He saw our point. Cumming came to tell me that another of his War Office defectors was proving as difficult to handle as the previous one. He refused to accept quite a good job and is now living at the expense of the ratepayers. There is a possibility that we may deport him to Germany. This only goes to show how impossible the Soviet product is. 69 The moment they free themselves from the regime, they become rank-conscious and lazy. late of Special Branch, who has been working in B.4.d., is leaving us. I saw Newsam today He seemed fairly happy ahout the result of the Cabinet Committee on Communists in industry provided the three Advisers accepted the commi tment. Tim Airy came to say goodbye. He is going back to the Army and will retire in July to manage his farm. He was not anxious to go back to school in this department which was really his only chance of making any headvay. Edelstone, naval representative on the Chiefs of Staff Committee, has expressed anxiety about sabotage in this country. Presumablly he has had some report about various cases of sabotage Which have been occurring on H.M. ships. There is a tendency to think that these are Russian-inspired, and a slight difference of opinion exists in this office as between c.2(Sab) and B.l.a. Frankly I do not believe that the Communist Party, still less the Russians, are deliberately embarking on a policy of sabotage on H.M. ships. The Party here is much too up against it in the Trade Unions and elsewhere to run the risk of being tied up with sabotage. There is, however, just the possibility that some local organiser in Plymouth or Portsmouth is getting hold of some disgruntled elements without the lnowlledge of his Head- quarters, but on this we have no evidence. To clear the matter up one way or another, Oughton is going to visit the Plymouth and Portsmouth police and thereafter we may impose some H.O.We Ws so as to get a better picture of local Party activity. This IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCIAT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDEH SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIO RECORDS ACT 1958 APRIL Doto THIS IS A COPY 70 ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION lst April; 34) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 ARRi 2010 Dick, Horrocks and Martin had a further discussion with me about the S.I.S. recomendations for co-ordinating Security Service and S.I.S. activities. We felt that the joint paper could be considerably curtailed and that may of the arguments which S.I.S. were anxious to include would only confuse the issue. They woulld of course be available to anyone who wanted to read them. S.I.S. seemed to take the line that if they do not include these arguments, they may have difficulty in getting past their own chief. Hayter gave a short talk at the J.I.C. on his visit to the Middle East and Far East. He began by drawing a comparison between JIC(ME) and JIC(FE). In the Middle East he thought it well on top of its task and there was no doubt that it had the full confidence of the Chiefs of Staff. In the Far East, in spite of the fact that it was geographically better placed - i.e. those concerned were all situated in Singapore - it was not so well staffed and it clearly had not got the confidence of the C.O.S. He thought this was mainly due to a vague idea that it should have been in a position to give advance information on the troubies in Malaya. Considerable improvements, however, had now been made. A new and more efficient secretary was being appointed and the Foreign Office had at last found a full-time member for the J.I.S. There was still no full-time member from the R.A.F. On the questiona the Chairman, the J.I.C. itself and Hayter were opposed to the suggestion of an independent Chairman. They argued that it would be far more profitable to the J.I.C. to have the benefit of the lowledge of the Comissioner General's Deputy who was naturally au fait vith everything that was going on in the area. An independent Chairman would be bound to be more isolated. It became clear, however, that confidence would not be re-established in the J.I.C. unless the Csin.C. were alllowed to have their way. The matter will therefore be put up to the C.O.S. by the J.I.C. saying that although they consider the proposal unsound, they think it better to give the local authorities what they want and see how it works. Lloya is the main promoter of the idea and he is supported by Ritchie andnthe Commissioner General. The Foreign Office will supply the new Chairman who may be Michael Cresswell. If so, the choice is, I think, a good one as he has already had considerable J.I.C. 71. experience. It appears that the Commissioner General is anxious to regard this new Chairman as his political adviser. Both the Foreign Office and the Colonial Office intend to oppose this. They maintain that Serivener must remain the Commissioner Generall's adviser on foreign territories and Hone on colonial territories. As regards JIC(ME) Hayter did not think that the Chairman was entirely adequate, and I gather that some change may be made. Inconvenient as it was in some ways, he thought the Chairman should remain in Cairo. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 AR Di Hayter mentioned a general lack of security in Fayid. I said that we had had a report on this and that at the request of the Services, SIME had been giving security lectures and advice. The matter had rather been brought to a head by the statement made by the Egyptian Security Officer in Ismailia, to our D.S.0. in Which he made reference to Sandow and Bigott. This rather shocked the Committee who thought there might be aavantage in putting up some kind of a report to the C.0.S. about the inevitable employment of aliens which would emphasise the necessity of the demands of Cs. in O. Middle East, for British personnel as replacements. I said that the Head of SIME was in this country and coulld assist in the drafting of any such report. It is, I think, important that we should not appear as having sneaked on the Cs-in-0. There is, however, reasonable cover as the matter had come to Hayter'e notice quite independently. 72 I told the J.I.C. that an Australian Security Service had now been set up with our assistance and that the Direetor General had been appointed in the person of Reed. Generally speaking, this was encouraging. I also mentioned that in conneetion with Shedden's visit, we intended to get the P.M. to write to Mr .Truman drawing his attention to the fact that this new machinery had now been set up and was beginning to operate and expressing the hope that it would go some way towards allaying American apprehensions and to a resumption in the flow of information on defence policy and research. Kenneth Strong, who had seen Hollis in Australia, expressed the view that it was important to get it into the minds of the Americans that serious steps were being taken in Australia to improve the situation, although of course we all realised that the mere setting up of a Security Service did not in itself imply that security was adequate; this would only be the case after a considerable lapse of time. came to see me. T discussed with him his fob in Beibut. He said that but that he was more than ever convinced of the necessity for an M.I.5 station, not only there but also in Damascus. He thought there were types of information which we coulld cret THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOEUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS C11958 ARRL 90(o Ltn April. Perfect has returned. He is worried about a case affecting an Atomic Energy contract where the police were asked for their views about the firm and specially instructed not to make a direct approach. They wrote us the usual report saying they had "discreetly ascertained" ete. but oun contact had subsequently discllosed that they had visited the wrong man in the firm and told him about the work being done for Atomic Energy. In point of fact this individual had no knowledge that the firm had such a contrast. I told Perfect that he must accept it that 73 the Police would never say that they could not find something out and that whatever instructions we gave them, they would visit the firm unless they had the relevant information on their files. The only remedy was not to tell them about the nature of the contract. I had a discussion with D.F. D.B. DE/A and Magan on the enquiry about They would thererore regret ns aeparture. It seerns that if he is to be replaced, S.I.S. still want to hold on to the cover of Passport Control. It was decided that Magan should visit Greece on his return and enquire into the whole case. I saw D.M.I. about his lecture for BRITANNIA. which he has considerably revised. I gave him one or two additional points about the important Port and Travel ontrol group and also the necessity for our being informed immediately if anybody thinks he has detected a spy or S aboteur. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED DEPARTMENT OF THE UNDER SECTION AOT 1958 APRIL PUBLIC RECORDS 2010 74. I saw Helsby and took him a draft letter to Truman embodying the information received from Hollis about the progress of Australian security. The idea of this is to put Shedden on as good a wicket as possible when he visits the U.S. this month. The letter was accepted after I had cleared it with the Foreign Office. 5th April. TTHIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED N DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 APRIL Zo1o I Ihnched with Ralph Murray and Runacres of I.R.D. I formed a rather better impression of Ralph Murray who seemed very keen about his job and anxious to co-operate with us. I asked him what his charter was. He said 8 that his instructions were to push the "cold" war by any means available, which ineluded individuals, press and films. He has not made much progress so far as regards the latter, but intended to do so. I sold him the idea of animal farm. He has not so far found a representative for I.R.D. in the Far East. He has someone in Cairo in B.M.E.O. I urged on him the necessity fr tying up locally and here in London and suggested he should one here and meet certain people who would be concerned with his line of business. He seemed anxious to do this. We discussed the Peace Conference in Paris and I left him certain data. His idea is to dissuade the liberal-minded from going to the Conference in order that it may come out in its true Communist colours, and possibly to inject one or two individuals who could throw a spanner in the works by asking awlcward questions. Vickery tells me that the Inspector of Police of Ceylon will be visiting this country shortly. We agreed that he should meet various people in this office. 75. 6th April. The J.I.0. want to put in a report on the lack of security in Fayid to the Chiefs of Staff in order to reinforce a demand from the Middle East for British personnel. We are rather worried about this, since we do not wish it to be thought that S.I.M.E. have Isneaked) on the Cormanders-in-Chief. We are suggesting that the War Office should telegraph back, stating that they must have some account of the security position in order to get the backing of the Chiefs of staff. This, I think, should get us out of the difficulty. Owing to a mistake by the finance and cipher departments, a telegram intended for Courtenay, Young has been sent to Longfield-Lloyd stating that owing to the large balance held by Courtenay there will be no further remission of funds for the Quarter April-June. Longfield-Lloyd has cabled back saying he does not understand. This is most unfortunate, since it may be interpreted as meaning that Courtenay is running a secret service of his own in Australia. We have cabled Longfield-Lloyd,saying the telegram guns addressed to him in error, and informed Courtenay that he can his discretion in talking to Longfield-Lloyd! Dick Butler tells us that Vansittart is contemplating an action for libel against the Daily Worker, which contained an article by Zilliacus. There is no doubt that the articlle is slanderous, but Charles Russell & Co. are inclined to advise that it should be ignored, On the whole I think they are right. The D.WI. might, however, be induced to publish an apology and to fork out some damages without taking the matter to Court. THISISACO COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UIDER SEOTION 7th Aprill. 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 ARRIL Doo Strong came to talk to me about a demand for vetting of the Ordnance Survey personnel. They did no't want to declare their whole department secret, but had some 2,000 people. We are told that these people are employed in making maps, not of this country but of foreign parts. The secrecy of their work is said to lie in the areas which they are mapping. The Services seem to attach importance to this. I said that I coulld not really see the force of the argument. Maps of this country are safeguarded by the omission 26 of Vulnerablle Points, and it would be natural, for any foreign power to think that we were keeping our maps generally up to date. It would be nothing new to the Russians to her that we were taking a lively interest in the Eastern Mediterranean or invany areas bordering the Iron Curtain or behind it. I have suggested that before we undertake the commitment the matter should be raised at the J.I.0., in order to find out precisely what the Services are getting at. Potter brought me a report on our Registry by of S.I.S. Registry. He said that it was very much the work of an amateur and so childish that it was really a waste of time to answer it. It more or less whitewashes S.I.S. methods, which Potter says are lamentable. There is only one point which interested e,namely, that S.I.S. seem to think that it would be better if the girls in the Look-Up section were allotted certain letters. This is of course nonense. If, however, he had said certain girls should specialise in Polisk, Czecho-Slovakians, or German names and cases, there might have been some sense in it. Hollis has returned from Australia. The new organisation is, albeit somewhat shakily, on its feet, although there is a considerable amount of personnel to be recruited. The 1.Q. is to be in Syaney. There is to be a Director in Melbourne with a seat on the J.I.0., and another Director in Canberra. Reed, the Head of the organisation, although administratively under Evatt, is to have access to the Prime Minister. The work done by Hembllys-Scales has been highly praised by Chifley in two personal letters to the D.G. and there is no doubt that Courtenay is going down extremely well and will play an active part in getting the organisation going. THIS COPY URIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 8th April. 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 AfRic 2O10 Hutson telephoned about SCHLIOMIVITCH, Chairman of the Zionist Revisionist organisation who is up for naturalisation. He wanted to know whether We had modified our views in any way about Revisionists. I said that it was amply proven that they had supported the Irgun,a that if by any chance we were called to implement our Treaty with Transjordan, I woulld not like to say what the Irgun might do. In such an eventuality it is quite certtain that SCHLIOMIVITCH would not be on our side. It seemed to me, therefore, that the matter should at least be pos stponed until the Palestine situatior clarified itself. I discussed with M.E. the S.I.S. criticisms of our Registry. He agreed that they were largely childish and that of the two ours was incomparably the better. At the same time he felt, as I do, that both Registries are rather in a groove and are apt to consider the system rather than the interests of the users. Since the purpose of these recriprocal visits was to pave the way towards some form of integration, I asked M.E. for his views on the desirability of setting up a separate set of Communist and R.I.S. records for the use of the joint section if and when we got into a common building. Personally I was rather doubtful about creating another set of files. It seemed to me that the joing section could work much more effectively on the basis of S.I.8. files and our files, to which they should have access in the common room. A new set of files woulld only contain extracts divorced from their text and any serious research worker would be bound to wish to see the original documents. M.E was in agreement. I then went and had a look at his index. He has broken down the Russian Intelligence Service into a number of sub-headings. which are in the form of cards on which entnies are made with a reference to the file. Each officer in the seotion makes his own notes on his own cards. When a subject seems to be looming rather lange, they have a conference and do a write-up. In many cases where matters are referredit them they have sufficient knowledge to give the answer out of their heads, or by reference to cards. I should have thought that some comparable system was all that would be required by the joint research section. l1th Apri.l. This IS A COPY ORIGINAL AL DOCUMENTIRETAINED INDEPARTMENT OF THE UBLICRECORDS ACT 1958, Fnl Q0(0 I have arranged for Haldane-Porter to go over and see Harding-Newmar about drafting a wire to J.I.C., M.E., asking them to provide further information about the security situation in Fayid so as to enable J.I.C. London to support the application for White personnel to replace aliens in the camp who have become involved in the handling of secret documents. Mitchelll tells me that Bennett has visited his contact at Birmingham University. He has discovered that Lancelot HOGBEN is nearly always drunk, at loggerheads with most of his colleagues, and desperately jealous of Professor ZUCKERMANN. This enquiry had been made as a result of a conversation between someone calling himself "Lanceloti and ZUCKERMANN. It vas clear that "Lancelotu was very arunk and not responsible for what he said. Amongst other things he had mentioned that he was born under Sagittarius. Miss Weldsmith guessed that he might be Lancelot HOGBEN and subsequently found that he was a Professor at Birmingham University and that he was born under Sagittarius. Bennett has asked his contact to supply us with a sample of HOGBEN'S typewriting, which we shall be able to compare with the original document sent to King Street. This document, which was clearly torn from the back of a Soviet publication, was a membership form filled in in type for ZUCKERMANN. We believe it was a malicious act on the part of HOGBEN to get ZUCKERMANN into trouble. I lunched with the D.G. and Page. The latter is over here from Jamaica in order to attend the Geneva Convention. talked to me about the case of the Communist who is being given a job in the Welding Association. He was challenged by his eroployer and replled that his membership had lapsed. He also produced a letter to the London District Party Committee, indicating that he no longer wished to be associated with them. He did not, of course, mention the fact that he had allowed his premises to be used at the request of STADLER, 8 Czech attache, by a Czech agent who wished for a quiet spot in which to write his reports. He has in fact now got STADLER to make other arrangements, since the approach to him by his employer must have been an indication that if the authorities knew of the Czech assocation the would view it with disfavour. There is no evidence to show that knew what was in the reports; on the other hand, ie must at least have had a veny strong suspicion of what was going on, since his natural question to STADLER should have been: "Why doesn't the individual write his reports at the Czech Legation?" Moreover. the fact that the association has now been discontinued. presumably at request, confirms that must have thought it a dubious one. Lastly, D.N.I. has told all departments that they are not to place rescarch onntracts with the British Welding Association. Graham feels that if this is allllowed to stand, the British Welding Association are bound to dismiss he has therefore, drafted a letter to Ransome in which it 18 suggested that D.N.I. might confine his remarks to secret contracts only. Personally T am not very satisfied; I feel that Graham is being a little too air-minded. THIS IS COPY DOOUMENT RETAINED UNDER SECTION OF THE UBLICRECORDS ACT 1958 Aril 2010 79 12th April. THIS IS ACOPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 APRIL 01o At the D.G's meeting to-day, Gnaham Mitchell said that the Foreign Office did not appear to be very clear about the policy in regard to granting passports to Communists. Sir William Strang has recently turned down two cases - in fact So far in no single instance have they refused a passport, in spite of the fact that quite notorious people have been going to conferences on the Continent. We do not mind very much, as on the whole we think this whole procedure rather foolish. Graham Mitchell came to tell me that a telephone check had just disclosed that waa clearly insincere,an that he had consulted the Party when he found himself in trouble and had presumnably written the letter to his employer under Party instructions. James Robertson has been doing some fairly extensive research on a man called who appears to be in touch with a Russian lawyer in Switgerland known to have had conneotii ns with members of the Rote Kapelle or Rote Drei. There ie evidently something pretty clandestine going on, although whether it is spionage or Black Market it is difficult to say at the moment. 3o Hollis came to tell me that MILNER of the Australian espionage case had been appointed by U.N.0. as Political Adviser to Admiral Nimitz, who is to make arrangements for the prebescite in Pakistan. We have suggested to Thistle that he should consult the F.B.I. and see Suitable warningis given to Admiral Nimitz. I.P.I. consier it highly undesirable that MILNER shoulld go to Pakistan. THIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 13th April. 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 APRIL Doio At the J.I.C. to-day I told Hayter that we were contemplating a round-upo of Poles. He said that he rather regretted that were not roping in one of the Attaches. I pointed out that there were various legal difficulties and that the D.P.P. had been against it. I also told Hayter about Admiral Nimitz. He said that he would be grateful if I would keep him informed, since if Nimitz was inclined to accept MIINER the Foreign Office would probably vant to weigh in. It has been decided to postpone action against the Poles, KACZMAREK and others, since while the O.Cs were down here consulting with the D.P.P. a further meeting had taken place between the informant and KACZMAREK and they would not be meeting again for another week. The action is therefore scheduled for next Wednesday. involve I asked Hinl why it was that we could not/KAUDY, the Assistant Military Attache. He said that the meeting with KAUDY would be difficult to cover since he would probably keep the rendezvous in a car. It would then be difficult, if not impossible to know when the documents passed. Apart from this, vie had allready identified KAUDY; it would, therefore, be impossible for us to search him on the assumption that we did not know his identity. All this would have to come out, as it was part of our case that we had identified KAUDY when he met the informant and KACZMAREK in Liserpool. 19th April. I had a discussion to-day with Perfect, Oughton and F.J. about keeping Chief Constables informed on the V.Ps in their areas, and solliciting their aid in discovering what Communiste are employed in certain factories. There had been some difficulty owing to a letter written to a .C.enquiring whether 81 there were any Communists in a factory which had a sub-contraet for atomic energy. The Police had been specially askednot to visit the factory; this, of course, they did with the result that they disclosed to someone not indoctrinated the fact that the contract related to atomie energy. This led to a complaint. It seemed to me that the only reason for writing to a C.C. at all was to cause him to search through his records and establish whether any of his Communists were employed in a particular factory. This might lead him to discover that although he had quite a number of Communists listed, he did not in fact know where they were employed and had therefore better do something about it. His deliberations, however, could not be in any way conclusive, since in a place like Brimingham, for example, many of the employees in a factory came from other C.Cs' areas. There vas clearly no point in a C.0. going to a factory, since we were already in touch. An added difficulty is that C.0s do not always like passing their information to each other. They do not mind passing it to us or to our passing it on, provided we do not state its origin. The upshot is that we can only improve our knowledge about Communists employed in secret factories by stimulating the Police as whole to make more exhaustive enaamiries and put on top of the work in their area. It was agreed that we would endeavour to let C.Cs have a list of .Ps in their area, inspite of the risks that this might entail. If we did not do so, there was quite a possibility that we should be missing something. Hayter telephoned to me about Admiral Nimitz. I told him that ve had had a reply from Thiste, saying that the information had been passed both to the State Department and the Navy Department in the flat terms that MILNER was a Russian espionage agent. It was the intention to inform Admiral Nimitz and Thistle would endeavour to let us know the result. Potter has to put in a broadside report on the S.I.8. Registry. Its main troubles are that (i) records are never centralised; a number of people seem to have littlle bits of the story tucked away in their cupboards (ii) the papers are not put on to the files at the outset; (iii) files do not get back to the Registry for six weeltsnor two months, meanwhile alll incoming papers go into what is known as the "bins". Officers rarely give direction as to carding, and once a file goes out there is no adequate means of tracing its whereabouts. Lastly, there are not nearly enough personal files. 82. A somewhat awlward situation has arised through a question in the House by a Colonel Lipton as to whether Scotland Yard passed the names of Bernal, Crowther. Louis Golding and Patricia Burke to the Americans as people who mhoulld not be granted facilities to go to America to attend the New York Soviet-sponsored Peace Conference. Chuter Ede replied emphatically on two occasions that no such information had been passed and that it was hot the custom to pass to foreign Governments information of the kind stated. Strictly speaking this answer is true, since Scotland Yard did not in fact pass anything. At the speoifio request of we did, hovever, give certain particulars about these individuals ithout making any recommendation, as a result of which they were presumably refused visas. This takes us back to Sir John Anderson's ruling of 1926, after a British Cornmunist, Mary Moorhouse, had been expelled from Holland or Belgium as a result of information supplied by us through Passport Control. It was laid down that we were not to instigate or acquiesce in aotion against a British subject by a foreign power without prior reference to himself. Sir Hyndham Childs, then an Assistant Commissioner at Scotlland Yard, took the matter up at the time and received assurance that this did not cut across the accepted practice of passing information through intelligence channels.to foreign powers ontan exchange basis. Had he not SO ruled. the whole basis of our liaison and intelligence work would have gone. The matter was again discussed in 1934, when Sir Russelll Scott was Under Secretar of State at the Home Office, when our view of the position was again confirmed. It was understood that the passing of information about Communists on an exchange basis was to continue. The question now arises whether we should get a further clearance for this policy from the Prime Minister, and whether he woulld wish us to discuss the matter with the Home Secretary. We did not inform the Home Secretary when the recent question was put down, as we felt that it might have been embarrassing for him. Now that the matter has bbwn oven, it might be desirable for him to know the truehposition. Should any contrary rulling be made, it would cut right at the root of our liaison with the Americans and with the Brussels Treaty powers, with whom we ane having regular meetings every three months in London. The D.G. has asked for a note to be prepared on this subject in order that he can raise the matter with the P.M. Dick Thistlethwaite has given us an account of the signing of the Atlantic Pact. He said it was a very restrained affair, the only colour being provided by the Icelandic and Portuguese delegates. The Icalanders said that their tiny country had never fought a wan could have no army and more or less implied that they were most uhhappy about the whole affair. They looked asiif they had been 23. given a grilling by the State Department in order to make them talk. The Portuguese were sinister and villainous, and the Foreign Secretary devoted the whole of his speech to a flattering eulogy of President Truman's dynamic personality. Perhaps the best description of the ceremony was given by a member of the Embassy. He felt that the nattyesuited State Department officials behaved exactly like ushers at a wedding. If he had been asked whether he was a friend of the bride or of the bridegroom, he would have said of the latter, since it seemed that the father of the bridegroom was obviously Ernie Bevin. The young son off this respectable British family (no doubt the very youthful looking Ambassador) having been divorced from his French wife in 1940, had now decided for sound and solid reasons to marry a rather flashy American heiress: hence the ceremony. It was perhaps unfortunate that, instead of Mendelssohn's "Wedding March" the Marine Band played two tunes from Gershwin's "Porgy and Bess", namely "It Aintt Necessarily So" and "I Got Plenty of Nothintm This ISA COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 AAL2CO DsI0 20th April. The D.G. gave lunch to Mr. Viathianathan, who is the Permanent Under-Secretary in the Ministry of External Affairs and Ministry of Defence in Ceylon, and the Prime Minister's right-hand man. He formerly worked as an official in the British administration and has a wide experience. He was extremely friendly and cooperative and highly intelligent. He has instructed his I.G and D.I.G to call on us, when we intend to explain to them in some detail bur functions. At the moment, I gather, they are slightly bewildered. They have formerly had liaison with Scotland Yard, and they cleanly 84. do not know where Scotlland Yard ends and we begin, Viathianathan has met Wagstaffe, of whom he appears to approve, and has introduced him to the Police. He is quite satisfied that he should deal direct with the Police and that he, Viathianathan, does not wish to be kept informed except in the more important cases which may have political repercussions or affect matters of policy. I talked to him about general security. He seemed particularly interested in this subject and wishes to discuss it further as soon as the Conference is over. He had not apparently seen the document on the Bridges Panel which had been sent to Ceylon. I explained its object and told him how we fitted in to the general security system. There is clearly nothing comparable in Ceylon, but,as he explained, conditions there are, of course, utterly different. For example, in his own office the private lives of all his coihleagues are known to himself Dr to senior members of his staff. There is, however, no general vetting system on the basis of Police records. He evidenly thinks that some improvement in Ceylon is necesany and that there may be much which can be adapted from our system here to suit local conditions. I saw Birchall about a suggestion that Allan should go to Triniaad with a small mission which to look into the Post Office system generally. This idea was discussed tentatively with Sir John Shaw by the D.G. when the latter was in the Caribbean. Birchall has readily agreed to Allan being sent, and if we think there is any advantage in his going to Jamaica as well there would be no difficulty. The question of payment arises. The Legislative Council in Trinidad is prepared to pay for two people, bu't may not be ready to include a third. If not, the expense will have to be borne either by the Colonial office OP ourselves. II said that we would take this up. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED INDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 2lst April. 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 AREIL 2o(0 A perfect flood of Information is coming in from Thistle, as a result of official sanction being given to his discussing certain GLINT material with the F.B.I. There seems little doubt that the Embassy case is mixed up in a Hider case of leakage in the United States which is conneeted with the SPDED case. There are all sorts of complications in the handling of this 25. material, since even U.S.O.I.B. are not aware of its existence. The F.B.I. are playing up extremely well, and Thisile is in almost daily contact with Lamphere in the F.B.I. who has bean making a detailed study of the wholle matter. ORIGIIVAL DUUUr 11 HETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 02L 2010 Thistle has telephoned (20.4.49) te say that Admiral Nimitz has been informed about MIINER, and that ways and means are now under consideration for getting him out of the delegation to Palistan. I SO informed Hayter. KACZMAREK was arrested last night, his premises searched and also those of the firm th which he has been connected. He haB made a confession implicating KAUDY, the Assistant M.A., but so far has not told us much that we did not know already. He is pleading that he was acting under pressure from the M.A. owing to relatives living in Poland. I attended a rehearsel of BRITTANIA and made a short speech after the D.M.I's address on sabotage. He postulated sabotage in industries and utility undertakings. T explained that the Security Service was responsible for getting information about the organisation, methods and activities of agents of foreign Intelligence Services and that in time of war they hope to neutralise them. Further, that we had responsibility for 5th Columns, whom we should endeavour to keep out of V.Ps and to intern should the necessity arise. TO reinforce these plans, on the sabotage front we maintained contact with V.Ps and advised them with regard to the measures they should take to protect themselves from internal sabotage. We had no responsibility, however, for guards outside perimeter fences. As regards suggestions by the D.M.I. that sabotage of railways and communications might be a problem, I said that we could only deal with this in our endeavours to detect the workings of enemy agents or 5th Columnists, and to get the dangerous ones under lock and key. If, in spite of this disgruntled elements committed acts of the kind the Police, civil authorities and the population as a whole would have to be relied on. The The only other point mentioned by the D.M.I. was rumours. I pointed out that in the previous war there were many rumours, but that in no case had they enemy direetion behind them, to except in the case of enemy broodcasts. The only way meet this was through the B.B.C. broadcasting denials. 86 Perfect is proposing to over and see the Pollice in the Channel Islanas. There is no doubt that his efforts are beginning to bear fruit and that there is a marked improvement in the activities of the Police and the quality of their reports. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 ARRIL D.01O I had a meeting about the War Book with Charles, Dick, Roger and Hili. We decided to report progress as requested to the Transition Committee on Jully lst, since this Would give us an opportunity of saying that we should get no further with this or that owing to the failure of the Home Office to reach a decision. It seemed to me that we could not leave certain important decisions about arrests, searches, proscribing the C.P. eto. to the precautionary stage - at any rate without 82. clearing a great deal of preliminary ground. If the whole subject had to be trashed out by a Vorking Party and then submitted to a Cabinet Committee, and then finally to the P.M. the Communists Would have burned all their documents long before we got near there. It was agreed that the appropriate sections of B and C Division should get out a small index of people that they would like to consider for arrest att the outbreak of war. It seemed to me that if such a system were not adopted, the names of important people might well be forgotten when a crisis arose. Roger feels that Communists laid off from undertakings susceptible to sabotage should be interned. There is considerable force in his argument, but T doubt whether there is any use in interning a large number of people merely because they have been unlucky enough to acquire knowleage valuable to an enemy. There is not the slightest doubt in my own mind that any of the Tribunalls We had in the last was would immediately have let them out. APRILTHIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 22nd April. 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS Carew Robinson came to see me. He is wriltihg up a history of 18B cases and wanted to know whether we had anything on the subject which would be of usC to him. He had read Aiken-Sneath's report on the B. B.U.F. and he knew quite a lot about the proceedings of the Birkett Committee. He had, of course, had access to all Home Office files. I told him more or less what T thought of the Birkett Committee, which instead of being an impartial tribunal really acted as Counsel for the Defence of the accused. I reminded him of the case of KURTE and Ben GREENE, where Birkett had cross-examined our agent like a pickpocket. Ultimately, of course, GREENE had brought an action against John Anderson which had failed and the original testimony of our agent had been upheld. This to my mind was a Clear illustrution of the dangersof anything in the nature of a legal tribunal. I showed Carew Robinson portions of Curry's book which had a bearing on the subject. He promised to let me see what had been written before it was enibodied in any war history. T saw Noel Wild, who informed me about the latest L.C.S. plans. 'c' had previiously mentioned them to me and suggested that I should get hold of Wild, as certain of them woulld affect matters in this country. 88 We had a long meeting with from 3 n.m. to 6.30 p.m. when we considered the draft memorandum of our forier deliberations. I opened by saying that I thought the draft was rather an unfortunate one.; it read to me rather like a legal document drawn up by two business firms anxious to see they were not double-crossed by each other. Secondly, I felt that for those who would read it and were not au fait with the discussions and counter-arguments, it might be rather misleading, in rarticular by the various points raised by S.1.S. against ouD representatior abroad. Frankly, none of them seemed to me to have much substance, and if they remained unanswered it rather gave the appearance that ve thought they were valid. Jack Easton and said they were sorry that I did not like the general tone of the document; they had, however, felt bound to introduce these points to show that they had been raised, otherwise they would undoubtedly have difficulties both with their Chief and with the Foreign Office. I said that we too might have difficulties with ou Chief, who might well say that he had a Charter given to him by the P.M. and that he was denied the means for carrying it out to his satisfaetion. I do not think that this rather blunt opening to the proceedings did any harm - in fact S.I.S. were pretty amenable to a number of amendments which we subsequently introduced in order to get the document on to better lines. There was a tendency throughout to avoid closing the door to some sort of interim arrangement by which the joint colllation section could be set up temporarily in some other building or in one department or the other. We concentrated on getting this eliminated wherever it appeared, and on stressing that the cardinal factor was to obtain aa building or contiguous buildings which youlld house us all; anything else conld only lead to inefficiency and not-, as stated in the document, purely a question of convenience. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS 23rd April. AOT 1958 ARIL 2010 There has been a slight spot of bother over an agent of the Lancabhire Police who attended the Paris Peace Conference. Un- fortunately he ran out of cash nd,after disclosing his identity first to the Paris Prefecture andeasking assistance, he went to the British Embassy. S.I.S., whom we told about two of our own people attending the Conference, were not informed about this agent; we only knew in fact through the Lancashire Police that he was going, twenty-four hours before he started, and we were never given his name. 7. This ia a typical instance of S.I.S trying to make a mountain out of a molehill and to build up a case against any form of representation by us abroad. It is difficult to see how advance information about this man's visit could have altered the position from S.I.8's point of view. THIS I IS A COPY ORIGINA DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 ARRIL 2010 Burt came to see me about Communists in the Police Force. He wanted to interview the two suspects on whom we are carrying out observation by H.O.W. The matter had been discussed with the Home Office, who were giving it their consideration. I said that the Police were really neither civil servants nor military; they were somewhere between the two. In the case of the millitary, it would not be customary tD question a soldier about his political views, provided he was not doing anything prejudicial to military discipline. It Would be argued that the O.P. was a legal body and that he was entitled to be a member of it, in the same way that any othe? doldier might be a member of the Labour Party, the Liberal Party or the Conservative Party. If, hovever, the Home Secretary decided that Police Officans should to through the "purge" procedure, it would be wise to get a complete case of Parity membership, orHassociation with it in such a way, eto. ete. otherwise the case would be tuned down by the three advisers. It woinld then be very difficult -- if not impossible - to move the man to some other 90 sphere. The Horne Secretary might, however, decide to allow Burt to interrogate the man. I said that while I was pretty certain that Burt would get away with it, it was just possible that in one case in a hundred a man would be the type who woulld stand on his rights and might go to his MIP. or to Pritt. Unless at thet stage the Home Secretary was prepared to get up in the House and support him, he might be in difficulties. Runacres of I.R.D. rang up with a list of delegates to the Paris Peace Conference. I told him that we could pick out about forty names, but some 200 were reported to have gone and the names were still coming in. He said he would let me know if he wanted the names immediately. He seemed doubtful whether it was really necessary to put us to the trouble of searching our files. THISSA( COPY ORIGINAL O00UMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 25th April. 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS D.G. Meeting. ACT 1958 ARRIL 2a1O The D.G. circulated to us a copy of his proposals that a new Director shoulld be appointed to control the activities of all Dur B.3 sections. He said that he thought we might not agree wiith it, but that he felt very strongly on the question and would like us to give it ouP careful consideratio We had a further meeting about DuI own Mar Book, during which further points emerged. Although it seemed to me desirable that we should clear the ground as far ab possible with the Home Office, even though the decision Would have to rest with the Secretary of State of the Cabinet of the day, there woulld inevitably be a good deal of preliminary work to be done. I doubted whether if this were all left until the precautinnany stage we should get a Cabinet decision in time to enablelio to take action. It seemed to me that ve wanted to have a carefully reasoned document on the pros and conS for presentation to Ministersrimmediately the crisis arose. 26th April. Caulfeild came to see me about two things. Firstly, a friend of his named who is having labour troubles in his factory - known as I said that unless this was a listed factory where seeret work was going on I doubted whether there was much that we could do. Nevertheless if would make us a report, mentioning the individuals, we should ike to have it. 91 Hin other point Was concerned th the purchase of rubber by the Risrians. The indication was that some individual unidentified had presented a cheque,made out to a member of Schroederte Banl, for some 44,000. This vas an extremely high figure in relstint to the deal and seemed possibly to indicate that the Ruamians might be taking bribes. I said that of course many such individuals made out that they had to pay large sums of money to Russians in order to get the deal through, but in fact put it into their DVIT pecketo. If, however, jt Ware ponaible to say that such and such a Ruspion mas receiving a high commisedion, it would be extreuely valuable to LIS to tow his name. Caulfeidi said that thia was exactly whet he had in mind, and that i he could anBis't MS in any way in identifying such 2n individual he o112 be very willing to ao 5O. Runaorea asked me whether we uld like to receive copies of his reports or Corunism, and whether 1 thought it would be a Eod thing For him to sand copies to the Home Office. I said that I would certainly like to see them snid that having read them I would give hits my vies about the Home Office. I mentioned that we might he raising at the J.i.0. the question of these reports, since it seemed to me that Bo many people were compiling them new that confusion might reslilt if they Were not carefully co-orlinated and written on the baaie of all lnfommation available. There was, for entample, good de:l and nrobaliiy more than anywhere else sin our filee and in tliose of S.I.s. Borne Df thie informatd mn at any pate did not reach the Foreign, Office at a1l. Fnt Davia, tho is Principal Secretary to Noel Balcer, to1ld the tlintshe had recen ly had a nidicilous report about Imland for N.I,5, mentioning a aum of 150.000,000 aaid to he going from the I.R.., I think, to Rusgia. I tola her 1ITiI the t each 1 report 92413 got have come from M.1.5, since ve wene not concerned mitl renderig reports abnut Ireland and certainly woulld not have passed on anything s0 wild to the O.R.0. It seemed to me thnxst the lrind Df thing that might have emanated from tite Morth. David Scherp tells me that wre licive Had no such report, aind I am trying to check dth S.1.8. It is rLthez: Lxnitating that T7E should have to tuke tho rap for this leind of thing. 92 Minubea 0D D.0. meeting hela tonduy., he Tolder ir D.D.0 Becf: tray. Johh Marriott bphught time E viss aoplication by KRVCHENKO. in which he stated that he wanted to come here in trendit to the U.S.A. He Would be maling a statement to the Presa, eto. On auxyival he wished to be met by an amed gud in onder that his proteotlon might be assured, Te decided that this purely a matter between the Home Office and the Foreign Office. Fror the security point of vie 1e hed 110 interest. I lunched with van Moyland. He said that the Head of the Police w43 coming over here and thet he wouna like me to met him. I had a talk with Llewellyn. late Acting-Consul-Genera) at Data, who had been extremelly helpful to Sterhens. I thanked him for all he had done. He expressed very warm appreciation of Stephens's work and appeered to have formed a veny good friendshin with him. He was rather amused by a nemark by Stephene to some tife of a membee or the foreign comnunity who asked him what he was doing. Stephens, with his eyeglass well in, said that he was interested in stained glass wvindows! Apparently this explanatior of his presence in Dakcar van accepted! Llewellyn is going to take ug a post at ouP legation in Kabul. Ian Carrell is bacle on leave. I had E talk v/ith him about things in Hong Kong. There had course, been difficulties with Mackintosh, Chief of Police, but things were now going better. The D.S.0. waE handling a21 inter- cepted materiall and Co-ordinating these activities with Singepore. 27th Anril. The Following points came ub at the J.1.0. to-day, off the Agenda and in conversation afterwards. 93, 1. A Brigade is being sent from this country to Hong Kond in May and Anti-Aircraft inite are to follow in June. ND immediate troublle is expected, but it is felt that if the Communists assume control of the whole of China and come down to Canton, some attempt on the Island may be made. In any case it is thought desirable to have additional forces to cope with any possible internal troublle and refugee problems. It is generally felt that the Island could be held against an all-out attack by Chinese Communists, largely owing to the weakness of the Chinese Air Force. If, however, the Russians were to intervene it would be a different story. 2. Contact has been made either by Naval oP Embassy personnel with the Battery which fired on the "Amethysth. The Battery Commander stated that he had orders not to fire on British ship unless they fired firat. He alleged that the "Amethysth had done B0. In faat the "Amethyst" never fired a shot until she went aground, due to damage by enemy fire. The Battery Commander said that he had recognised that the ship was British and that he would not again open fire unless she attempted to move from her present anchorage. As regards the firing on the other ahips, the Battery Commoander alleged that this took place owing to the faot that no previous notification had been given. The meeting was on the whole quite friendly and conciliatory, and the Chiinese have even offered to lend a sampan if the ship's boats are too damaged to permit of communication wath the shore! 3. The British Embassy in Nanking has not been molested in any way and wireless counication is still maintained. Our Military Attache states that the bearing and marah discipline of the Chinese Communist forces is distinctly good. They are well clothed and equipped. 4. Sir Henry Tizard had an extremely unpleasant interview with Lewis Joinson, the new Secretary of State for Defence in Washington, on the subject of Australian security and the consequent hold-up by the Americans in passing classified information. So heated did this become that at one moment Tizard nearly left the room. Subsequently, however, Johnson went to see Eisenhower and seems to have had his head washed, since he returned in a more conciliatory mood. Although Shedden'e visit Btarted on an extremely bad wicket, he has apparently oreated an extremelly good impression with certain of Johnson's subordinates and was to see Johnson himself before he left. 94, 5. Hayter mentioned to me after the meeting that he hoped that as much of the KAGZMAREK case would be held in open Court as posaible, and said that if he were called upon to make a shap decision he would hope that all the Pollish diplomata implicated would be mentioned by name and not in the cuBtomary way as "representatives of a certain foreign power". I told him that the D.G. would be making a statement at the meeting on Friday; We had a meeting about the D.G's proposals for the formation of an overseas Division with a new Director. Dick, Roger, Charlles and I aln felt that this step was organisatilonally unsound and that if B.3 were manned and the B.3 sections properly staffed the D.G. would not have the feeling,w) he apparently has, that things overseas are not properly looked after. If, however, the D.G. was not prepared to allow this situation to remedy itself when Kelllar returned and other suitable officers were found to man the sections, the only possible arrangement would be for Hollis to become an additional Director and hold the position in the office of Deputy B. this would to Bome extent ease this burden and ensure that overseas matters were represented on the Direetorial Board. This Would mean, however, that we should have to have another Director of C. Division, which clearly would create an extremely difficult problem to solve. It waB difficult to see what Kelllar woulld do, since if Hollis became Director of overseas stations he certainly would not want a Senor Officer. Hollis undertool to put up a note on our deliberations, which we would discuss on Monday with Horrocks when he returned, The D.G's paper is, of course, directed more against the administration than anything else. However, whatever the drive on the administration front, it is impossible to reoruit and train suitable officers in a short time. There has been a repeated demand for the establishment of ovrseas section, and in consequence we have had to denude Head office. The basic trouble about separating overseas sections from B.Division arises from the fact that all stations abroad largely derive their motive power from B. It is the subject being studied in B. and B.2 which provide the raison d'etre for a large number of our stations abroad. There are, of course, some Btations where the product is almost wholly indigenous, oP where the work to be done is af a O.Division kind, but the madn stations of S.I.M.E and S.1.F.E have to be fed by B. The point that we particullarly stressed in our note is that overseas matters should be directed by the Directorial Board as a whole and that tae daily meeting by the D.G. with his Directors, however short, might Eo a long way to meet his needs, 95 28th Airil. THIs IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCTIMFNT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT MDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PHIC RECORDS ACT 1958 APRLL o1 I saw Sir Richard Aluwilnare and M?. Koelmayer. They are the I.G. and the D.I.G. of the Ceylon Police. We had qud t te a long tallk. What interested them particularly was the system of the Bridges Panel, which I explained to them in Some detail. They tola me that at the moment they were reaponsible for security in all Government Departments. I pointed but to them that this was clearly wrong, since they had no controll over the personnel. The responsibility for security must rest with the departmental Minister, and the role of the Police was to give ther advice and asistance from their records. They heartily agreed and seemed much relieved at the prospect of being ablle to remove the major burden from their own shoulders. We further discussed Roger's paper on the overseas Division. T said that T thought it should provide a more definite answer to the various points which the D.G. had raised in his memorandum. It vas, I thouht, necessary to make it quite clear what the reasons were for the present situation. We should, I think, say also that even if a ne Division were created, much of the vork would still have to be carried out by B. Division. unless there was to be very considerable duplication. The thind point was that it would not be solely those in the Overseas Division who would be visiting stations abroad; it was often necessary for representatives of B. and B.1 to fulfill this task. Roger is going to amend his draft. 29th Aoril. At the J.1.0. to-any D.N.I. mentioned that in his lecture during Operation TRIDENT, Sir Henry Tizand seemed to take a pooN view of Intelligence and of the J.l.0. C. in particular. He said that he had no time to read the J.I.0. reports and tha: he did not believe that the Ruspians vere capable of launching an offensive aguinat us. This was generally considered to be a somewhat irresponsible remark. 96. The First Sea Lord, in his address at Operatid TRIDENT, mentioned the immense importance of American CO- operation, and stated quite frankly that if it vas not forthcoming resistance by ourselves would be out of the question. Aaminal Inglis Was present. 2. The Foreign Secretary is worried about the situation in Hone Kong and is asking the Colonial Secretary of State to supply a weekly report. A telegram is being sent to J.I.C. Far East from J.I.. London, and the Coloniall office will be warning the Governor. 3. Hayter is proceeding to Washington in about a week's time. He is anxxious to take with him the paper on defectors and the Secretary has been asked to ensure that it is ready. I understand that we have done our part and that it has been with S.I.S. for some time. THIS IS 1COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 APRIL Qoio 5. The D.N.I. has a long and frank talk with Admiral Inglis on Friday last. He made the following points: 1. The first he had heand about the lack of security in Australia was in July last, frrom Sir Edward Travis followed by Sir Percy Sillitoe. 2. Why had we not taken the side of the Amenicans against Australia, whom he regarded entirely as a thind party? (The Commonweailth link clearly meant absolutely nothing to him) 3. In dealing with the Australians we had deliberately sheltered behind America. The Americans kne! all about this as they had their on sources in Australlia. 4. We had refused to reply to the Amehican letter asking us to withhold any information about guided missiles from the Australians, and had ended by sending a letter from the Minister of Defence which had given grave offence. D.N.I. went on to say that Inglis was a cofinned Anglophobe from the Middle West. who regarded any collaboration with the U.K. as an unwellcome commitment. He did not think that we had any contribution to make or that we were really worth helping. D.N.I. said that during Operation TRIDENT, when Admiral Hill mentioned co-operation with the United States 97 applause was general, with the noted exception of Admiral Inglis.! Inglis disbelieves both in our Government and in the Government of Australia, and is convinced that any information which is passed either to the U.K. oi to Australia is bound to come into the possession of all members of the Cabinet and ultimately of Russia. He could not believe that an Intelligence Service had the right to withhold information from a Minister. Inglis should be going in the course of a year, but ther are strong rumours that, in view of recent incidents, he may be on his way out somewhat sooner. 6. Hayter mentioned that Dr. Jessup, the American representntive on U.N.O. had made the approach to the Russians regarding the blockade. This had clearly been a bad gaffe, since verything was moving in ouP direction and nbthing was required except to sit still and wait. Jack Easton telephoned about some final amendments to our paper on the relations between the Security Service and S.I.S. I could not agree with his wish to exclude reference to a Committee which should consider all requests from the Security Service o1 from S.I.S. to operate on each other's territory. For some reason OP another, S.1.S. do not wish to set up this piece of machinery. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 30th April. 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 ARRIL 2olo A telegram has come in from Thistle saying that MILNER was due to arrive here at 1O o'cllock this morning. He said that MILNER would probably visit a Professor at the London University. It was too late to pick him up at the airport, 80 we put a check on the Professor. MILNER is by way of going, on to Geneva tomorrow. 2nd May. the Thisle has arrived for discussions bout/ashington case and the material on which it is based. The important point which emerges is that the individual at the back of the operations in the U.S. Was GROMOV, who I think at the time was an Attache at the Embassy. The whole positio with regard to the materal in the U.S. is extremely delicate, since Carter Olnrke, whe is in control of it is prepared to take quite a wide view of what concerns this country. Should O.N.I. 97 become awane of this, and 1 particular Admiral Inglis, considerable complications might result. Lamphere of the F.B.I is handling the material in the F.B.I. and is extremely co-operative. It is stinn not clear how the actual leakage from the British Embassy occurred, but there is at least a possibility that the documents were obtained through Alexander Halpern's secretary. For Minutes of D.G. Meeting held to-day. see folder in D. D.D.G.See's See's tray. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 ARRIL D1 edisoussed with. D.O and D.E/A oun reply to the D.G'E note on the overseas division. We explained that we had misgivings about a new division which would be bound to breed separatist tendencies, and pointed out that in any case it would have to make full use of the B. Division sections which must remain the principal Btimulntors of overseas: stations. Ye thought that the present somewhat satisfactory situation was entirely due to the denuding of the staffs of the B.3 sections and to the fact that there had been no officer in control of B.3 for about six months. This had thrown an intolerable burden on D.B. For the above easons we were unanimously in favour of continuing under the present organisation, which we thought was logically created and ould work satisfactorily on the return of Kellan. If the D.G. did not agree, there were to alternatives, both of which we felt had certain disadvantages. Finstly, to place Hollis as an extra Direetor in B. Division to carry overseas responsibilities and to act as D.B's deputy this meant, of course, that another Director would have to be appointed for C. Division, and secondly, to place overseas matte under Hollis in C. Division. which seemed to us groesly illogical. T talked to the D.G. about the paper on our relations with S.I.S. I explained to him that I thought he was under a slight misapprehension - in fact the paper stated that we could proceed with discussions about representat abroad provided we agreed in principle that ou ultimate aim and object when accommodation became available vas to get into the same building and have a joint collation section. It seemed to me that this was a considerable advance. The D.G. had formerly criticised our paper rather severely, stating tha t he thought it was the business of a orking Party to put forward a workable scheme, and could not see that anythng of significance had bean decided. T said that in my opinion the arguments put forward by S.I.S. in opposition to our having representation in foreign territory were really laughable, and that if I were them I should have been aBhamed to put them in. Apart from this, the de facto positio was working against them all the time. In my view, if 'o' were a realist he would be thanking Jack Easton for having applied the brakes to a car that Waua rapidly running downhill,an would continue to do SD though perhaps not 50 faat. 6th May. ile had a meeting on the paper which we ane prepaning for the J.I.C. and Chiefs of Staff on the sabotage threat to this country. I ttended meeting of the Vice--Chiens of Staff to-day, when a tlegmo From America regarding an objection by the Anarieans to Philins Radio Bubsidinny sompaniaa being employed on the manufacture of V.f. fuses. Gene al Nrisbeg, DP the Ministry of Supply, said that since this controversy aroge ne lisd, in anticipation of a ban on MULLARDS, rede tentative arrangements with 9.0.0. and E.M.I. to take on the production of V.T fuses. This would reduce the delay in our production proesamme te eight to ten mentha instead ..0f three 1822S. Fon. variety of reasons., including this one, he thought it inadvisable to Dress the Americans any more on the aueetion o1 their objections to PhiliDe subeldlany compandes. Ha had Blreedy received B considerable amount of Dlant from the Philips Group for the manuacture of V.T. fuses and he intentled Lo coiglaite thir contrget. The Vice Chief's seemed satisfied with this arrangement and it was decided not to pursue the matter further viith the Americans. 100 Inoidentllly, hisbepg tlontipned that within the last few weeks the Anericans had eliminated t number of Philips technic from their researeli estahlishmenta in the U.S.A. They had evidently decided Lhit before taking a firm line with te it might be advisalle for them to put their own house in ordor I stayed on for a diseussien on the establishment of a Security Gervige by the Germans in the Western Lone. I gave some history of whit had happened afta the 1911-1918 war and then said that I thught that if we mene going to attach officers to the orEanisstior for supervisory purposes in the Laender. ve shpiald not neglect the federal Bureau, which wollla otherwise become the centre of a Geran clandestine service. This would probably ocur anyay, but we micht have some knowledge of that Was happening. The V.0.1.0.8. snoke alout the proposal that the Germans show] be allowed to he a Gendarmterie. This had been turned down by the Foreign Office, but the T.C.I.G.S. did not agree and intended to take the queaticn up. He thought that if the Germans did not have a Gendarmerie in the Teatern Zone they Wolild be EIt a serious disadvantate if any question subseuently amose of the Allles withdrawing from Germanyy altozethter. The RuSSisne Would then have a Gestaud of conBdderalle proportirinis, hich under their direeti would get control ove the whole af Germmany. Apart from thie, ls dii not lie the iden of TPitish troons being celled te puell istirbeneeo if they shuld BIise. 9th May. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED DERARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Apol 20L0 / 0O1 Mills has arrived back from Gib. He seems to have a very good grip on the situation and is carrying out duties not only for us, He pays periodical visits to Madrid and Seville and has re-established contact with He had previously dropped and excluded him from the Rock owing to proof that we had obtained during the war that he had been acting for the Germans. He is now proving a useful source of information. loth May. We discussed the paper on our relations with S.I.S. at the D.G's meeting to-day. I rather emphasised the points I had previously made. He said that he had already approached de Normann about our going into one building, but he understood that this could not be achieved for at least four or five years. He had reported this to 'o' and had asked him to state definitely whether he was in favour of the project, since if anything was going to be done the premises woulld have to be earmarked now. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958, Bp2oid 2010 D2. I saw Walter Bell, who is leaving for Nairobi I have sent a personal letter about him to Baskerbyle-Glegg, urging that he should be given as much scope as possible. THISIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED NDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION l1th May. OF THE PUBLIO RECORDS ACT 1958 Apyil I attended a rehearsel of Exercise Britannia this 20i0 morning. We gave a lunch to Commodore Shelley, who is leaving is post as American Assistant Naval Attache. He has been extremely helpful to us with regard to defector cases. 12th May. I went to see Garner of the C.R.O about a suggestio that Dick and I should go to Eire. T felt that in the present circumstances it might be wise to postpone our visit. He agreed, but said that he did not think it ought to be too long delayed. Meanwhile, he said he would write to Laithwaite. The Irish are at the moment being more than usually contrary, which is saying a lot! They affect to be highly incensed, because in our Bill which recognises the Republic of Ireland we have alsosrecognised Ulster and made it quite clear that she will remain a part of the U.K. unless of her own free will she decides to throw in her lot with the South. This may be a vairly safe bet, but at the same time I do not see how under any circumstances we can relinquish our control of the Northern ports, which are vital to the security of this Island. Even if Ulster said she wanted to joing with the South, we ought to say "no". I gather that this is, in fact, the view of the Cabinet, but that of course for political reasons our attitude cannot be mentioned. The D.G. gave a lunch to Captain Popkess, 0.C. of Nottingham. Popkess is an extraordinary character and clearly something of a meglomaniac, as his large signature in green ink denotes! He is gadget-mad and his one idea is to mechanise the Police. On the other hand, he is no fol and some of his devices seem quite sound. He hhad, he says, reduced his breakings-in in Nottingham by 43%% through the installatinn with firms and private individuals of a burglar alarm system which runs straight 10.3 into his Control Room. The D.G. thought this system might be useful for the physical security of this office and I am to go up and have a look at it. Popkess also has schemes in force for the identification of individuals by photographs and by handwriting. I doubt whether either of these are applicable to the kind of case that we deal with in this office. Our object in getting Popkesa down here was to interest him in our work and so give his Special Branch officer appropriate support; in this I think we have been wholly successful. Before he came here he hardly knew that he had a District Party Committee of the Communist Party in his city. We had a further meeting on the War Book, which we have now completed. We have still to consider the question of staff required for expansion. the particular individuals who are to fill the jobs and what further recruitment and training will be necessary. I am appalled at the thought that in the event of war we should have to send out no less than twenty-four ficers to the provinces the moment the flag falls. In edition, to this, we have quite a heavy commitment for any Supreme Commander' staff. Van Moyland asked me to come out and meet the Chief of the Dutch Ri jkspolitie, but I am afraid I cannot remember his name. The discussion was general and mainly on the subject of Russian and German intentions. 13th May. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCLIMENT RETAINED INDEPARTMEN NDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 APRIL 01 I talked to Newsam about the Irish Bill. He said that he had been largely responsible for the inclusion of the para. 104. about Northern Ireland. I said that taking a long-term view I was rather worried by the implication that if the North one day decided to throw in their lot with the South we would be prepared to allow them to do 80. Personally I could not see that this country could possibly afford to give up the Northern ports, even if Eire came into the British Commonwealth, or even if they decided to have a defensive alliance with this country. The Northern ports were vital to. the security of thie Island and there could be no comparison between the Irish situation and the Indian situation, owing to Ireland's geographical position vis a vis this country, and you might just as well contemplate Liverpool being declared an independent republic. Newsam was prepared to agree,and in fact said that in Cabinet discussions it was abundantly clear that the British Government would not in any circumstances contemplate giving up direct control over the Northern ports. Whether there would ever be any possibility of a solution of this problem on the basis that we have lease bases to the U.S. in the Caribbean, I do nnot know. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UINDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS 16th May. ACT 1958 APRIE 20 I saw Druce, who is over here from S.I.M.E. He is coming to the end of his Army service and wants to be taken on as a civilian in the Security Service. He seemed quite a pleasant personality and is well spoken of by Bill Magan. We might possibly send him to Greece, where he has been employed before. General Irwin, the American D.M.I. called with the American Military Attache. The D.M.I. had mentioned his presence here when I motored down to Camberley with him for Exercise Britannia. It occurred to me that this might be a useful opportunity for regularising our relations with G-2. The D.G. was not in, SO Dick and I saw Irwin together and explained to him our liaison in Franlfurt and also with Miller in Singapore. The General said that he had no direct responsibility for the production of Theatre intelligence; he was merely concerned with the Personnel and training. If, however, our liaison with Theatres was not satisfactory, he could say a word to General Omar Bradley, with a view to getting this put perfectly well and that/we wanted was his blessing, which he right. We said that that the relations were working readily gave. He thought it an excellent thing that we should the liaise with G-2 wherever it was convenient to do so. At moment they had nobody in the Middle East. General Irwin subsequently saw the D.G. for a moment. 105. We discussed the S.I.S. paper at the D.G's meeting to-day. The D.G. explained that he had not yet had any reply from 'c' on the basic question of joint accommodation. I think the D.G. seemed more satisfied that the joint report did represent a certain advance in our relations with S.I.S. 17th May. For Minutes of D.G. meetinghse folder held by D.D.G.Sec. I went down to Camberley again for an Exercise Britannia rehearsel. Gerald Templer threw out a question postulating tha't in the event of war we should find Communist cells in every Government department, every Service and in every factory - what did we propose to do about it? I replied that we had for many years made a careful study of Fifth Column movements in this country, that as a result of this we had compiled considerable records and had a fairly comprehensive knowledge of methods and tactics. In addition to this the Prime Minister's purge system was in operation, and measures were taken to prevent the entry o people into employment in places where vital secrets were held. We did not wish to be complacentt but we felt that we were in a fairly good position to deal with any menace such as the V.O.I.G.S. had described, provided we had the necessary powers THIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 18th May. 3(4) OF THE PUBLIO RECORDS ACT 1958 ARi 2010 Ransome telephoned to me about a navall rating called JAMES, who had discllosed himself as a Cormunist and refused to go to the aid of the "Amethyst". The Admiral was inclined to get rid of him on the grounds of "services no longer required" rather than to have a Court Martial, Which he thought would cause undesirable publicity. I said that there were two points which I thought should be borne in mind; e.was that although this incident was known to the Communists and that in the event of a Court Martial Pritt had been asked to take the defence, nothing had been said about it in the Communist press. This was probably due to the attitude adopted by naval ratings and the population of Dartmouth when Harry Pollitt went down to speak to them. There seemed, therefore, to be little desire at the moment by the Communists to exploit this incident. The second point was that JAMES, in communicating wh his parents had indicated the unpopularity he had incurred amongst the ship'e grew and his fear of being lynched. This 106. seemed to me to be a more important point, since if JAMES were not courtmartialled there might well be resentment on the part of his comrades. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE RUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 APRIL D00 Perfect and I lunched with Thomas, 0.C. of Merthyr Tyafil. He seemed a reasonable, co-operative type and ready to take a keen interest in our affairs. Het was given a tour of the office and had talks with Oughton, F.J and others. He was particularly interested in the case of suspected sabotage which had been brought to his notice by a man called of a firm called Teddingtons. This firm had been applying a highly polished surface to certain steel rods which had something to do with the lubricating system of aircraft being used for the Berlin air lift. It had been found that owing to the heavy veights carried, the engines were getting overheated and this device was specially onstructed to meet the difficulty; it depended for its efficiency on the highly polished surface. had discovered several of these rods which appeared to have been deliberately scratehed, and he put it down to a foreman whom he knew to be a Communist. The factory is, Itgather, a listed one but has never been visited. Thomas would not have reported the incident unless Perfect had happened to see him. This is now being tied up and Paynter is looking into it. M.E. talked to me about the G-2 report on the case of Dr. SORGE, the Soviet agent who had operated for a long time in Japan but vas discovered by the Japs during the war and executed. G-2 had had access to the original Japanese documents and had compiled a highly interesting report, which we had applied for thruu 107. M.I.3. G-2 had, however, given them the brush-off. M.E. thought it possible that General Irwin, the American D.M.I. might be able to assist. I passed this on to the D.M.I. THIS COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UJNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 APRiL Old 19th May. Travis came to see us after his return from Australia and America. He was extremely satisfied with the arrangements which had been made with Carter Clarke, which would in effect give us access to almost all the material we wanted and enable us to collaborate freely with the F.B.I. I mentioned to him Popkess' burglar arlarm system. He said he would be very glad to have details as he thought it might have considerablle uses at Eastcote. We had another Exercise Britannia rehearsel at Camberlley. I saw the War Room scene which was quite interesting. It assumed that by 1960 War Headquarters would be fully equpped with television apparatus. After the A.B. explosion over Bristol, the G.0.C. spoke to the local Commander in the area, who appeared on the telephone on the mock-up television screen. He was asked to send up a helekopter, also equipped with television apparatus. Bristol is seen f rom the helbkopter appeared as a moving target on the soreen. Before the War Room scene the A.B. explosion over Bristol took place. This was portrayed effectively through an explosion transmitted over a loud-speaker. Immediately afterwards large clouds rose from the muddle in the centre of the Rawlinson Hall and various lights were operated to indicate 108. fires. The explosion seems to have been a surprise to most of those present, as indeed it was to me. By that stage of the proceedings a number of Brigadiers and higher ranking officers had sunk down in their chars and were half asleep.! They got an extremely rude awakening! 20th May.l THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENTT RETAINE IN DEPARTMENT UIDDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE RUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 ARRiL 2oo Dick White has had a most successful visit to Paris, where for the first time officers of the S.E.D and the Surete have met round the table. Dick is convinced that the people who really matter abe the Surete. He took with him The Effect of the visit is that we shall now have much closer relations with the Surete, which I hope will be cemented further when they come over at the beginning of next month. was merely a stooge throughout the whole visit, but he would not know it! At the J.I.C. Directors' meeting to-day, D.N.I. said that he had recently paid a visit to Sweden. He found their defence measures were very well advanced, even down to a "scorched earth" policy. He got the impression - although based on exactly what I do not know - that C.E. in Sweden was not a strong point. 109 The Russian aircraft which recently landed in Sweden is not of a modern type. The Air Ministry hope to examine it. The pilot, who is remaining in Sweden as a political refugee, comes from a diatrict about which information is sought. He is to be interrogated. 2. As regards the "Amethyst", D.N.I. said tha't the ship could only be moved by an approach on the top level, which in the present circumstances it was difficult to get. The Chinese were still endeavouring to get from us an admission of original fault. 3. Kellas of the Foreign Office Stated that a defector of some importance from Ozecho-Slovakia had arrived in the American zone. He is the Secretary to the Council of Ministers and has attended all Cabinet meeting. The Foreign Office are asking General Hayden to obtain from the Americans the results of their interrogations, and Hayter is to take the matter up in Washington. It seems doubtful whether this man will have much to say of special interest to oursellves. I saw Birchall and asked him about Allan's visit to Trinidad, the purpose of which is to see what can be done about interception. Sir John Shaw, the Governor, has got the wind up about Allan'e visit, as the local Legislative Council are only prepared to pay for two individual who will be dealing with the general administratior side of things. I said that there two alternatives, either that Allan should have some plausible excuse for finding himself in the area, or that one or other of those already going should be briefed by Allan. Birchall said he would Look into these two alternatives and let me know the result. 22nd May. oughton tallked to me about a request from Mackenzie of the Northern Department for informatiD about the Peace Conference held here on the 17th May. It Beemed that Mackenzie wanted to past our information to the Americans. we It seemed to me undesirable that/should start up another channel for this type of information, when the American Embassy had an F.B.I. representative in their office who was in almost daily touch with Durselves. 10 Page looked intto see me. He is going back to Geneva in about ten days time. He said that the roceedings had been one huge woffle. The Russians did not seem to care very much what theyagreed to, since they clearly had the firm intention in the event of war to disregan anything that the Convention might decide. However, this to some extent simplified the discuasions! 24th May. I attended the Brittannia Exercise and made my little Speech after the D.M.I. This was folllowed by a certain number of questions which I think were fairly Successfully answered. One officer, a proposof sabotage, suggested that instead of trying to guard rahlwas and telephone lines it would be much simpler if we put the whole FifthColumn into gaol. I said that I entirely agreed, but that I did not think it would be necessary to deal quite so drastically with the Communist Party - at any rate at the outset. I tried in general to give the impression that we were well on top of things. In fact, I think weearey although we are conscious of a number of gaps and hope to improved there as time goes on. If one is at all hesitant the soldiers are apt to get the idea that nobody knows anything about the Fifth Column and will start doing things on their own. This is invariably fatall, as we knew to our cost at the outbreak of the last war. Every commanding general was present, including those from the Midale East and Far East. There were no officers below the rank of Brigadier. In addition, Chuter Ede, Kenneth Younger, Monty, the 0.I.G.8.. and the V.C.I.G.S. attended. Chuter Ede made a very witty little speech. He bagan by saying that he thought he had got there just 32 years too late; when he was a Regimental Sergeant-Major he would very much like to have had an opportunity of addressing the Staff there were one or two little things he might have told them! 25th May. Sir Norman Brook telephoned to me about BLACKETT. There is apparently some suggestion that he should be given an addiitionall post, I told Brook exactly what our assessment of the case was and where, in our opinion, the danger lay. BLACKETT was strongly Left Wing and internationally minded and surrounded himself with Communisita who might not share his integrity. He was not, however, the kind of person who would act as a secret agent himself, at any rate under normal circumstances. 11/. said that because he already knew SO much, it was not a good argument that he should be given access to new fields. I suggested that before reaching a decision Brpok should have a word with Sir Harold Parker, who would tell him about Tizard's interview with BLACKETT. Ann Glass came to talk to me about the old case of William Norman EWER. of the Federated Press of America. There was no doubt that EWER had been a Soviet spy and that George SLOCOMB, now on the Evening Standard, had assisted him. Freddie KUH's part in the conspiracy was a little doubtful. EWER had been in touch with someone in the Foreign Office, and it is now suggested that he should be interrogated in order to ascertain the identity of this individual. I wondered a little whether if this were done, after a lapse of twenty years, it might not invite criticism as to why it had not been done before. Apart from this, I did not see that there was any special inducement for EWER to tell us the answer. The case will need very careful consideration. After the arrest of GINHOVEN and JANE, the two Special Branch officers inplicated in the case, EWER must have concluded hatwe-knew-about w-about his activities. No Action appears to have been taken at the time of the arrests, as they coincided more or less with the general Election and it was felt generally that another Zinoviev letter incident should be avoided. 26th Nay Two policemen have been down here from Nottingham. They are now well on their toes as a result of Popkess.' visit. This A COPY ORIGINAL LDOCUMENTRETAINED INDEPASTMENT UNDER SECTION THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Apny 2010 Mann tells me that MIDDLETON, who had recently resigned publlicly from the Commnunist Party, has now been elected as. Secretary of the Scottish T.U.C. The vacancy fell due and a Right Wing Trade Unionist called CURRY had been groomed for the (job. When the election meeting was held, a Councilllor from Glasgow named DUNCAN, who is well-known as a fellow traveller put up MIDDLETON, who was seconded by the Secretary of the Scottish Mineworkers Union, a well-known Communist. Owing to 12 the apathy of the Right Wingers, who did not turn up at the meeting, MIDDLETON'S election was carried by a narrow majority. We have no positive evidence here to show whether LMIDDLETON'E defection from the C.P. is genuine or not. It looks very much as if it were not. This A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED 27th May. ACT 3(4) OF 1958 PUBLIC RECORDS SECTION D.G. sa'N the P.M. He talked to him about the case 2019 Hori\ The who has for some time been known to be closely associated with MACARTNEY, who did ten years for Soviet espionage and has had other convietions, including one for smash and grab. MACARTNEY, is in touch with POLLITT and recounts to him what he hears from The P.M. I think, will speak to but will confine his remarks to the association wit MACARTNEY, which is in fact fairly notorious. The D.G. also talked to the P.M. about our passing information about British subjects to the Americans. This had come up in an acute form when the Home Secretary was questionedabout the case of CROWTHER, BERNAL, Louis GOLDING, and others going to the Soviet Peace Conference in New York. The P.M. said he had thoroughly approved of our action and that thehless the Home Secretary knew about it the better, it would only embarrass him. The D.G. told the P.M. that we now had quite a number of agents in the Communist Party who were well-placed and gave us good coverage. The P.M. seemed particularly pleased about this. At the J.I.C. to-day we discussed the case of D.N.I. said that he had onsiderable evidence that German scientists returning from this country had been approached by the Russians. He was conviinced that if a successful approach were made to the results would be disastrous since he had a complete and up-to-date knowledge of submarine and anti-submarine warfare. It appears that is quite prepared to settle in this country if he can get his funds, amounting to some 2,000,000 eichsmarks, out of Germany. His property is in the American zone, where there is a complete ban on the export of any capital. A telegram has been sent to the British zone, asking that an approach shall be made to the Americans locally. It is by no means certain, however, that this will lead to anything. If it fails it is proposed to take the matter up in Washington. Meanwhile, is 113. D be given a month's leave, as it was thought undesirable antagonise him. 'c' is to do what he can to ensure that if is approached in Germany, he should be briefed about the kind of answer he should give. In the meantime, further details are to be obtained about the nature of his holdings in Germany. The J.I.B. representative said that he was under an embargo from the J.I.C. in regard to passing information about the arms traffic to the Americans. This had been due largely to the Israeli situation. It was deicded to lift the embargo and to leave the matter to J.I.B'S discretion, subject, of course, to the usual precautions with regard to sources. IT was thought desirable that special precautiors should be taken with regard to the Israeli traffic and Commonwealth traffic. At the moment, the case which J.I.B. wish to discuss with the Americans is the illicit traffic to Albania. In general they wil confine their discussions to countries behind the Iron curtain. I saw Firth and Allan about the Trinidad project. They said that they could not provide a plausible excuse for Allan to be in the area: neither could they brief the two Post Office officials who were going out. Allan had the impression that the whole of the Post Office machinery was in the hands of blacks. If this were so, there was nothing that could really be done. I said that I Would try and find this out,an that as things stood I did not think there was anything to be done until our D.S..0. was established. If there was a white official as Postmaster General, he could explore the ground. Noell Wild came to see me about a deceptior project, known only to himself and 'of. He wanted the assistance of the local police in Dorsetshire. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED 28th May. IN DEPARTMENT UNOFR SECTION 3(4) OF THE PIBI BECOF: I had a long discussion with Roger ahd9m.J BRt 2010 the sabotage paper. T had a slight feeling that it might 114. create a false impression, when we said that we had no evideno of any sabotage plans. The fact was that we had considerablle coverage of the Communist Party, and it seemed to me, therefore, that our negative evidence had a certain positive quality. I also felt that in regard to malicious damage we should say something about our experiences during the war, when large numbers of cases Were investigated. In no case was the act found to be due to enemy action, and in many cases where the solution was foun the-t the act was due either to some disgruntled element or to negligence. through bad inspection, or to a desire by a firm to find an exouse for incompetent work. 36th May. This IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 APRie 2010 Noel Wild came to see me about a certain deception project, where he wants our assistance with the Dorset police. At the D.G's meeting Hollis raised the question of vetting Irish citizens, particularly those being employed on Y work. The fact is that unless a man has resided here for some years, there is little that we are likely to be able to say. It was suggested, therefore, that the authorities concerned should be told that three years of residence 1n the U.K. for an Irish citizen is necessary before he qualifies for secret employment. This was agreed. Hollis raised the question about ciphers, which vie are to ask Longfield-Lloyd to hand over to Coubtenay Young. Other documents of a security nature in the possession of the C.I.S. 15. are now being handed over to the new Security Service, and the moment, therefore, seems to be appropriate. It seemed to me that the One-Bime Pads, which are held by Longfield-Lloyd should be changed in case they may have become compromised. This raised quite an issue, since similar Pads have apparently been issued to all overseassstations so that they can communicate with each other. If, therefore, Longfield-Lloyd's Pads are compromised, So are those of all our other stations. I then asked whether there were any other holders of these Pads who were not in fact our D.S.Os. Os. This disclosed that Cunmings of New Zealand also had them - and maybe there are others besides. I suggested that all these Pads should be recalled and that in future our own D.S.Os should have different Pads orf an area basis, and that entirely different Pads should be used for communication with any other overseas station which was not under our direct control. The D.G. agreed. THIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT LNDER SECTION 3lst May. 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 APRIL 200 I discussed with Hollis a letter we are drafting to ministries in regard to the vetting of the 150,000 industrials. Our proposal is that we should cease to receive names and particulars, but should check the place of employment of any Communist who comes to our notice against the llist of establish- ments provided to us by the Admiralty and the Ministry of Supply. Although this method woulld not give quite the same coverage, it would undoubtedly save us tan enormous amount of work. The proposal has been generally accepted by the D.G. For Minutes of the D.G. Meeting held to-day, see folder in D.D.G. Sec's tray. Dick White, Vickery and I discussed the collation of Communist reports, with particular reference to the one being issued weekly by the C.R.O. We agreed that before making any representations to the J.I.C. we should reach agreement between ourselves, S.I.S. and the C.R.O. and for that purpose we should have a meeting with Jenkin,a and Vickery gave us a note on MENON. He was certain that will try and et some ammunition for us to get MENON out of his present position as High Commissioner for India. So far we had told 46. nothing except verbally; there was an obvious danger in putting anything in writing. The note makes it cllear that although MENON is S obviously trimming his sails in his dealings with the India League and the Communist Party, he shows no real change of heart. Indeed, anything he gets is almost certain to pass to his mistress, Miss TUNNARD, who is Secretary of the League and at least a fellow traveller. I said that as long as MENON remained, nobody could say that Indian security was good. There would be a danger with regard to documents, and also with regard to Indians who wished to come here to attend Courses, including the I.D.C. They would be under MENON'S auspices and liable to questioning. Vickery is of the opinion that Nehru would never get rid of MENON. The only course, therefore, woulld be for the British Government to take the bull by the horns and declare MENON persona non grata. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 ARRIL 0(9 lst June. Johnny Cimperman brought Reynolds of the F.B.I to see me, who is on his way to Frankfurt. He appears to be responsible for liaison between the F.B.I. and the Services. We had quite a discussion about relations with the Services. and I was surprised to learn that the F.B. were moving towards much closer rellations and, indeed, that they were proposing to depart from their former attitude that they were merely a fact-finding organisation. At the J.I.C. to-day we discussed the fortnightly paper on Hong Kong, on the basis of somewhat slender evidence. The general view was that the military threat of the Chinese Communist Armies to Hong Kong was no greater than it Was two weeks ago. There remains, however, still the question of a rabble trying to invade the leased territories, when the Chinese Armies penetrated further south. In such an eventuality I do not know whether any decision has been reached as to whether the troops holding the frontier are to fire or not. The Governor is going to give us a close appreciation of the time and circumstances under which he expects trouble. I spoke to Marston Logan after the J.I.C. meeting,abou sending Left Wing and Communist teachers from the Oxford Delegacy to instruct natives in West Africa. He said that he had received my letter on this subject and had sent it up for consideration by higher authority. He seemed to agree entirely with its terms. I rather gathered from Marston Logan that he was not entirely satisfied with his liaison with us. I think this arises Largely from the constant changes. I told him that this was due to the heavy demands placed upon us by the Colonial office, who had asked us to open three new stations within a period of about six months. If these jobs were to filled, we could only send out people who had had a considerable amount of training in our office. I hoped that things would settle down befor long and that we should be able to build ourselves up satisfactorily at home. He then talked about the case of one from the Seychelles, whom he had asked B.3.0 to investigate. He seemed to think that it was extraordinary that a British subject houwas living in London could not be traced. I explained to him that, unlike aliens, there were very few starting points with British subjects and the case was further complicated by itss delicate nature and the express instructions from the Colonial Office that nothing should be done which would arause the individual's suspicions. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL LDOEUMENT HETAINED DEPARTMENT UINDER.SECTFON Logan then said that he had given us several traces, 200 including that of the man's solicitors. He seemed to think that we would have people standing outside the solicitor's office indefinitely, waiting for to come in or go out. I said that this was an extremely difficult matter, and that we could not employ our special staff on a job like that unless there were reasonablle grounds for thinking that the man would paying a visit and we could pin-point the time. We might it in a very exceptional case, but the case of would hardly qualify for such extraordinary measures, even if there 112 was any likelihood of their being successful. Logan then said that he had not realise d that our office was not quite what people like Denis Mackaill described it to be. Later on I spoke to Badham about this case. One of the traces given to us was the Royal Empire Society, and I told Badham to find out whether we had a contact there or not. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED NDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC HECORDS ACT 1958 Ayvi 010 Burt came to see me. He had quite a lot of general gossip. He vas very anxious for us to provide him with some chicken food for He then went on to tell me that Milford Haven had got badly tied up with a Company Promoter called GODFREY. GODFREY who is a Jew with an unpronounceable name aMXhas done seven years penal servitude for fraud and has a number of other convictions for petty larceny. Bnrt wondered whether I coulld drop a word somehow through some channel to Milford Haven, advising him to resign from GODFREY'S Company. I said I would do what I could. 8th June. Burt telephoned about Mossy SIMONS, who having been fifined in Northern Ireland for smuggling, wa's brought over for court martial in the U.K. and was given two years imprisonment. He has now escaped, with the Corporal of the Guard - who must obviously have been bribed. The remaineder of the Guard were found locked up in the Guard Room. Mitchell has arrived back from Beirut after an extremely successful visit. He had two talks with the Prime Minister', who seemed ready to accept all his recommendations, including a British security adviser. The Minister, Houston- Boswell, was very pleased with the visit. He said that even if nothing is done, the fact that the recommendations have been made and accepted by the Prime Minister will give him a useful handle if further troubles occur. It is quite clear from what the Prime Minister said that the present system is hopelessly corrupt. Apart from that, many of the S.B. Inspectors are detailed on special duties with Ministers, which have nothing to do with their ordinary work, while two are Communist agents. One of the notes which the Prime Minister had down on a piece of paper was that steps shoulld be taken to clear the agents of foreign powers out of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. We are now confronted with the task of finding a suitablle adviser. TOLSON has been suggested, but a knowledge of Arabic and French seems essential. THIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 fhev 010 We began to discuss the D.G's answer to our note on the overseas division, but have had to postpone this untill next Monday. What seems to me to be unsound is the non-acceptance of the fact that the motive power for overseas work must come from B or C Divisions. The D.G. feels that the problems overseas are entirely differenf to those at home and need a special training. Personally I feel that the problems are basically the same and that training in investigation here is the best Possible training that an overseas officer can get. He also needs training in Division methods and principles. He will, of course, have to adapt his knowledge to local conditions. Some knowlledge can, of course, be supplied by the area section of B.3, but this is really only reflected knowledge. Hordern came to see me and introduced Dason, his Chief Inspector who war working on the KAOZMAREK case. We discussed the case of the Australian who is a Communist and anxious to work his way into Springfield in order that he can assist the Russians. The case seems to be a fairly cast-iron one. Before we take action, however. we are anxious to know something more about contacts. I saw Nessam. He agreed, after some discussion, to amendments of our H.O.Ws which would enable us to take correspondence addressed to or emanating from the subject of the Warrant. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENIT RETAINED DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 9th June. 3 (4) OFTHE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 Ard 2010 I saw Turnbull, Head of the C.I.D. Sierra Leone, who seemed to think that WE had some difficulty in intercepting correspondence from this country to Wallace JOHNSTON. He thought that the latter might be receiving correspondence from Communist sympathisers here, and possibly from George PADMORE, now is now in Manchester. I could not quite follow what the difficulty was, as it voulld seem to me to be a simple matter. to put on an out check. of S.I.S. rang me up about Auberon Herbert, who had apparently established some contact with two Albanians in Italy. I gather that it he matter had something to do with D.Ps and that the two Albanians Were implying that Herbert had some inind of Government authority, although this was by no means clear. I gave the gist of a minute T had written about HERBERT a year or two ago, and suggested that the best thing Would be to get the Embassy to send for HERBERT and ask him what he was doing. If they did not want to do this, I could perfectly well speak to him when he came back. While it was quite possible that HERBERT might be doing something rather foolish, there would be nothing sinister in his activities. 121 The Admiralty have bought a Roumanian defecter,V who was a wireless operator on a Roumanian ship and gave himself up in Maita. Neither ourselves nor the Admiralty think that on present evidence he is worth sending to this country, but for some reason or other the Admiralty and the Governor do not think they can keep him in Malta. The man's name is PASCU. We are taking the line that we do not want him here, but if the Admiralty insist on bringing him they must make their peace with the Home Office, and if they do e will assist them in housing him. THIS COPY ORIGINAL ITRETAINED IN DEPARTMENT SECTION loth June. THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 201o D.B. has appeared before the Russia Committee. They were anxious to know about our general machinery and coverage, and apparently had the idea of using us for the "cold" war. Dick explained that while we had considerable coverage it was designed for C.E. purposes and we were not particularly anxious to below it. Neither did we think that Hcold" war activities in this country were a very good idea. It seemed to us that the Press and the Trie Unions were doing all that was necessary! General Stewart, C.I.G.S. and Colonel Gilbert, Director of Blans, of New Zealand visited the J.I.C. to-day. They were aksed about security in New Zealand. They said the problem was a small one compared with other countries, in that the circle for Top Secret documents was a very restricted one. They had considered having a Security Service, but the proposal had been turned down owing to unfortunate experiences in this direction during the war. I asked whether reference had been made to Folkes, to which T got a reply in the affirmative. I thought it wise to make it quite clear once more that this matter had nothing to do with the Security Service in this country, and that we had no responsibility for sending Folkes out. I was anxious to make this clear, as it had seemed to me when I last saw him that Commissioner Cimmings was still under the impression that M.I.5 had something to do with the matter. Both General Stewart and Colonel Gilbert said that they fully understood the position and had not wished to imply in any way that the Becurity Service in this country was responsible, Ofhcoursentheipenso who was really responsible, although naturaly I did not say this at the meeting, was the P.M. himself, who made a complete hash of the whole business. Having taken security awat from Commissioner Curnmiings, he eventually found that he had td and it back. Clearly, therefore, he could not now take it away again without very considerable embarrassment. There will, 122 therefore, be no Security Service in New Zealand until Curnmi.ngs retires or a new P.M. takes over. I tried to discover whether any positive counter-espionage work was going on, but vithout result. I had the feeling that both General Stewart and Colonel Gilbert were not entirely satisfied with the present position. As far as Soviet representation was concerned, they said that there was no evidence that the Soviet Embassy in Wellington had any direct contact with local Communists. I rather doubt whether Cummings would know if they had! Satellite Oonsuls were mostly New Zealand sub bjects, but I could not ascertain which of them weren't. There is a small communi ty of Jugo-Slavs in Auckland who are somewhat divided in their loyalties; there are, however, some good British subjects among them. General Stewart, who unfortunately suffers from a severe impediment,in his speech which makes it extremely difficult to understand, stated that the Americans were piling arms and aircraft into Formosa. Hayter said that he gained the impression while he was in the States that the Americans were confident about the position in Formosa, for no very particular reason. They did not seem to envisage the possibility that Chiang Kai Shek might, if is suited him, sell out completely, or that large factions in Formosa might opt for joining the Communists. The whole of the Chinese Nationalist Air Force is based on Formosa at the moment. Hayter gave the meeting some account of his visit to the United States. He had taken up the question of THISIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT NDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION ACT 1958 Aeril 201o Hayter had conversatbons with the O.P.C. (Office of Policy Co-ordination), which is the "cold" war department and the opposite number of I.R.D. in this country. The head of it is a man called Wizener (?). Of all the organisations of this kind in the United States, most of which lack purpose and efficiency. Hayter thought that O.P.C. was an exception. They get their policy from the State Department and the Defence departments and are staffed by representatives from these organisations. They are a part of C.I.A., but the State Department has the right of veto. The present policy is to foster national communism, with a view to causing splits and as a stepping stone towards disintegration So far this policy has not been implemented to any degree and most of the plans are rather in embryo. Hayter mentioned that the unopolarity of Lewis Johnston is unrivalled by any other representative of the present Government. He seems to be disliked by everybody and this is a matter of genes aAl discussion not only by Government officials amongst themselves, but 23 also with foreigners. (I) mentioned that the airman defector in Sweden had some quite useful information. The Swedes are apparently embarrassed and do not want to keep him. The Air Ministry suggested that he should go to Germany and it was agreed by the Committee that they should collaborate in this matter with S.I.S. Jack Easton mentioned that the S.D.E.C. are anxious for an exchange of J.I.B. information for S.0. purposes. They particularly want information about their eastern borderssand even about their own country. J.I.B. are already giving topographica] information on the British zone in Germany to the French, and they are prepared to meet the French S.0. delegates when they come over next week. General Dowler, G.0.0. East Africa, called. I gave him a general talk on our work here and overseas. He expressed himself as being thoroughly satisfied with Baskervyle-Glegg and what he was doing. He reallised that the Police were to some extent the working tools of the D.S.0. and he clearly thought that in certain respeots these tools were a bit blunt. He asked me about our experience in regard to the pilfering of arms. He was a bit worried about what was going on in East Africa. He did what he coulld to guard hs dumps, but there was a tendency by O.Rs and even by certain officers to sell arms or, more often, ammunition which had in one case reached Aden. He did not seem to mind this so much as the prospect of their getting into the hands of natives locallly. The matter had not assumed very large proportions. T said I thought the only method was to tighten up the guards as far as possible and to get the Police to run informants. He Seemed to doubt whether the latter were quite up to this. D.N.I. telephoned to me about an article which had appeared in the Sunday Times under the signature "E.V. BLACKMANT. It was on naval matters and indicated a leakage of a discussion which had taken place at a First Lord level. I think he suspected Dugdale, who is known to be rather thick with Blackman. He was very anxious that the matter should be sollved. and I undertook to do what we could. (24. We had a meeting to discuss Communist reports with C.R.O. and S.I.S. It was agreed that we shoud not interfere with reports for internal consumption, but where they were given external circulation, it was thought desirable thet they should be pounea in some way by ourselves and S.I.S. Apart from this, there might be something to be said for a periodical report on an area basis. We should be putting these views to the J.I.C. 11th June. A telegram has come in from Malta to say that PASCU is on his way to the U.K. Oughton came to tell me about the latest on the strike situation in the Docks and on the Railways. We had supplied a note to the Ministry of Labour and to the Home office for the Cabine t meeting yesterday. Oughton gathered that a decison had been reached to use the military to unload, and there seemed to be a general tendency towands a strong-arm action. It is interesting to speculate what the Labour Party Would have said to the Conservative Party if they had taken such action when they were in powers and it is somewhat paradoxical to find Labour using strong-arm methods against their own kind, who to some extent are, .protesting against the inefficiencies of nationalisation 13th June. At the Directors! meeting to-day we discussed the D.G's memorandum on a new overseas division. We none of us felt that his counter-arguments to our note in answer to his original proposal were valid. We felt that the setting up of such a division would be a mistake, and that the best course would be, at any rate to wait until Kellar returned and had had a chance of putting B.3 on its feet and giving the D.G. what he wanted. It was agreed that we should write a detailed note in answer to the D.G's laat memorandum, which we would disouss again on Monday. I attended a meeting of the Vice Chiefs of Staff to-day, when the Mulllards question was discussed. It was agreed that Vrisberg would explain the position to Mullards, and that what he had to say Would go for the other Companies as well. Any ban, therefore, on Philips subsidiaries in this country has been removed, except for Top Secret terial and any material in which the Americans have a propietary interest. Goldup will be told that Philips must settle their own problems with the Americans and the countries of Western Union. Sir Harold Parker, who was present, raised the questio of the difficulties that would arise when we started to equip Western Union countries. Wrisberg said that he, Coryton, and Daniels had signed a standardisation aareement with the Americans, both on development and production. As a result of this a complete impasse with regard to the equipent of Western Union powers was likely to be reached in a very short time. He urged strongly that matters should be thrashed out between the Americans, ourselves, and the Western Union Powers. A propos of this, he said he knew in advance that the American proposal would be, namely, to supply Western Union with all their surplus war stocks - not, in his opinion, a very good idea. He pointed out the present inconsistency of the American attitude. On the one hand they were urging Western Union countries to build up their aramant production So that they could be in a position to defend themselves, but on the other hand they were refusing to bring them into the Anglo-American standardisation scheme. There would have to be an answer to this if any ynogress was going to be made. ORIGINAL NDEPARTMENT DOCUMENT RETAINED The Vice Chiefs took note. THE CRECORDS SECTION On the question of security, Wrisberg expressed the view that once a weapon was in production the security issue did not arise. He somewhat modified this view afterwards in discussion with Sir Harold Parker and myself, by agreeing that where the quantity produced was small there might still be a security issue. In conversation with Parker after the meeting Wrisberg said that in his view a country could only go into full war production once in fifteen years, unless its whole economy was going to break down completely. If he knew that the Russians were going into full production now, he would take it as a certainty that they would have to go to war within a limited period. The Germans have twice gone into fulll production, once in 1910 and once in 1934; in each case they had lost the war as they had been outdated by ourselves and America who went into full production much later. I asked him whether he would advance this as a reason for sitting back and doing othing before the war started. He said "no" - what you want 126 is to have your plans all carefully laid and your research and development bang up to date. He mentioned that in peace- time equipment of two Divisions was practically breaking the back of this country, and that if there were any question of equipping four at this moment we should certainly go under. lLth June. For Minutes of D.G. meeting held to-day, see folder in D.D.G. Sec's tray. THiS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED NDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 6 April 2oio 127 Dick and Philip Vickery came to discuss the case of MENON. MENON, and the latter was fetched over to India to answer the charges, which are three-fold. One is association with the Communists and his undermining of Indian Government policy; two is his dubious relations with one CLEMINSON in certain trade matters, and threchis moral relations with members of his female staff. He was very nearly Voted out, but the Governor-General at the last moment intervened on his behalf. has considerable data about his malpractices and his Department but to get positive evidence he would like our assistance. Vickery. has told him, however, that it would be improper for Us to give it. As an alternative it has been suggested that should see a solicitor and employ a firm of private detectives. We are shepherding him into the hands of Dick Butler. Hugh Winterborn came in to see me. He is going to work in B.4 when he returns next month. He seems thoroughly pleased with the prospect. 15th June. looked in for a moment. He is leaving for the United States and Canada on Weanesday. We did not discuss the case of MENON. In view of what we had decided to do, I thought the less said about it the better. seemed fairly satisfied about the situation in India. He admitted that it had been serious, but felt that things were now under control. They are in a sense, only aifer latest report is correct the future prospects are none too good. The report in Question is one continuous tale of outrages all over India. THIS IS COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED ACT DEPARTMENT OF 1958 THE PUBLIC UNDER RECORDS SECTION 20/0 12 128. I 2 THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4)( 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Are 2010 16th June. I had lunch with Sir Richard Aluwihare, Inspector General of Police, Ceylon. Vickery, Harold Scott, Jackson& Nott-Bower were present. Aluwihare was interesting about the state of the law in Ceylon. It had really become something of a racket. In the old days when cases were deal with by District Magistrates, justice was dispensed by much more rough and ready methods, but a fair solution was much more easily arrived at. Now, with the full imposition of the British system and the legal niceties and appeals theman with the most money is likely to win. Aluwihare's idea is to give greater powers to District Magistrates. The fact is that our advanced Western system is not altogether suitable, and that the people are not sufficiently advanced themselves to make the best of it. THISI A COPY ORIGINAL DOCULAENT FETAINED IDEPARTMENT DER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. Apr2o 2010 17th June. A further heresy has crept into the British brief for the Geneva Convention. T asked Kennedy to go over and discuss the matter with Strutt, as a result of which a telegram is being sent to the British representative. I drew Gardiney's attention to the fact that the Planners' brief for Australia had no reference to security, and suggested that we might put in a note. He agreed. Hollis has undertaken to write it. (50. I discussed with Dick and John Marriott the case of Nilliam Norman EWER. Dick and I felt, and I. think John agreed, that as it would be necessary to consult members of the Labour Party before taking any action, the matter was af very considerable delicacy.a our action might bemsunderstood. Apart from this, it seemed extremely unlikely that EWER either could or Would enllighten us about his alleged agents in the Foreign Office, Colonial Office and O.R.O. These so-called agents may well be little more than contacts; in any case, FVER would represent them as such if he were prepared to talk at all. Unfortunately, there is very little on record here to show Slitical implications of the case and the reasons why no action was taken at the time. The general belief is that it was thought to be bad politics to have a show-down which might lead to the ory: "Another Zinoviev Letter.!" I thought we might perhaps try and get a bit clearer on this point by talking to Jane Archer, who handled the matter. There is nobody else here who knows anything about it. 20th June. At the Directors' meeting to-day We discussed the overseas section,an decided that the best thing would be for Dick and Roger to talk to the D.G. and to suggest to him that owing to the difficulties of staff and the possibility that Kellar's return might provie a solution to the difficulty, to postpone a decision for six months, when the matter could again be reviewed. We also discussedth possibility of getting assistance for Perfect. Owing to staff difficulties, this could not very well come about until October, when 0.1. is to be re-organised and a part of the work transferred to B.1.A. I finally suggested that we might perhaps get Mann down to tide over the period of Perfeet's leave. This would, I think, serve a useful purpose in getting Mann acquainted with the work going on among the Police in England. Perfeet is somewhat worried about this proposal, which had been put to him by Horrooks. I told him that we had gone intReit very thoroughly and could see no alternative. The fact/ that it was no good pulling the bricks away from one section in order to build up another. At the moment the bodies were just not available. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED NDEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 April 2010 William Hayter telephoned to say that a telegram had been received from our Charge d 'Affaires in Madrid, to the effect that a Madrid newspaper had reported that Sir Percy Sillitoe, Head of the Secret Service - otherwise known as M.I.5, intended to pay a visit to Spain. The Charge 'Affaires wanted to know what he was to say to the Spanish Foreign Office. if questioned about the reasons for this visit. I told Hayter that the D.G. was on an official visit to Gib, but I could not conceive that he would be conducting any official business in Spain. If he were going to Spain, it would be purely for reasons of sight-seeing. I telephoned him again later to confirm this view, and he agreed that in the circumstances there was really nothing to be done until the D.G's return. The Foreign Office were evidently worried,as such a report was likely to create a wrong impression. The Spaniards might think we were spying on them, and the Russians would be only too glad to say that we were in league with Franoo. Later I sent a telegram informing the D.G. what had happened, in case he should be questioned by reporters on arrival here on Wednesday. 21st June. For Minutes of the D.G meeting held to-day, see folder in D.D.G. D. D. Sec's tray. THIS IS A COPY NDEPARTMENT ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED ACT 1958 THE PUBLIC UNDER RECORDS SECTION Apr 2010 13 This IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION ACT 1958 OF THE RECORDS 22nd June. 2010 At the J.I.C. tp-day Brain mentioned that Bevin had sent for the Chinese Minister and given him a dressing down for the sinking of the motor shipAnchises" (?) in the mouth of the Yangtse. It appears that it was a Nationalist bomber based on Formosa some airman evidently lost his head. I lunched with Priceand Thomas, the C.C. and Deputy C.C. of the Cardiff Police. They seemed very satisfied vith their tour of the 0 "fice and are extremely keen about their officers coming here. They said that they had been taking an active interest in Comunism and Would do anything we wanted them to do. All the Directors had a meeting with I.P.I. to try and assess their ommitments in the light of the new situation in India and Ceylon. we came to the conclusion that owing to the highly speclalised nature of the Indian problem and the fact that the situation was still extremely fluid, it would be a mistake to attemt to break up I.P.I. as between 3.1.A., B.1.B. and B.3. Vickery gave a vary careful survey of their present activities which he felt should continue. The total staff of I.P.I. is 10, three men and 7 women. If they wene integrated, it seems ikely that another officer would be required. We thought that it was egnally undesirable that I.P.I. records should be merged with those of the General Registry. It appears that I.P.I. secretaries do their own registry work and have acquired considerable expertese in L. .Us connection with Indian problems. Personally II have considerable sympathy with the point of view that expert L.U is of paramount importance in al.l intelligence work and that our own registry is somewhat deficient in this respect. 133 We have had a telegram from Courtenay saying tha't he thinks may be identical with one a member of the Central Executive Cornmititee Of the Australian C.P. whose wife or mistress died round about the date previously mentioned. Generally speaking, this man seems to fit the bill. It now remains to try and trace out his contacts. This discovery indicates very clearly how important it is to have a framework into which to put a piece of really good information. Had we been faced with a similar problem we should probably have been able to give the answer in half an hour. W/hen Hollis got to Australia, he could not get even a list of the Executive Committee members. 23rd June. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. Apa 2010 134. THIS IS-A.COPY ORIGINAL EOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENI URDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Aprd 2010 24th June. I attended a meeting of the Committee dealing with the affairs of the Geneva Convention. Newsam was in the Chair. As the old D.G. said,W were "entangled in a web of legal technicality", but with the aid of Kennedy I think we have avoided any major snags, although I doubt whether Kennedy hims elf is wholly satisfied. We shall probably both of us get a pasting from Hill when he returns on Monday for having "sold the pass" on this most important but extremely dreary subject! I discussed with Cohen of the Colonial Office the question of recruiting lecturers to go to West Africa drawn from the Oxford Delegacy for Inter-Mural Studies. He explained to me that this matter had in fact been worrying the Colonial Office for some time and that they were extremely anxious to get it right. Discussions had already taken plac with certain people at Oxford, and arrangements had been made y which a kind of unofficial committee would in the first place express an opinion on any candidates put forward by the Delegacy. At the same time, Cohen was veny anxious that they should all be subsequently vetted by ourselves. I raised the question of general sui abil.ity and in particular the case of I said that I doubted if it were possoue to mane much distinction Between Communists and Left Wing Marxians when it came to the question of teaching coloured peope; there was practically no difference in the ultimate aims, except that one Party wished to obtain their ends by revolutionary means and the other by evolutionary means. The efffect of either could only be to make the natives anxious to run before they could wall, with disastrous consequences to themselves and to the Hritish Government. Cohen said that the real choice was between sending them teachers whose political views cDincided with those of the Government, or sending them no teachers at all. In the case of I gather that the matter hasbeen referred back to the headmaster of the school where he is now teaching. 135, 25th June. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN UEPARTMENT ONDER SECTON 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 there 2010 27th June. Dick Butler came to see me about Krishna MENON. He things that there are certain lines that he will be able to pursue and he has asked me to get the assistance of Bnrt. I told the D.G. about the proposal at his meeting to-day and obtained hia approvall to the course of action taken. I also told the D.G. about my discussions with Cohen. Dick has had a conversation with the D.G., aa a result of which he proposes to drop the overseas section until we have had an opportunit of seeing whether Kellargreturn meets his requirements. I had a long talk with James Robertson about FINGAL. T said that if he wanted roy support I would be quite prepared to see FINGAL. I had studied his last report, where he had an extraordinary interview with The positior as I saw it was that had got sudden feelings of remorse that she was leading astray a peson with whom she had established a genuine friendship. She saw the moment when she might be breaking up his whole ingocent family life: she wanted to be frank with him and gome to the point, but she could not bring herself to do S0 for two reasons. Firstly, she did not wish to run the risk of these friendly relationships being broken off, and secondly, she feared a violent reaction which might place her in jeopardy. I thought, therefore that it might be worth while considering whether there was any other may in which we could ease her path konxiiin coming to the point. I wondered, too, whether she might not be a little suspicious that he had not reacted more forcibly to her secretive attitude inrelation to their meetings. It seemed to me that he might well have stid "/hat is all this about. Why should T be SO careful about this that and the pther?i I am quite sure that FINGAL will have a coroplete answer to all this, as he seems to have allmost uncanny intuitinn in his relationships. 136. 28th June. For the D.G. Meeting held to-day see folder in D.D.G. D. Secfetary's tray. I discussed with Marriott and Cumming the case of a potential Russial defector in Berlin who is a member of the Russian Naval Academy and has considerable expert knowledge about the Russian naval programme. This man has been approached through two cut-outs. The matter has reached the stage where has asked the nature of the work on which he would be employed if he defected, and his placeof employment. We all feel that this savours somewhat of the double-agent. Nevertheless, the Navy ane very keen to get him if possible. The sum to be offered is to be discussed at the J.I.C. to-morrow. We do not intend to oppose the project, but are recommending that he should be told that endeavours would be made to obtain him employment suitable to his ttainments and linguistic capabilities and subject to the normal security safeguards. 29th June. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER ER SECTION OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 Ar 2010 I told the Committe that we were proposing in the course of the next few days to pump the Czech Assistant i2 Military and Air Attache, SROM, a Lieutenant-Cplonel, who is giving assignments to an agent. These assignments related principally to air matters. Hayter had previously told me that our proposed action had the approval of the Foreign Office, but was anxxious that I should clear it at the meeting with the Services. No objections were raised. S.I.S. have been informed. 37. Brain spoke to me after the meeting about the last batch of Hong Kong documents. There is apparently a feeling in the Foreign Office that we have been holding them up. I said that I would give him chapter and verse, but that the ramour was incorrect. There had, of course, been delays in the first instance, due to difficulties with the Hong Kong Pollice and lack of staff. The bulk of the documents was considerable and the sorting and translation of them was bound to take time. As soon, however, as we got the documents they were Istributed in Hong Kong and sent immediately to S.I.F.E. who distributed them locally to the J.I.0., including the Foreign Office representative. They were then sent on here and distributed immediately to the Foreign Office and the three Services. The particular document which I think adsexcited the Foreign Office was one which envisaged the separation of the currency of the Hong Kong -- Shanghai Bank in South China. General indications with regard to Hong Kong are that the Communists are likely to go slow, since a complete dislocation of the entrepol trade would have very serious consequences on the economic situation in China. I vent and saw Burt and told him the story of MENON, and Dick Butler. I suggested that Burt might be able to help Butler by giving him certain leads with regard to CLEMINSON who hrs a criminal record. Burt expressed his willingness to do this and an appointment was made with Butler. I sav Sir Frank Newsam to-day in order to discuss with him my letter regarding Warrants to covey E6FrEspondence going to and emanating from an individual. He has agreed that in cases where we consider it necessary we can put forward Warrants to cover both correspondence to and emanating from an individual. He hopes that the number of such Warrants will be limited and confined as far as possiblle to foreigners. THISI A COPY ORIGINAL DOUUTTETIT RETATNED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIG RECORDS ACT 1958 ARIL 2oto 138. I pointed out that there might be cases where we applied for a Warrant in the ordinary way and at some future date might wish to cover correspondence emanating from the individual concerned. It was agreed that in that eventuality we Would cancel the old Warrant and submit a new one to cover correspondence addressed to and emanating from the individual. THIS COPY ORIGINAL 1L TENIT BETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 ARi dark 30th June. I have had severall long talks with Alec Kellar about his experiences in S.I.F.E. He feels that things are at last beginning to move in the right direction and that our stool in the area is much improved. He spoke well of all the officers with the exception of and He does not feel that has sufficient drive or intelligence sense, and his wife is of course a distinct disadsantage. has no veny special qualifications. As an intelligence officer he seems to find difficulty in getting on with people. T talked to Kellar about ou responsibilities with regain to other stations. It seemed to me that it was important that.we should do all we could to check up on undesirables from the Colonies who visit this country, even though they might not be Conmunists. On the other hand, we should not go too far in this direction. If, however, they were people who were likely to cause disaffeetion, there Was in my vietl justification for investigating their contacts here. If we did not do this we somewhat inpaired the position of on D.S.0. vis a vis his Governor. I cited to him the recent case of Uganda, where the Governor is embarrassed by the unchecked activities of NULUMBA and MUSAZI in London which are having a deplorable effect on the population. 139. Lth July. The D.G has seen the Prime Minister, who want him to go to Hong Kong. The P.M. is writing to the Secretary of State for the Colonies, telling him to inform the Governor that the D.G. is going out on his behalf and will be reporting to him on his return. The D.G. gave an account of his meeting with the P.M. at the meeting to-day. In addition to discussing Hong Kong, he told him about our latest information with regard to strikes and also about the case of SROM, the Ezech Assistant Military and Air Attache, who vas questioned by the Police, having been arreated with certain documents in his hand. Special Branch and the Watchers had appeared at the rendezvous; SROM had indicated to the informant that he shoulld proceed to Richmond. From there all concerned proceeded to Richmond Park, where SROM sat down to listen to the band. The Police came up behind him and as the informant gave him the documents they put their hand on his shoulder. He protested about his diplomatic status, but the as Police to his asked identity. him to accompany The Foreign them Office until are they now could considering be satisfied the next move. SROM was subsequently released. Shawcrogs has written a letter to the P.M. indicating that there is no co-ordinatiiog with regard to Cornmunist matters; He had apparently Been Burt, who could not tell him what was going on in Liverpool in connection with the dockers' strike. He seemed to be searching round for something in the nature of the Linoviev Letter, which would show that Dn the direction of Moscow strikes are being started in Canada, Ausitralia and the U.K. with the object of wrecking the Marshall Plan. Mitchell has draftedlal reply for the P.M pointing out that the Security Service is really the focal point for information on these matters, and that information from their sources is closely CO-ordinated with that of the Pollice throughout the country. He waa also told that the general picture with regard to the dock strike was fairly clear. The Communisit Party had not been involved at the outset, but had Since done aln they could to give support to the strikers. Although Barrett, the Union Leader, was indirectly encouraging the strikes, he could not do 80 officalily by virtie of hds position. As regards directives from Moscow, it is extremely unlikely that any exist, since the days of Zinoviev letters were over and guidance and direction came through the open Press and the radio. 140. Shawcrosa sent a somewhat apologetic reply, stating tha he was not aware of the organisation which was directed to countering subversive movements and tat he was sorry for having butted in on the Prime Ministerts preserves; at the Same time, he hoped that if there was any information which showed that the Communists Vere deliberately inciting people to sabotage the Marshall Plan, he would be prepared to mount a case. In Dur view this would be impossible unless there was some incitement to a breach of the peace. I shall be seeing the D.P.P. in order to get his opinion and some direction. 5th July. ML.E. and I went up to see Popkess and his burglar alarm system. We inspected the apparatus with a representative from the firm of Ericlsons, whom I think we could have done without. There is no doubt, I think, that the Bystem works and is more or less fool proof as regards false alare. Popkess has had considerable success with it already and assured us that it had reduced his breaks-in by 43. The apparatus is not cheap and we shall have to consider very carefully whether it is really worth while installing it in parts of our own building. On the whole it is unlikely that any ordinary burglar would attemtp to enter these premises in the hope of finding dash or other valuables. We are, therefore, protecting ourselves against the possibility that Some foreign power will employ a burglar to get at our documents. There is a limited amount of evidence to show that this is at least a possibility - T refer to the two cases where the Soviet Embassy have taken an interest in old lags. We also have the case from GLINT, which shows that a Roumanan courier arrived in France with a bag full of burglar's tools and skeleto n keys. The French in reply to Roumanian protests admitted that a mistake had occurred in examining the courier's bag, but that nevertheless they could not quite see why it had been used for the purpose of importing a burglar's outfit. In discussing communism with Popkess, he expressed a certain desire for either centralising or distributing to all Chief Constables in the district records about Bommunista. which would enable a quicl identification to be made when a man passed from one C.C's area to another. He thought it might be done on a C.P. District basis. I said that the S.B. conferences, which we were organising, should go Some way to meet his difficulty and that we here in London had centrallised records. We would, however, look into the matter and let him know. It might perhaps be raised at a Chief Constales' conference. Popkess' Police Force is highly mechanised and 18 on the whole, I should say, efficient. He was constantly pointing out ct/. to me hov other Forces had folllowed n his ake, but generally about ten years behind! He was particularly contemptuous of the Yard, who he thinks - and probably rightly - ane in something of a rut. 6th July. The followire, statementa were made off the recond at the J.I.C. to-day. (The Cniefs of Staff went S.0. preparations to be made for tthe defence of Hong Kong. The Foreign Office and, I imagine, the C.R.O. are opposed to the suggestion. Cooper, now the J.I.B. representative on the I. 3. and recently in Singapore, stated that in regard to Item 2 (Intelligenee Requirements from United States Sources on China) in conversation with one of the American Attaches he had learned that there would be little chance of getting these requirements made except through Washington. He had also discussed the question of information from Japan. His American colleague had said that MacArthur WaS nclined to run Japan as a kingdom of his own, and that even Washingtor had the greatest difficulty in finding out what waF going on. He thought, however, that it was desirablle that there should be a proper liaison between Tolyo and Singapore, although he did not know quite how this could be brought about. It was suggested that perhaps when General Harding took over from General Ritchie might make a visit to Tokyo. The change over is likely to take place fainly (soon, as General Ritchie has broken his leg. ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED VDEPARTMENT UNDER SECITION 3(4) OF PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 foril There is a long paper examining al sources Ruseia and which 18 highly criticall of S.I.S. It is felt that as we lose out grip on Germany, sources are going to ary up almost completely and that even now we are not in a veI strong position to predict a wan with Russia. I suggested to Vickery that popaibly might help. He will discuss the matter on return from Amenica, but he is not very optimistic. Very few Hindus are likely to visit Russia, except an members of the Communisit Party, since most of the trading is done by the Russian Mission in India and by visiting Russians. He thought there would be more chance of staging something in Pakistan, and that probably this had already been discussed by with on the occasion of the former'a recent visit to Kmpachi. I' 7th Jully. Paling of the D.P.P'S office called to sse me. He has beer asked by Shaweross f'or an assurance that Special Branch and the Security Service were doing allll they could in connection with the dock strike. I explained to Paling the situation as we saw it, and he entirely agreed With me that in the circumstances there wats not likely to le any evidence upon which to stage a prosecution. Hordern came to see me. He had two points: (i) that he would be glad if we could reveit to the old system, by which he was sent copies of letters addressed to surrounding Borough Chief Gonstables. I said that we would look into this, although there had been an unfortunate incident when one of our letters to a Borough Chief Constable had been marked "Copy to C.C. LanCs.' This had led to a certain amount of trouble. His second point wa's that one of his officers had been asked by Oughton to disclose an informantis identity. Hondern said he was quite open-minded about this, but that 02 course there was a strongly-rooted prejudice - and in ome ways rightly -w againet disclosing informants' names. I said I did not think ther could possibly be any sont of general instruction on a matter of this sort, but that I could conceive occasions when disclosure of a name woulld be of value both to him and to us. On his side we might ascertain that his informant was in difficulties with the Party Ve shoulld then be able to give him a warning. On ou side, if we knew an informant'a identity we might be alle to suggest ways in which he could be used to our advantaee outside his DWI area. Hordern readily understood t is, and I ain sure that in any indiviidual case he would be ready to meet us. It is, however, difficult for him to issue a.generail instruction that Police informan's are to be discllosed to M.I.5. Graham war present at the interview. THIS IS A COPY ORIINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED DCPRTMENT UNDER SECTION 314)0 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. Aeri 2010 1h3 THE ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. Apa 2010 144 THE RETAINED UNDER ORICINAL SEOCTRECORDS SECTION IN DEPARTMENT RECORDS DOCUMENIT 2(4) OF THE ACT PUBLIC 1958 Apridl 2010 /45. THIS IS COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PURLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 ARRIL Dlo 11th Julv. The D.G. visited the P.M., who vas anxipus to know why he Was going to Hong Koni. The D.G. explained a11 the circumstances and sa1a that he personnily thought that the matter could be settled by Johnson, if he hnd the proper backing. The P.M. however, clearly wanted the D.G to EO and has witten a Letter to the Secretary of State for the Colonies. in which he instructs him to inform the Governor that the D.G. is going out with the P.MIs approval and that he win] report te the P.M. on his return. I lunched with van Moland and he gave me his new credentials, which establish him as liaison officer with the Department of Justice, detached from the Embansy. We had a meeting with S.I.S. to consider collaboration in war. $.1.6. had put up a cockshy paper, which we are going to study. By and large, I think e are in agreement with its terms. We all think that the S.0.I. units in any future war should be joint units. 12th July For the minutes of the D.G. meeting held to-day, see folder in D.D.G. sec'e tray. l4th July. The D.G. and llichael Serpell left for Hong Kong to-day. oIP 146. COPY 15th July. ORIGINAL DOOW DAUT RETAINE IN DEPARTMENT ER SECTION At the J.I.C. to-day Sir Fredericl Shedden gave, RECORDS to a large extent a repetition of his discusayh the Chiefs of Staff (recorded at 150a in SF. 53/244/4) The progress of the J.I.R. had been slow, owing to the procedure in Australia for recruiting civil servants, Nevertheless, it was beginning to produce results. Kenneth Strong expressed appreciatior of the work that wan being done. Sir Frederick had been shoeked by the ideas that exxisted in the United States in regard to members of the present Government, and even MI'. Chifley himself. quite prominent people had drawn him aside and asked him confidentially whether he thought that Mn. Chifley wan working for the Communists. He had gained the impres rion thet the United States Government were waiting for the General Election in Australia before coming to a decision about the removal of the present embargo. Afte the meeting Hayter cleared the room. He said that there had been a most unfortunnte meeting of the Defence Committee, which was discussing the Harwood report on future military expenditure, the three Service Ministers, the Foreign Secretary, and the Defence Minister being present. There was H suggestion for an additionall expenditure of four-and-a-half million pounds on intelligence. The general attiitude was "This is out of the question and what do we get from Intelligelue anyway? Bevin and Alexander seemed to be the leaders in expressing this view. This WIB followed by a suggestion that an enquiry should be made into the whole of Service Intelligence, and that M.I.5 & 6 should be included. Hayter had seen the Secretary of State subsequently and had pointed out to him that he got a great deal from Intelligence, and the fact that all the minutes put uD to him are based on Intelligence. Naturally he did not see all Intelligence reports; there wene far toD many of them and he would not have time to digest them. AS regards the enquiry, he pointed out that there ha: recently been an enguiry made by Air Vice Marshal Evill. Hayter left the Secretary of State a copy of the report. Hayter said that if an enquiny was insisted upon, endeavours were to be made to shepherd it in'to the hande of Sir Norman Brook. After the meeting I spoke to about A.V.M. Leask'e association with the and the SAMARINS. He said that Leask was a great personal friend of hs. Equally, he seemed to think more OP less the same of wife. himself, he thought, vassound. There is also a son, born and bred in this country, who has just joined 147. and has been posted to Germany - I imagine in view of his language qualifications. I told that ye did not know of anything seriously weone with any of these people, but tha't we were aware of the fact that there was a fainly close associntion between the LEASKS, the and the SAMRARINS. He agreed that, in view of the nature of the wives, there might be dangers and he would seek an opportunity to say a word to LEASI. I said that ye did not wish to be brought into the matter in any way. Hill and I went to see the D.P.P. regarding Sir Hartley Shawcross' suggestion to the P.M. that a case might be mounted against the Communists if it could be proved that on direetions from Moseow they were deliberately trying to create trouble in the dock strikes in order to wreck the Marshall Plan. The D.P.P. agreed with us that there WEIS nID Possibility of a prosecution unless there was definite evidence of an incitement to cause a breach of the peace. We said, however, that ie we did aver have anything from a useablle source which showed that there had been Incitement to commit a breach of the peace, we would let him have it. Shaweross clearly-seersto-b to looking for something in the nature of a Zinoviev letter. Such things do not, of course, now exist, and information is passed through the open Press and the radio. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 16th July. 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS 1958 ARIL Dalo Burges: telephoned to me to say that there had been a proposal to close down the Chiina News Agency. He had haid that he did not think there was any possibility of doing this unless it vas inciting people to acts of violence. He wanted my confirmation. I said that that would be my view. He then apologised for having been responsible for the trouble about the Chinese documents from Hong Kong, which indicated that the Chinese might attempt to eliminate the currency of the Hong Kong Shanghai Bank in Southern China. He fully realised that the fault lay entirely with the Foreign Office epresentatives in singapore; who had had a copy of the document at the earliest possible moment. T explained to Burgess the difficulties which we were encountering in Hong Kong vis a vis the Pollice. /48. THIS A GOPY 18th July. ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETA D IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION For Minutes of the D.G. meeting held to day CecHfolden RECORDS in D.D.G. Sec's tray. ACT 1958 AfRIL Dolo HOOPER has vrittenm a letter in which he makes it cllear that he is re-establishing contact with PIECK in Holland. PIECK had intimated to him that he had approached his old masters, but that SD far they had ignored hi.m. HOOPER rather doubts this, he says that PIEOK is very well in in Dutch Foreign Office circles; that he has a scheme for starting exhibitions in various countries, and that evidently he wants HOOPER'E services. HOOPER thinks this is all a cover for Soviet espionage and wants us to re-employ him. I have replied that we have gone into this matter, but regret that we cannot Offer him re-employment. In the meantime, I have sent the documents to Vivian. I attended a meeting of the Vice hiefs of Staff to-day, when I covered most of the ground in our paper on sabotage. Befor the meeting Heneage said that he t ought our paper gave a complete answer, and apologised for a misapprehension about the resources of this office directed to the subject of sabotage. V.C.N.S. who was in the chair, was still, I think, a little bit sceptical. He said that he envisaged in time of war a situation when there wuld be a large number of acts of sabotage and he felt it desirable that those who woulld be engaged in counter sabotage activities (as far ab I could make out, he had in mind those of the Services who would be guarding V.Ps) should be earmarked and receive instruction. I said that if the Services lke to nominate people, we should be very ready to give them a course of instruction, although it could not at this moment be based on any concrete knowledge of Russian intentions and methods. I did not think any useful purpose wouilld be served now by sending out large numbers of people to factories to give instruetion to the managerrents. We had found it extremely difficult during the war to maintain enthusiasm on the subjeet of security unless we could give concrete examples. As these examples had always to be based on what had happened to countries other than the U.K., enthusiasm was apt to flag. Neverthelesr, we had it in mind to give some instruction, by getting those concerned down to London Or talking to them on a regional basis, as soon as we wene clear in regard to the classificatior of V.Ps. Apart from this, we had a prograrme for crippling the Communist Party at the outbreak of any war by the arrest o.f its executives, and by eliminating /49. from .Ps any members of the Party who were in a position to cause damage. For the reasons stated in our paper, we did not think that the Communist Party was likely to embark on sabotage policy in peace time. Gerald Templer joined the meeting rather late and WES asked for his view. He said that he had had a good deal to do with M.1.5. and that he had complete confidence in the organisation as long as they were given all they aaked for. I had a long talk with the D.M.O. afterwardB. D asked him if he was satisfied. He said he was completely satisfied; his only concern was that considerable demands might be made upon operational pensonnel in time of war, and he was anxdous, therefore that guard duties, etc. might be carnied, as far as possible, by personnel of the W.D.0., ot other suitablle bodies. He thought that when key points had be finally claasified, there migh't be some valuerin getting managements to appoint security officers and to give these officers some sort of plan and instructions to work on. There is nd doubt in my mind that the Navy are the moving spirit in the proposals put forward by the Vice Chiefs, and that a suspicion Still lurks in their minds that the various incidents which have occurred during the last few months are to be laid at the door of the Communists. Perfect came to tell me about the Ohannel Islands. Communism in Jersey is very much at a discount, and the speakers are liable to get rotten tomatoes - of which there is a plentiful supply in the Island - thrown at them. Piratin's visit was a coroplete failure and he did not even get a hearing. The Police are under the Mayor, who is a kind of Honorary Constable, but there are two members of the Force of fifty who work direet to the Attorney General on our affairs. On the whole, the arrangement seems satisfactory. In Guernsey there is an 0 rganised police force with a Chief Constable. The immigration authorities have a difficult job, but seem to be alive. The open door is Alderney, whenceyyou can go in a fishing boat to the mainland of France thout difficulty, It would be fairly easy to employ this method for illegal entry, since once in the Islands there is no further check in the U.K either at Southampton, Weymouth or Northolt. 150. 19th July. Burt came to see me this morning. I showed him the file of Michael CARRITT, who has written to Special Branch claiming disassociation from the Communist Party and wishing to clear himself. Our records show that CARRITT has been in financial difficulties and that. frankly, his job in the Party does not pay. He has been trying to get outside journalistic work with the Satellites and now has some employment with the Anglo-Polish Society. There is nothing in our files to indicate that he has resigned. On the whole I am inclined to think that he does not wish to face up to resignation, but that for financial reasons he will graduallyisli out of Party activity. He knows that S.B. will have his name on record and evidently thinks that if he cannot clear himself they may be a spoke in his wheel. Burt is going to see CARRITT and try and cllear up the position. He is quite ready for us to see him if we want to. rtnblxinrtxubxntxnurxtrehkusxxithur I told Burt about our troubles with the Attorney General. He entirely agreed with our view that no Zinoviev letter would be forthcoming. For the minutes of the D.G. meeting held to-day, see folder in D.D.G. Sec's tray. Braham brought Houston-Boswall, our Minister in Beirut, to see me. The Lebanese have now asked for a Police Officer, which 16 satisfactory. ouston-Boswall is an amusing character and I should say Must the man to handle Orientals. 20th July. I saw Mr. Harrison, Attorney-General of Jersey, who had been very co-operative on the occasion of Perfect' visit to the Island. He seems a sensible person and will arrange for his S.B. officer to visit us on a suitable occasion. At the J.I.C. to-day, Brain mentioned that Kelly, our Minister in Moscow, had had a fairly congenial meeting with Joe Stalin, who seemed to be in good health. Kelly said that AS. his predecessor seemed to have been mainly concerned with wrangling about trivialities,a that he hoped that during his period of office he would have an opportunity of discussing politics on a aromewhat wider basis, if Joe did not dissent. The Atlantic Pact came up. Kelly said that it was purely a security pact with no agressive intentions and not directed against anyone in particular. After all, the Russians had a similar pact with satellite states. Joe replied that his pact with the satellite states was directed solely against Germany. There appeared to be nothing more in the conversation of signifacance I had a talk afterwards with Val Boucher He said that there was some suggestion that an approach might be made to the Americans, by way of ascertaining what their attitude would be if the Irish, in the matter of courses and equipment, turned to the U.S. He said he thought it would be useful to know this as it might strengthen our hand in any future dealings with the Irish if we knew that the Americans, if approached, would not be prepared to entertain such proposals. I said that it might be useful to know this. On the other hand, we might be putting ideas into the Amnericans' heads. It seemed to me that it would .be a pity if the Irish were allowed to fall into the hands of the Americans on the question of armamants, since they would clearly become the victims of Irish-American propaganda. I told Boucher that I was convinced that the decision of the Irish Government to stop their Service representative from attending Staff courses in this country had been reached purely on political grounds. It was clear from what Laithwaite had told me that at this moment they were terrified that any associations that they might have with the British Government might be used against them by the Opposition. BONALEDOCUMEND EETAINE ORIGINAL THIS A COPY BETAINED X SECTION ACT 1958 LCRECORDS 2010 102 This COPY ORIGINAL RETAINED I lunched with van Moyland. IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEGTION ACT 1958 OF THE PUBLIO RECORDS Aerd 2010 I saw Mr. Collier of the Historical Section of the Cabinet office bo-aay. He is anxious to include something about the work of the Security Service in his work on the defence of the U.K. I explained to him that it would be difficult to do this and make sense without telling the whole story. I had found this same difficulty in lecturing to the I.D.C. and had eventually obtained permission to "take the lid off" completely. I then gave hir a brief outline of what had happened. The basic factor was that we had succeeded in running the German Intelligence Service in this country from the outbreak of war until the armistice, and that this, coupled with security measures which gave the outward appearance of being 100f - but were in faot only about 25% - had enabled us to keep this country clean of enemy agents and to provide an important weapon for deception in the Battle of Normandy. Collier had been sceptical at the outset about our desire to avoid any publicity, but on hearing this he readily agreed with me that any mention of our organisation, if it were to be consistent with security, could only be misleading. I said that if there were any points within our field which Were troubling him, either Dick White or myself would be very ready to give him the background, if it were in our power to do so. This might, in certain respects, savechim from doing a lot of unnecessary work. I told him that he was perfectly at liberty to discuss this problem with John Gvyer, and that he could tell Professor of the Work Butler of the Security that he had Service satisfied in the himself history that of an the account war could only he made by the disclosure of vital information. If Professor Butler needed to be satisfied on this point, he could refer him to me. 53 THE ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. Apnl 2010 54 THE ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION S4) 4)OF of THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1968. April Ro(o 1$3.51 THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARIMENTUND SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 AORI 2lo 21st July. Dick Butler came to see me. He told me abouttth extent of his enquiries in the case of MENON. He had approached a certain Dr. Kaul in this country who was heading a campaign aginst MENON and obviously had a good deal of information, some of which had already appeared in the Indian press. Butler took the line that he was acting for a client in India whose name he could not disclose. Under those conditions Kaul was not prepared to go very far. Sir Marston Logan rang up to-day with two suggestions about Uganda, based on my letter about MULUMBA and MUSAZI. (1) they had an ex- Under-Secretary for Native Affairs in tow, who could translate African dialects. If we were agreeable, they would arrange for this individual to translate such letters as we might intercept between MULUMBA and Uganda. If they contained any information of importance, it could then be telegraphed either through our D.S.0. or direct to the Governor; I said that I would look into this. (ii) The Colonial Office and the Governor were particularly anrious that we should give MULUMBA another period of observation. I told Marston Logan that ve had already done this and that, frankly, we did not think it was profitable; we were therefore reluotant to employ our Watchers on this task. Logan urged very strongly that it would go a long way towards relieving the anrieties of the authorities concerned if we could re-impose observation for a short period, even if the results were negative. I said that we would endeavour to do this. is4 7y Dick brought me a draft for an inspired P.Q. in the House of Lords on the case of SROM, and a suggested reply. It seemed to me firstly, that there would very likely be a supplementary question enquiring about what was being done to the Polish refugee who had supplied the information,a and that even if this could be got over in the House of Lords, the Press hounds would descend upon S.Y., which would certainly result in complications. Dick and Marriott both thought that in the circumstances it would be better to call the P.Q. off, which was done. I talked to Thomas about an alleged sabotage case to naval aircraft. He has carried out a thorough investigation, as a result of which the whole thing seems to be due to negligence by a firm supplying oill coolers. They were supposed to have been reconditioned, but it Seems unlikely that this was done. There must have been neglligence, too, by the Navy in failing to inspect them. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAT DOCUNENT DOCU ENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 APRIL Onto 152 22nd July. Kabu At the J.I.C. there was a closed session at which the D.M.I. said thathis M.A. in Korbal (?) was on very friendly terms with the Afghan Minister of Defence. He wanted the backing of the J.I.C. to allow his M.A. to sound the ground as to whether the Afghans were getting any information from Russia and, if things looked propitious, whether they would combine with us in any agent-running project. The J.I.C., including 'c', gave its bhessing. In a discussion on security of the new Dominions, it was decided that they should only be given inforation on the basis of the Ineed to know" and that even then there might be exceptions. It was agreed that the new Dominions should be told and that this should be done on a high level. I explained that we were doing what we could to get rid of Krishna MENON. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMRNT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 GORIL Dol Pendred told me after the meeting that Air Vice Marshal Leask was retiring shortly and joining some firm with business interests in Helsinki. He was going to reside there with his wife. Pendred said he intended to warn all concerned. Greenwood of J.I.B. asked us to see a candidate for Counter-Intelligence, Pakistan, called LEIGH-BENNETT. I arranged with Vickery that this should be done. 23rd July. He seems to have been much impressed by his visit to the U.S. and Canada, where he was studying federal police methods. He was clearly more impressed by Canada than by the U.S. He obviously thought that there was something much more solid and genuine about the efficiency and prestige of the R.C.M.P. than the advertising methods of the F.B.I. Courtenay has written two amusing D.Os which gave a bivid picture of the new Security Service in Australia in action. 155, There is clearly an enormous amount of hit and miss, but some progress is being made. There is no doubt that Courtenay is an ungualified success; he is consulted at almost every turn. I have got a telegramn in from the D.G. in which he says that it has been agreed that the Committee in Hong Kong on Intellligence matters has now been eonstituted on a formal basis with the Colonial Secretary in the Chair. He is anxious, however, that the G.S.0.1, who is to cover Intelligence activities of the three Services, should be a good man and should be appointed as early as possible. THIS IS A COPY I have passed this on to the D.M.I. ORIGINAL DOOURENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENiT UINDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 hPRIL Qolo 25th July. I saw David Stewart on his return from the Middle East on leave. We ran through the staff and he seemed to think that on the whole they had got an extremely efficient and capable lot. He made one new point in regard to Italy. He thought that something should be done to establlish an effective liaison with the appropriate counter-intelligence authorities in Italy. but he thought that in the same way as we are now in touch with Westerri Union counter-intelligence bodies, we should be in touch with our opposite numbers in Italy. There is, I think, quite a lot to be said for this, Kelllar and Badham came to talk to me about MULUMBA. We all agreed that there was little to be got out of direct observation, but that in deference to the wishes of the Governor of Uganda and the Colonial Office we should give him another run for a short period. At the Directors' meeting we had a long discussion on our overseas organisation. I said that I did not feel that we were altogether clear amongst ourselves as to precisely what the role of our S.L.0. was in each of the Colonies. For example, in West Africa, was "Tin-Eyel purely a liaison officer whose business it was to be constantly on the move and sticking pins into various parts of the map (?), or iad he a responsibility for collating intelligence in bhe area? 159 My own view Was that, firstly, he had to get everyone on tire alert and, as far as possible, working together by organising meetings and an exchange of information between the Colonies and with adjacent territories. Secondly, it was his business to know what the indigenous movements were in each of the Colonies, how far they were linked with movements in adjacent foreign territory or as between Colonies in the area, and lastly, whether they were linked with any internatinnal organisation outside or with the U.K. To do this, he would have to receive reports from each of the Colonies. Equally, if he were effecting an exchange with the Belgian Congo, the Ivory Coast, and Dakar, it must be for the purpose of the interchange of information whichcertainly in exisiting circumstances would have to be centhallised in his office. It seemed to me, therefore, that heismust have an office with a considerable number of records. It would not be necessary for him to carry records of indigenous movements or to end detailed reports about them back to this office. He would, however, have to know something about them and the extent to which they were likely to develop. He should receive from this office as much assistance as possible on methods of investigation, 'C! Division matters, and also on any international movements which might infringe on his territory. I think these views were on the whole accepted, but I doubt whether anybody had been very clear about them before. The D.M.I. telephoned to say that I coulld inform the D.G. that the matter of the G.S.0. in Hong Kong was under active consideration but that no name had yet been selected. I might also add that an official request for the appointment from G.H.Q. FARELF to the War Office would help to expedite things. Burt telephoned to say that he hed heard that Mossy SIMONS had been located in Dublin and he was arranging for his arrest and extradition on the grounds hhhat he had conspired with others to escape. On the question of MULUMBA, Burt said that he was unable at the moment to spare any officers for observation, owing to the accumuibation of work resulting from the dock strike. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION ACT (4) 1958 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS Apal 2010 160 THIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED NDEPARTMENT RSECTION THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 2010 Dick and Graham Mitchell have seen Tizard about BLACKETT and given him quite a lot of information about Peter ASTBURY. Tizard seemed to be quite worried about the position and intended to have another talk with BLACKETT. He quite saw that it would have been embarrassing for us to do so. 26 th July. I saw van Moyland and to-day. We discussed first of all the question of Czech airlines. I said that on the whole I doubted whether it was reasible to take any action, although we were quite satisfied that the Ozechs were training their military pilots on their civil airlines. This was in fact a fairly normal practice, which had been carried out by the Germans before the war. It was clear, however, that unless all European countries were to agree that the crews of Czech aircraft should be put on a quota basis - which Would certainly have to be reciprocal - little could be done to prevent Czech pilots from getting the experience which they needed. Even if we could get France and the Benelux countries to agree, this would not prevent the Czechs from flying in the Middle East, in satellite countries, and in Scandinavia. If, however, still felt strongly about the matter, it could be discussed at the Special Information Committee which meets every three months. then mentioned the espionage aspect of this problem. I said that I understood that in Holland foreign aircraft had to fly on certain defined routes, which presumably prevented them from taking photographs of prohibited places. Such restrictions in peacetime in this country were allmost impossible, since aircraft were coming into the country from almost every angle, and, on the south coast at any rate, defined air corridors would have to cover the whole area. then mentioned that on his journey here from Holland he had noticed a Czech who had deliberately taken a photograph of the airfield as the aeroplane was coming down. He wondered what our regulations were. I told him that since the war it was permissable to take photographs - I rather gathered that this was not the case in Holland. I said tha't this was another matter which could quite well be raised on the S.J..S. 161. I passed this information on to Dick and asked him whether he felt that the S.I.0. could usefully discuss either of the following points: (a) the possibility of agreement on measures to curtail the number of Czech pilots operating on their civil airlines, and (b) regulations regarding photography from the air. Personally, I doubt whether (a) is either feasible or worth while, and (b) is clearly fraught with every sort of difficulty and would be hard to make effective owing to the many possibilities of evasion. At the D.G's meeting to-day Mitchell stated that he had obtained a ooncession from the Ministry of Supply and the Admiralty on the question of vetting their existing staffs in outstations, numbering some 146,000. It had been agreed that the Ministry of Supply and the Admiralty would rely on our bringing to their notice the names of any of these individuals who might come up in the course of enquiries. As regards any new intake, they would be subject to the normal vetting procedure. Kellar mentioned that a number of records, formerly the property of the Palestine Pollice relating to members of the Stern and Irgun had been sent back here from 3.I.ME. He thought that they should be handed over to the Police, but that the latter should inform us i1f any terrorist mentioned in these documents turned up in the U.K. It was the duty of the Police to see that they did not commit terrorist acts, but it was our duty; on the basis of nformation received from all sources, to inform the appropriate authorities regarding any terrorist organisatior in this country. T had a further telegram from the D.G., which I passed on thethe D.M.I., containing a suggestion that a Brigadier Field, formerly M.A: Nanking, should be given the 0,8.0.. job in Hong Kong. The D.M.I. evidently did not think that this was a good idea. The D.G. referred me to a telegram from the Governor to the Colonial office which emobdied certain of his proposals. I had a further discussion with Dick and Hollis about overseas matters, with a view to clarifying our ideas. 162. Courtenay has written two D.0. letters, in which he gives quite an interesting picture of life in Australia and in the Australian Security Service. Things are still very much on an ad hoc basis, but some progress has been made. Chifley has given authority for telephone checks, but these can only be run rather sparingly and in a somewhat crude fashion. Chifley is jibbing about letter checks. 27th July. I have had a letter from Gerald Templer, drawing attention to a certain penetration of the British Legion in Hants and Dorset. I have asked Perfect to look into it. At the J.I.C. to-day I passed on the information which I had received from the D.G. about Hong Kong. Hollis, Dick and I gave Sir Frederick Shedden lunch, and I had a long discussion with him in the afternoon. He saw several other officers here. He was extremely friendly and, off the record, gave quite an interesting penepicture of the various personalities in Australia. To give me an idea of Chifley'e attitude to the whole question of Security, he xctxsaid that after the D.G. arrived in Australia, Chifley rang him p,when the following conversation took place: "Is that you Fred? There is a fellow here with a bloody silly name- Sillitoe As far as I can make out he is the chief bloody spy - you had better have a look at him and find out what he wanta". There is clearly no love lost between Shedden and Evatt. Shedden fully realises how much hart Evatt's pose as mediator between Bast and West had done to Australian relations with the United States. The distrust of him, and indeed of the present Government, as a whole in the U.S.A., is more than marked. He doubted whether there would be much improvement until and unless the present Government went out of power. He seemed to think that there was quite a chance that Menzies might come back. He seemed to hope that he would. He was quite enthusiastic in his praise for MacArthur, who he thought had done a good job 163 in Australia during the war, in spite of a tricly situation. He had always been deferential to Australian wishes. In spite of this, however, there was a period when the Americans were extremely unpopular and this might take some time to live down; their behaviour had not always been as good as it might have been. In spite of his personal feeling for MacArthur, he recognised that the latter was something of a Prima Donna. There is no doubt that Shedden is extremely well-disposed towards us. I met Joy for the first time. He has taken over from Halford. Kellar brought the Gove'nor-designate of Cyprus, Sir Andrew Wright, to see me. He had the organisation explained to him and I told him the general principles on which we work. He was anxious to know just how far AKEL was under Communist control. We explained that there were definitely links with the Comminists, particularly those in Greece, but that the association on the Cypriot side seemed to obe largely a means to an end. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED NN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 28th July. 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 AfRIk 20(0 I had a long discussion with Dick and Alec about overseas matters. There is clearly a divergence of view between them on the future of overseas stations, but to some extent the problem has, I think, been narrowed. I had a talk with Battersby about a letter from Gerald Templer on Communist penetration in the British Legion. There is no doubt that the Legion has been progressively drawn into the political field, and that the Party have somewhat tardily awakened up to its potentialities as an election target and a field for subversive activities. It is, however, clear that they have not yet made much headway. I am telling Gerald that the Legion should take active steps now to put its house in order by: (i) the appointment of relliablle and active district secretaries, who will see that Communists or fellow travellers are not nominated when 164, executive posts fall vacant; (ii) that they shoulld ensure that a really sound man is groomed for any vacancy that occurs, and that the right people should turn up at the election meeting, and (iii) that good speakers should be sent down to Branch meetings, who will] put grievances in their proper perspective and prevent the Communists from holding the floor. I suggested that he should talk to the President of the Legion on these lines. I had a talk with Dick about our proposed memorandum for the J.I.0. on the co-ordination of reports on world Communism. We decided to drop the matter and to rely upon closer liaison with the various departeents concerned, such as I.B.D., F.O.R.D. , C.R.O., Colonial Office, etc. I has a talk wit Alec and Malcoim Cumming about sending McMillan to Malaya, MoMillan cannot spare the time to stay more than a few days in the area; dt is therefore necessary that as much of the ground should be clleared as possible 8o that full use can be made of his expert advice. A major snas hasarisen over the payment for his journey. The War Office cannot pay and the Colonial Office cannot pay - SO we are being asked to pay. I had a talk with Cumming and Dick about an approach from the Americans for joint "miking" operations between ourselves and the Americans in the American Embassy. The Americans want tos demonstrate to members of the staff the need for security. They wish US to set up one or two ordinary mikes and to put one on the telephone. It is difficult for us to refuse, and we are therefore giving them the Curnming has informed 'o'. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENTR RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UINDER SECTION (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 APRIL. 2010 165. 29th July. I attended an extremelly rambling meeting of the Defence Transition Committee Working Party, with Cornish of the Home office in the chair. The purpose vas to decide on the shape and form of the H.D.S.E. or the Interdepartmenta. Committee on Security, in time of war. I was the only person there who had any experience of the H.D.S.E. during the war. We got no further than deciding that we wanted a basic paper on the H.D.S.E. during the last war, and on the functions and duties of any other body dealing with security matters. It was only then that we should reach any decision about the future of the H.D.S.E. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUBAENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 ARRIL DOo I talked to Perfect about a scheme put forward by B.1, in which it is suggested that a police officer should be selected from each district and who could act as a channel for communi- cation and co-ordination of information between ourselves and the Police. I think this proposal is fraught with every possible difficulty. In an ideal world it might be all right, but with the Police as we know them I feel certain that it Would end in disaster. (i) We should have to ask the Chief Constables of the district to nominate an officer who would be acceptable to them all; one would finally be elected, probably with a few dissident voices,who, even if he gotethe co-operation of the Chief 6d tables in the district, it would not follow that he woulld be able to establish the same relations with the Superintendent and other officers on the working level. Moreover, he might not 166. be suitable to Us and if he were any good he would have to go for promotion just an he was getting into the stride. The allternative would be to give us scmebody who, owing to his poor qualifications was never likely to be promoted at all. Mann should be regarded as an exception,and it would be ittle short of a miracle if someone of comparable tact and ability could be produced in each police district. Apart from all this, we should really be reconstituti Regional Offices,wit all the expense that that entails, and I doubt whether either the police or the Home Office would agree, even if the expense could be distributed locally. There is yet another point, namely, that there is a kind of snobbism in the police which causes them to be proud of their personal elations with M.I.5. The new system proposed would tend to dissolve this mysticism. The only alternative that I can propose to meet the case of Chief Constables who think it advantageous that they should know more about what is going on in the Communist world in surrounding districts, is that a map of the Communist Party districts should be superimposed on the police districts, and that we should send copies of the more important letters affecting a Communist Party district to all the C.Cs concerned. Burt telephoned to say that he had got General Palmer in his office. I arranged to see Pallmer for a moment on Saturday morning. He is only passing through this country on his way to the Continent and had not in fact origianlly intended to touch the U.K. I talked to the D.M.I. about MacMillan. I suggested that as he had a part interest we shoud apply to the War Office in the ordinary way for his passage. The D.M.I. said he did not think this would work as MacMillan had already been put up by name as a G.P.O. official going in War Office interests, and this had been turned down under some Regulation He thought really that the Colonial Office should approach the Treasury. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUR I RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3oth July. 3(4) OF THE -PUBLIC RECORDS 1958 ARRILLoO General Palmer came in for a fev minutes. He said that they were making some progress in the security field, and that he was extremely pleased with Simkins, whom he liked for 162. personally and/whose lnowledge and views on Communist matters he had a great regard. I arranged that he should have a car to visttisindsarpor ORIGINAL Sunday. RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 2nd August. ACT 1958 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS Wild looked in for a few moments with John Marriott. We discussed Doto the note on deception in the Middle East which Billl Magan is proposing ti it send through J.I.C. (M.E.) to the J.I.C. I wondered a little whether that as in practice the J.I.C. (W.E.) had been producing the chicken however, food should not come to us for submission to L.C.S. We agreed, to keep the D.As running in S.I.M.E., it Would be preferable that they in should give their approval to the proposal for setting up a L.C.S. officer the Middle East. It had been arranged that as soon as the paper reacl the J.I.C. London, it would be passed direct for consideration by D.C.S. At the D.G's meeting to-day, which I took, our discussions were devoted entirely to personal problems. The only fact that emerged was that we needed at least half a dozen new officers. I urged Horrocks to arrange another Appointments Board at the earliest possible moment. I had a word with Kellar and Dick and Hill about the arms traffic. It was agreed that Hill woulld get out a statement on the present machinery and the responsibillities of this office both for internal and overseas use I talked to Alec about the Lebanon. He is doing his best to find a suitable officer to act as adviser to the Lebanese Police. 3rd August. The D.G returned to-day. His visit to Hong Kong seems to have achieved the desired object, although he still felt that the whole thing might easily have been done by an authoritative telegram from the Collonial Office. He said that Mackintosh was a typical policeman, but that he one nothing about S.B. work and that he was hopelessly understaffed and far te complacent about the whole position. They wanted the D.G. to look into his affairs, but the D.G. rightly refused to do So and insisted that this was the job of Johnson. He told Mackintosh that Johnson was an ercelllent fellow and that he would do well to give him every possible assistance. He hinted, in fact, that if Mackintosh was thinking ultimately of a job on the Colonial Office Police Inspectorke staff, he would be well advised to co-operate with Johnson. Johnson had already begun to look into thing and was fully aware of the weaknesses of S.B., and indeed of the Police Force as a whole. He and the D.G. warned Festing that if there was any troublle in the leased territories, it would be folly to rely upon the Police, who would be bound to Wonder on which side their bhead and butter lay. The D.G. secured the agreement of Mackintosh to hand over any important Communist Party agent to the D.8.0. to run in conjunction with the Police case officer. If Mackintosh keeps his word, this coulld prove valuable. 168. Lth August. I had a word with who is back from the Middle East. He says that the state of leakage in the Canal Zone from Service sources is extremely bad. A specific case is coming up which, it is to be hoped, may produce some improvement. In view, the camp is bristling with Libut. Colonels and Brigadiers, with all their attendant satellites in the form of .S.0.1s, 2s and 3s, and SO far from wanting more British personnel to take the place of foreigners the whole staff should be drastically reduced. He doubts whether there will be good security until this has been done. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 ARiL Poio 169 I went with James Robertson to see FINGAL and to discuss his case. I think the interview nad the desired effect in boosting up FINGAL'S morale. Obviously he has been undergoing a great strain, but he seemed in quite good heart when he left us. He was pleased to hear that he had made his mark with Villiers in K.P.I.D. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 314) OF THE PUBLIO RECORDS ACT 1958 APRIL 2ol0 I had a meeting on the War Book, when I endeavoured to get some rough idea of the numbers that would be required for our expansion scheme Meanwhile, Horrocks is to closely examine his lists. 9th August. I attended a meeting at the C.R.O. wi'th Seel in the chair. Others present were Cohen and Trafford Smith from the Colonial Office,a Cox of the Oxford Delegacy. The latter is a friend of Herbert Hart's and I have met him before. Keith of the Welfare Department was there; his job is to look after negro students. He said he hdd been rather disturbed by our approach to some of his subordinates about the work of his organisation He was particularly anxious that nothing should be done which would cause negroes to think that the welfare organisatior was spying on thern. I said that this had not been our object; we merely wanted to know something about his organisatio and the way it worked. He said that he would readily give this information, but that he would be blad in future if we would deal solely with him. I told him that he coul get out of his head the idea that M.1.5 were padding about after his protegees only on very rare occasion Would we contemplate anything of the kind, if for no other reason than that we found it a somewhat unprofitable form of investigation. We then discussed the part played by the Oxford Delegacy in sending teachers to African Colonies. It was cllear that the final selection of students was now in the hands of an Inter-Universities Appointments Board, at the head of which was a certain Adam. Cox sadd that before submi itting names to the Colonial Office, Adam used his discretion as to Whether any 120. preliminary vetting enquiry was necessary, and that he was still using HODGKIN, the Communist Secretary of the Oxford Delegacy, in an advisory capacity. Even Cohen was somewhat disturbed at this, and Cox was asked to persuade Adam to refer all cases before any concrete suggestions were made, and also to. endeavour to tap Universities other than Oxford; Durham was suggested. There was a general conscioisness that candidates put up by the Oxford Delegacy had not been too good in the past. I mentioned the fact that we had recently heard that in May a certain individual had been in touch with the Communist Party, but that we did not know his identity - all we could say was that he was about to go out to Wes t Africa for a period of three months on so. Cox said that undoubtedly this must be John MCCLEAN, about whom we had already warned the Colonial Office. I asked whether tiwere not topossible to send out people who would just teach their subject and not engage in politics either at the Right, Left or Centre. The reply was that when subjects such as political economy and political science were being taught, it was almost impossible to get anybody whovas non-partisan. I do not think that the present arrangements are altogether satisfacto but we shall know in due course, by the people submitted to us for vetting whether there is any improvement in the standard. THIS IS A OOPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT ONDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIO RECORDS ACT 1958 ARRILnOL '71. There has been a successful conference on Russian affairs at Oxford. We putup a strong team, who apparently acquitted themselves extremely well, which stood out in strong contrast to others present. E.H. Carr, late of the Times, and also Borodin, gave talks. Outstanding on our side on Far Eastern mattees was MacDonald. Guy Rurgess was there from the Foreim Office, but was not nearly S0 good. The Overseas Division has again been raised and the D.G. has asked that we should give him a final answer to lhd.s last minute. He said that he had spoken tentatively to Bridges on the subject. A serious case has blown up in regard to atomic energy. ULTRA material from Washington shows that one of the British team working in America in 1944 and, I think, 1945, was giving information to the Russians. There is not much clue to his identity, except that he had a sister. The suspicion falls on one FUCHS, and to a lesser degree on on PEIERLS, whose cases were looked into here some time ago vith negative results. Both FUCHS and PEIERIS had sisters in the U.S. - a mention of FUCHS' sister apparently appears in the diary of the Russian, HALPERIN, who was connected with the GOUZENKO case in Canada. An intensive investigation into the affairs of both FUCHS and PETPRIS is being made, but the problem is by no means an easy ane. Hill tells me that he has scotched PINTO'E book. He says, too, that the War Book has now been revised and that this will affect our basic War Book. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 AfRie 13th September. At the D.G'S meeting to-day, Dick mentioned the policy of the Home Office, who are naturalising Czechs and Poles somewhat light-heartedly. They did not seem to understand that if a Czech was working for the Czech Erbassy here, his loyalty was likely to be with the Czech Govennment rather than with this country. The Home Office stilll adhere to the view that membership of the Communist Party does not in itself constitute grounds for refusing naturalisation. I do not know how they oan reconcile their conscience on this matter, unless they regard the eath of Allegiance to the Ki.ng as a mere formality. Horrocks, Dick, Charles and I had a discussion to-day on the D.G's request about the Overseas Division. We all of us still felt that the proposal was unsound. It was agreed that Dick woulld put up a first draft dealing as far as possible wi.th all the points raised in the previous correspondence. 172. 14th September. I spoke to Trafford Smith after the J.I.C. meeting about Vest African tutors. He agreed with me about the unsatisfactory nature of the present position. He said he thought there was a good deall of confusion of hfought at the Colonial Office. I had a talk with Perfect. I agreed with him that it would be useful if he gave a lecture to officers on police organisation and methods. I also suggested that after we had delivered our lecture to Special Branch meetings an the organisation of the Conmunist Party, ve should suggest that the officer i/c S.B. matters where District Party H.Q were situated might give a talk at a subsequent meeting on the workings in practice of the C.P. Committee in his area. I think this would stimulate S.B. officers to collect their thoughts and make enauiries which would put them more on top of their job. They will be rather on their mettle, as they will not wish to make fools of themselves either to ourselves-o to members of other Forces. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 15th September 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 APeiu Dote Gerald Templer asked me whether there was any obectiron to his communicating verbally to Fraser, Chairman of the British Legion, the factual evidence in my letter, and recommending, as coming frcm himself, the various counter-measures suggested. I said that there was no objection. He subsequently rang me up to say that he had had a very satisfactory interview that Fraser was not altogether aware of the position, and that he proposed to carry out our' suggestions as far as he was able to do so. I think it would useful if this particular problem could be kept under review.. and any further information of importance passed on to Fraser through Templer, who thoroughly understande the delicacy of our position. Gerald was a little worried by the fact that this information had been lying in our files and that aetionon it had only been taken as a result of his initiative. I pointed out to him that we were a delicate position 9 but that we did normally try and get something done where we had a suitable contact. I had a meeting with Dick, Kellar and Horrocks on the subject of Joint C.E. units in time of wan. Agreement has more or le88 been reached as between ourselves and S.I.S. The only point at issue was the measure of independence which ouP joint organisatior should enjoy. F.J. felt that if it opeated directly under a Supreme Cormander, it might lose the co-operation of the I(D) staff, who would regard it too much as a private anmy. There might, therefore, be soe advantage in putting it under the I(b) staff provided thio individual was a suitable person. It might be possible to fill the post either from this office or from S.I.S. This point is to be further discussed. I had a talk with Alex aind Hamblen about the present situation in Hong Kong. It Beemed to mne that a basic paper from L.I.C. Hong Kong, was called for, and that the problem should be analysed of all the means 173, short of overt agression, by which the life of the Colony could be paralysed. I envisaged that when the Chinese Communists get down to Hong Kong, they might well urge their supporters in the Colony to embark at the outset on a movement of non-co-operation, nvolving a withdrawal of labour from the central services or the Police, and from Government office: As dislocation increased acts of violence and serious disturbances might follow. I thought we should put this forward at the J.I.C. with the agreement, if possible, of the Colonial Office. I saw Hadow, Superintendent of Police from the Gambia. He seemed to be impressed by Stephens' efforts to get things moving in the Colony. He is to attend a course here next month. Alderson, the Assistant Chief Constablle of Bedford, called. He wanted our advice as to Police action in a case affecting the Vauxhall Works. These works were situated on either side of the main road going to Airport. A certain Communist in the works had taken to holding meetings on the steps of the canteen in the lunch interval, beich attracted a large crowd and caused an obstruction. The Company were/ enxious to interfere, although the of fence was really taking place on their property The Police were anxious to interfere,f we thought that the Communists would make capital out of the incident they would refrain from doing S0. I said that we were quite prepared to take a chance on this, and that in my view the Police should act in accordance viith the law: if an obstruction was being caused, the man should be warned,a if he gave no heed to the warning he should be prosecuted. ARwTHIS IS COPY 20 ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION l6th September. 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS Ashmore, the Commissioner of Police for Cyprus cate to see me. F had been previously warned that he resented the presence of our D.8.0.: but he did not raise this matter during our conversation. He was at one time our link, and was probably annoyed about having access to the Governor and having reported some months ago that the situation in Cyprus was disquieting. Ashmore, who has lived in the Colony for thirteel years, is not very highly regarded in some quarters. He has only really established a Special Branch since Johnson's visit a short time ago. He is thought to be lazy and complacent; his line is that although there were incidents with bombs some time ago. the Cypriots had not really constituted a menace and coulli easily be dealt with in any emergency. He has no knowledge of activities outside the Colony, and is indined to discount them, although on being pressed he had to admit that what hapnened in Greece had a considerable bearing on the Colony. From what he told me, the present situation is none too happy. The new Governor asked the Mayors of Famagusta,a d some other place, to Come eand see him. They both refused and asked the Governor to come and see them. The Governor has 9o far declined to do so, because the Town Halls have a large nosis-sign over the doorway. Collonel Butler, of M.I.2., who has jus returned with the Planning Mission from Australia, came to see me. He said that the present proposal is that Indo-China and Siam should remain in the American Zone in any future conflict. He quite understood that S.I.F.E. woulld probably have to remain in Singapore, and he thought that an increase in our liaisor 124. staff in Australia, and representation on the J.I.C. would probably meet the bill. He told me that he had been down to New Zealand, and that he was considerably shocked by the lack of security. He told his opposite numbers in military circles, and he hopes he brought them to a realisation of their problems in So far as defence planning documents were concerned. The Foreign Office, after much debating, have decided to empty the services of Geoffrey Gorer in making a physciatric analysis of the Russian charactery although with what object in view I cannot imagine! Nor can I see how Gorer can possibly carry out his task. If he is proposing to work on some of the highly neurotic defectors that we have encountered, I cannot really believe that he will be getting a very good cross-section of the Russian people! We have been asked to ascertain whether he is the kind of person who can be suitably approached in this matter. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 19th September. 3(4) OF THE PUBLIG RECORDS ACT 1958 APRIL DO1O matters. Roger had just returned from leave and had certain comments I had a discussion with Horrocks, Charles, Dick and Roger on overseas to make, although he agreed basically with our first draft. that we might give him a party. We discussed only staff matters the Burt has been made a Commander, and I. have suggested to the D.G. at D.G. meeting. I had a meeting with Dick, Graham, Oughton and Perfect on police liaison. It was agreed that, for the time being at any rate, the proposals that the co-operation between this service and police forces in this country ,in the investigation of the British C.P., might be improyet by the appointment in each police district of a Police officer as S.B, CDrordinati officer. His functio Would be the co-ordination of the operations of all S.B. officers within the police district. In addition correspondence between this office and the individual police forces might be canalised through him. While they are undoubtedly sound in themselves, we felt that to introduce them a t this moment might get us into deep waten. It was agreed that any scheme for reorganising 3.B. meetings on the basis of C.P. districts, rather than Police districts, should bbe ahandoned, but that in talking to S.Bs in districts, account should be taken of the fact thet incertain cases they might have an interest in more than one C.P. district. The problem of keeping surrounding Chief Constablles informed of the activities of the District Party Committees which control C.P. activities in their area, remains to some extent unresolved. In the particular case of Hordern P.L.S. will discuss this matter with Dayson of Lancs. County and Mark of Manchester, to see whether a satisfactory solution can be reached whereby copies of enquiries to Boroughs in Lancashire can be sent to Lancs. County. It should, I think, be tactfully suggested to Manchester, and if necessary to other Boroughs, that if an enquiry is made about an individual 125. now known tD be residing in Manchester, there may well be records with the Lancs. County Police, who have had a long-established Special Branch, and that therefore we proposed to send copiee of certain lettens addressed to Boroughs, to G.C. Lancs. 20th September. I discussed the Irish files with Potter and directed that he should keep all those dealing with our liaison; they show its origin and developme which will certainly be valuable to anybody who is to deal with Ireland in a future crisis. TI also directed that a file on S.I.S. and Brofected S.O.E. activities should be retained: this file indicates the many pitfalls which should be avbided in a future war. For minutes of D.G's meeting held to-day, see folder in D.D.GES laSec's tray. wants me to attend French manoeuvres after the S.1.C. confereno on the 27th. The manoeuvres are to be in the French zone and there will b a counter-espionage exercise, to be judged by On Saturday wants me to go to his home at Limoges for a night. I said that I would have to get back by air on Monday morning. It has now been discovered that both FUCHS and PEIERIS have a sister in the U.S. The biading is, however, heavily on FUCHS, whose sister's name is in HALPERIN'S diary. I had a talk with Burley about relations between the Home Office and the Foreign Office. T felt veny strongly that something should be done to improve them and to bring the Home Office more into the Foreign Office picture. Difficulties in our work constantly arose through the Home Office being unaware of what was going on in the Foreign field. Burley agreed and said that it would be a difficullt matter to overcome. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 ARRIL QO10 21st Beptember David Stewart is going back to the Middle East. I told him my views about our proposed withdrawal from Beirut and Greece. 176. At the J.I.C. to-day I put forward a written suggestion about the preparation of a basic paper by the L.I.C. at Hong Kong. This was accepted and supported by the Colonial Office, who requested that the instruction shou go out from the Colonial Secretary to the Governor. Trafford Smith told me that Marston Logan is to be replaced by one, Juxon-Barton. He things that this vinl be a considerable improvement.. Juxon-Barton is a live wire and will push things around. he is a bit of a character and his manner is apt to be a little brusque. He is a retired Colonial Secretary and is slightly disgruntled because he waa not made a Governor. Brain announced that the Foreign Office representative at Tel Aviv is now ready to receive Service Attaches. We discussed our overseas paper with B.3 and Hollis's amendments. The paper was agreed; it goes down heavily against the creation of a new division. Dick told me that M.E. is anxious to remopen the case of EWER. He feels that this warranted by our success in spotting an active agent through a revision of the MONESS case. I said that I thought that before taking ant steps,W should try and get hold of somebody who knew EWER personally; ve could then get a better idea as to how to make our approach. Dick suggested Muggeridge,0 possibly Philip Jordan. Our next step will be to decide whether we should say anything in high querters and whether we should enliste the support of any Minister in speaking to EWER before we tackle him. My own view is that while we might have to say something to the P.M. about cr intentions, it would be better to approach EWER on our own level. It would certainly be less embarrassing and he might in consewuence be more COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 22nd September. 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 ApaiL 2O1O I had a meeting wiith Dick, John Irvine, F.J. and Thomas on our brief for the S.I.C. meeting in Paris on the 27th. The principal matter in which we are concerned is our own sabotage paper. TWo of the other papers mainly concern S.I.8., and others rellate to the future organisation of S.I.C. in its relations vith the Military Defence Organisation. There are suggestions that we should prepare for joint executive action in time of war. Our view is that, owing to the varying conditions and the different laws, and the fact that we shall be subject to the Government of the day, there is little to be done in this field, beyond getting each dher informed as to what action is contemplated. I gave our memo on overseas matters to the D.G. to-day. I apologised for having taken 80 long about it, and explained that we had gone into the matter with very great care. Although ve were unanimously against the creation of a new division, T hoped he would feel that we had taken this View in honest honest conviction and in no sense with any idea of being obstructive. It went without saying that whatever he decided, should give him the best service that we could. I then discussed oun recent decision to withdraw from Beirut and Greece. While T agreed ttla't our position there was difficullt to justify 177. on grounds of necessity, rather than desirablity, at this moment, it did not to my mind alter the principle involved in our representation on an overt basis on foreign territory. I was convinced that there were considerable edvantages to be derived from a close liaison on the spot between ourselves n touch with the local authorities and the S.I.S. representative. We could often confirm, deny, or develop the S.I.S. information, which they, by reason of their position, were not able to do. even if they had an indirect contact with someone in the Police. The D.G. agreed with this, but referred to our agreement with S.I.S. which frankly I did not feel had any real bearing on this point. The passag in our agreement to which he referred was the one which gave exclusive rights to S.I.S. to run agents in foreign territory. That was a point on which we were agreed, except in cases whether we both of us felt it was more expedient that we should nun an agent. Dick told me of a new development in the atomic field, which was disclosed confidentially at Friday'e meeting of the J.I.C. when the D.G. was present. THIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 AfRi 010 Hill came to talk to me about the Geneva Convention, the final terms of which have now been agreed. The most that we can do is to enter a reservation on a question of interpretation. We discussed various points and came to the conclusion that there was no need for us to enter any reservations. The document was on the whole satisfactory and should not hamper us seriously in any future conflict. 23rd September. came to see me. He i's going out to Basra, where he will effect security liaison with the oil companies, under the diredtion of Ashmore saw the D.G. yesterday and poured out a tale of woe about D.S.0. Cyprus. The D.G. has asked Dick to look into the matter both nov and when he goes to the Middle East. The D.G. told me that Johnson, has just returned. There is apparently a good deal of trouble in the police in the Malayan Union due to Gray's 3omewhat brusque manner and his tendency to mllitarise the police. Gurney has made the suggestion that the D.G. should go out to Kuala Lumpur for a month and try and smooth out the difficulties. The D.G. said that he was quite prepared to do this if it were thought that he could be of any use. 178. There has been a new approach to SHAG by The preliminanies to this meeting are quite fantastic. SHAG is to look out for a chalk Z which will be placed on a telegraph post near his home. Thiswill mean that if he can manage it he is to attend a meeting at that spot at a given hour on the same day. To confirm he will be there, he has to turn the 2 into an H. The man meeting him will be smoking a cigarette and have a rubber band on his little finger. SHAG will bring out his snuffbox and take a pinch of snuff - no conversation will pass. The second meeting will take place at a different rendezvous with another person, when the same pantomime will be gone through. The visitor will ask for a light, then offer SHAG a cigaretter, when the latter will reply that he takes snuff. This wilt be the all-clear for further conversation. COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT. RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 2lth September. 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS CT1958 A0RI DOO Truman made his announcement last night, which was published in the evening papers, that the Russians now had the atomic bomb. This was a sotry which was given out at the J.I.C. last Eriday week under a melodramatic bond of secreoy. Hayter cleared the room of secretaries and then said that if there was anybody present who could not keep what was going to be said to himself, would he. kindly leave the room. Trafford Smith, who is not accustomed to this kind of thing, felt gravely embarrassed and wondered what was coming! It was then announced by Perrin of atomic Energy that the explosion of an atomic bomb had occurred in Russia, it is believed somewhere in the vicinity of Lake Baikal. Apparently for some time both the Americans and ourselves have beeh doing aerial reconnaissances; the aeroplanes carry a kind of filter which will catch any particles of radio-active substances, which can subsequently be identified. They were patrolling somewhere in the North Pacific in Septerber and obtained partiches which have been definitely identified as plutonium. On discovering this, we sent out patrols somewhere in the vicinity of Norway and obtained similar results. It is, I beliere, alleged by the scientists tha't they can more or leas date and locate the explosion from these particles, and that the evidence is entirely convincing. I had always understood that seismographs were being used for this purpose, but I now learn that they have proved unsatisfactory, in that it is almost impossible to distinguish between an atomic explosion and an earthquak I gather that not very long ago we picked up particles which were, in fact, the result of a test bomb tn the U.S., about thich the U.S. had not informed us. When we told them, they owned up. There appears still to be some slight doubt as to whether the scientist are right in their conclusions, and even Whether all of those moat qualified to speak have had the opportunity of examining the evidence. Knbiing absolutely nothing about the matter, but with a certain experience of scientists and their tendency to go back on their theories, I cannot help being lightly seeptical about the whole thing. There followed a discussion within the J.I.C. as to what should be done about informing those most concerned. 'o' seemed to think that only the Chief's of Staff should be told, under a bond of the utmost secrecy. The D.G. thought that the P.M. ought to be told at once. This was at first shot down, and ultimately supported by Packand and agreed by the Committee. 'c' said that as he had in the first instance btsined the information through his contact with atomic energy in the U.S., he would be prepared to go down to Chequers imediately with Perrin. There were various developments during the following week. discovered on visiting the P.M. that he had already been in telegraphic communication wiith Trurnan, who was 179 anxious to disclose the information to the American people. We were apparently obposed to this, at any rate until the evidence had been more closely sifted. Perrin told us on Friday that it had been impossible to hold the sricans and that Harwell, including FUCHS and PEIERLS, would now know how the ommation had been obtained. He thought we might like to now this in case we got any reactions. Truman, I suppose, vas anxious to make political capital out of the event and sorbring the Americans to an even great consciousness of the importance of being on the alert and building up Europe. He may be politically right in doir this,bu if by any chance it is not true, the Russians will conclude that it is a Machiavellian move to boost and justify rearmament. So far the Russians have not officially claimed to have discovered the atomie bomb, although there was some refer nce to the matter, I think by Zhdanov, at a meeting of the Cominform some time ago, but this would have been before the explosion actually tool place. It is ifricult to see how this matter could have been kept secret here for very long, sinde alll J.I.C. basic papers were written on the basis that the Russians would not have the atomic bomb before 1952, or at the earliest 1950; this in spite of the fact that when the Smythe report was published by the Americans in, I think, 19446, it was estimated that any power which had the necessary raw materials and labour capacity should be able to make the bomb in a period of three to five years. The papers will, of course, have to be revise THIS IsA COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED NDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 PRie DOio Arising out of the discussion at the J.I.0. on the atomic bomb, there seems to have been a suggestion that we should get rid of SAMARIN at once; although exactly why this step should be taken is rot clear. here is no more reason for getting rid of SAMARIN than many other Soviet citizens in this country. Dick satv Victor last night. The lattershares my scepticism about the Russian atorie bomb. He also takes the view veny strongly largely, I think, based on convernations with Duff, that t resurgence of Right Wing parties in Germany is the most serious menace at the moment. He thinks it miht Well lead B tie-up with the Rusaiana. Winston, I gather, takes a contrary view. 26th September. I left for Paris with F.J and Thomas to attend the S.I.C. meeting. met us and we dined wit h him was very expansiv bout Anglo-Franch relations. He apologised tor peing so frank, but said that ne and others were seriously concerned by the way in which we were drifing apart Is applied both in the economic sphere and the sphere of defence. Devaluatio ad just taken place and vas evidently an extremely sore point; it was not so nuch that we had devallued, but that ve had done s0 without prior consultation vith the French and that our figure of 280 was far too low. He said that there vere similar things going on in the economic sphere, for example, the French ad to some extent in pre-war days regarded Jugoslavia as oneof their trade preserves, but now, in spite of all the machinery that existed for economic 80. co-operation, the British went ahead and did deals with Tito without prior consultation with the French. Would it not be possible to share things out a bit? In the defence field there was clearly a serious rub between de Lattre de Tassigny and Monty. France saw herself as the central figure of European defence, provided she could be given the necessary assistance and provision of arms. There seemed to be a tendency to withhold the lates types. France had evidently hoped that she and Britain woulld have gone hand-in-hand to the Americans on these matters, but she now realised that we were more or less joined with them in dictating to France. To all this there was very little that I could say, unless I had replied that France, although showing some slight recovery, seemed to be in the same sort of political mesa as she was before the war, had a million and a half Communists spread throughout Government Departments and war industries, and 130 Commuhist Deputies in the House. There was a consequer reluotance both by ourselves-and far more so by the Amerians - to put all our eggs in the French basket. We had come more and more to depend financially on America, and indeed had concentrated on getting the Americane to realise their responsibilitie which were bound to increase as the British Empire disintegrated. This meant that in all matter of defence our secrets were SO integrated that it was difficult to say what in them was British and what was American. Information and weapons could not, therefore, be released without American concurrence. The Americans were far away, and many of those in Washington who were in control had little understanding of European affairs; they were in consequence inclined to take an extremely rigid view of all matters of security. In some circles it even went so far as to suggest that American secrets should not be developed in Britain,as she might well be overrun before the Americans could come to her assistance. What we are suffering from now is a lack of plans between the urgency of building up Europe to defend herself and the needs of security. At the moment everything seemed to be too heavily weighted on the side of security. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOGUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 27th September. 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DO0 I attended the Conference of the S.I.C. The two important discussions centred round Irvine's retention as full-time Secratary and our paper on sabotage. The French and the Dutch were anxious to Irvine full-time, and the Chairman rightly remarked that if this was their idea they must define precisely what they expected him to do. Berthaud of the Surete was worried about a plan for integration on an international scale of those bodies represented on the S.I.0. if a war were to break out in the near future. He thought that at least the Committee ought to have a plan. I said that while we agreed in principle, we did not think it possible to make such a plan, unless it waa to be normore than a paper scheme, until the integrati of the various Services hadoccurred on a ational basis. We ourselves were advancing towards some such scheme, but we did not think that ve should have completed our task for another six months. The Dutch said that they had completed their scheme, which. incidentally, was untrue, and manifestly SO since the Department of Justice is not even represented on the S.I.0. although they control a large proportion of the forces of law and order in Holland. The French, supported by the Dutch, said that it would be a pity to wait for integration, which might take anything up to two years, and that a useful purpose would be served by Irvine drafting a plan We nad rnatiy, some retuctantiy, to agree to this. It may not be a bad thing, since it may emphasise the importance of integration and demonstrate how impossible it is to make progress until this has been achieved. As regards our sabotage-paper I sensed a slight note of defeatism. explained that while that part of the paper which related to action against subversive elements in time of war would naturally vary in the different countries, and be subject to a decision by the Government of the day, I felt that the Committee might find certain of the measures of a preventive capacit) for adoption in every country. I explained that we had begun by the classification of vulnerable points, in order to save manpower for external guards and confine it to those places of real importance, and that we were now establishing touch with the various installations and factories to work out a plan for internal protection in time of war. The Dutch, as usual, said that they had already adopted the British line, although they had not made as much progress as they wished. They felt, however, that they would inevitably be overrun in the first fortnight and that the Russians, wishing to use their various installations, would be unlikely to blow them up. The French said that they had a plan, but that it had not progressed very far, and gave the impression that our proposals Would be difficult to adopt and presented an enormous task y to which they had SO far given little considera- tion. They seemed to think that the whole question was a military one and that the Government of the day would have to decide when war broke out how they could best dispose of their manpower. The impression given was that they would throw all their forces into the front line and leave their vulnerable points to go up in the air behind them. However, the matter is to be given further study. We all had lunch with M. Moch, Minister of the Interior, who made a speech giving his blessing to our labours. I talked to him afterwards About Germany, on which he appears to have very strong views. He is quite convinced that the Germans will do exactly what they did after the last war and that it will be necessary to maintain forces of occupation for many years to come. 28th September. F.J.and Thomas returned to London and I left with for the French zone to attend the manoeuvres. We flew to Saarbrucken in one of the S.D.E.C.E. 'planes and drove from there to a place called Birkenfeld, which was the H.Q. for guests attending the manoeuvres. In charge was a the S.D.E.C.E. representative in the French zone. He had with him several other members of his staff, an American,Capta Greenberg of G-2 American zone, and a Lieut.-Colonel Cunningham-Cave, Intelligence Division, Germany. Everybody was extremely friendly, the food was quite good, but washing and sanitation characteristically bad! There was in fact hardly anyweter- either hot or cold, due to the drought. THIS IS COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 29th September. 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 AORIL DLOIO gave us a broad idea of the purpose of the operations and of the new scheme for the use of the Services Speciaux. Later we went over.. to the H.Q. of the Arbitrage where ve met who went into furtuer Details on the Intelligence side and told us about the progress of the battle He had arranged for us to go on to some spot about 100 km. away where we would see a parachute landing of guerillas. This operation, whi ch took place at dusk, was extremely impressive and was, in fact, conducted by the reservists who had acted as members of "Reception Committees" during the war. The plane came over, dropped the ground signals given with torches, and dropped four men from a height of a few hundred feet right on to the target. The 'plane was in touch with a wireless telephone set, provided by the "Reception Committee". I talked with one of the officers. He said the whole thing was most realistic; he had sat out for hours waiting for parties of this sort during the war and also for supplies. He inad many disappointments. Sometimes he would go out ten times before a landing was effected. He was fulll of praise for the fortitude of the various peasants who assisted in these operations. "You have no idea" he said "how buoyed up they were after a successful landing; they were prepared for another ten failures". After this operation we dined, some twenty of us, at a local Inn, which had received no warning. We had excellent wine, hors d'oeuvres, steaks,( portion being more than a week's ration in England!) with potataes and beans, followed by an enormous jam omelette - when we had finished this the Germans produced another of equal size.! About one 'clock we motored another 50km. to a spot where a "pick-up" operation was to take place. The plane came over about mianight, but owing to a ground mist they were inable to land. We motored back to Birkenfeldt, which we reached at about 2.30 in the morning, had an enormous meal and went to bed. 30th September. We started off again at about 9 o'clock, first to Baumholder, the H.Q of the Arbitrage, and then to the H.Q. of the "Red" Forces, to the north of the Mosul. We met there the British Military Attache and his staff, McNab, and listened to a speech by General Guillaumeon the progress of the operations. The British forces were complimented on their tenacity which in the past had stood France in such good stead. anks were expected in the area, but did not in fact show up while we were there. Before the war was in charge of Eounter-intelligence at the Deuxieme Bureau and visited us on several occasions. He now commands the Cinquieme Division Blindee. We moved on to Adenau, which was the H.Q. of the commanding General and also that of the Services Speciaux, who gave us an account of their operations. After a cooktail party we proceeded back to Birkenfeld, some 150 k.m., reaching there between two and three in the morning. We again had a large meal and got to bed sometime after three. The operations were concluded that evening. ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION Ist October. 3(4) OF APERBLLC PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DO(0 We went to Baumholder where we had a surnming up on the Interrigence side from and his staff. At four o'clock we returned to Baumholder for the critique, which lasted until 8.45 with one short interval of ten minutes, sitting on extremely hard seats in a very stuffy atmosphere! At leas fifteen Generals spoke, who represented all the various arms of the Service,an the Allies also made epeeches, including the British General who emphasised the enormous importance of British officers being able to speak French. Finally, we came to the head of the Academy (?) of Aeronautics, who gave a highly technical dissertation which was just too much for everybody; everyone started to talk to his neighbour and there was a general buzz going on, which made it even more difficult to hear what was being said. Finally, the General said "pour terminer", at which a general gasp of relief went round the hall! There followed only de Lattre de Tassig who let himself go in a somewhat emotional speech. He came up and spolte t us in the interval; he hinted at the lack of assistance and co-operation with ourselves, which had been mentioned by on the first evening that I arrived in France. He referred to it as: "Un question tres delicat", about which perhap's he ought not to speak. He then went on to relate his apprehensions about the Germans, and in particular the German youth. At one time had had aayoung Nazi prisoner; he had released this boy and send him to Heidelberg. He evidently maintained close touch with him and was appalled by what he was told of the rising generation. At nine o'clock we got into our car and motored to Baden-Baden, which we reached at 2.30 a.m. to find an enormous meal and Germans dancing ttendance at the Bellevue Hotel. This had beem arranged by de Castellaine an extremely nice young British Officer who acts as liaison officer for Int. Div. in the French zone and attended the operations. Baden-Baden is almost untouched. Karlsruhe, through which we went, had clearly had it in a big way. 2nd Octobe. We went to the aerodrome, but were told that there was no possibility of going to Limoges owing to a breakdown of one of the S.D.E.C.E' 'planes. There was, however, an 0ld Jukers 88, tied up with bit of string, which would take us to Paris. We went to look at this 'plane and saw astride the port engine a technician who was trying to wind it up with a crankshaft. After repeated attempts he sank back exhausted and decided to try the central engine. In this he was more successful and, having generated sufficient electricity. eventually got the port and starboard engines going! had rather wisely decided to go by train, so and I embarked with a number of Services Speciaux reservists who had been taking part in the operations. Two of them had been responsible for the "assassination" of General Malgutie, by cabturing an ambulance and driving in in charge of a suspected spy. As soon as they got inside. the General's office they pulled out their bombs, and the Arbitrage decided that the General had been "assassinated" and certain members of his staff severely "wounded".. Added excietment had been caused the General's Headquarters by a bogus rumour that de Latter de Tassigny had arrived. In consequence, everybody was running about trying to brush the last bit of dust off his uniform! We started off eventually, but after about ten minutes flying it was discovered that the automatic pilot was not working. We descended rather rapidly and for a moment I thought we were going to make a forced landing. Eventually we arrived back at Baden-Baden: the mechanics got busy and we were off again in a quarter of an hour and this time had a successful flight to Le Bourget, where I took leave of who were going down by train to Limoges. THIS IS A COPY Erd October. ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION I returned to London by air from Paris. 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 APRIL 20(0 Lth October. We had an Appointments Board this afternoon, with a certain number of promising candidates. 5th October. At to-day's J.I.C. meeting we were told that owing to the recent disclosures about the Russians having discovered the atomic bomb, it was estimated that they might have as many as 250 by 1956-57. This will, of course, throw all J.I.C. appreciations out of date. I gave the meeting a brief account of my visit to France. 134. I lunched with Corin, Burt and two Norwegians. One named and the other The former was here during the war and is now head of Intelligence in Norway, and the latter is in business here but acts as an agent for in the interrogation of Masters of Norwegian ships returning from visits to ports behind the iron curtain. organisation is smalll and he has not got much in the way of resources. He runs a few agents and for the rest is largely dependent upon the police, with whom there is a good liaison, in spite of the somewha crude methods which they employ when making enquiries on behalf of Intelligence. The Norwegians have no powers of interception unless they make a special case, which has to go before a Magistrate. Although the request can be made in camera, there are sometimes other people on the Bench of somewhat doubtiuill political reliability - a factor which has to be carefully considered before making an application. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. AeRik 2010 The Norwegian Communist Party numbers about 17,000, but in a war with Russia where the issue is clear, he would put the hard core at something between 500 and 1500. In the event of war these people would all be arrested at least twenty-foure hours before the balloon went up. Steps would also be taken to remove undesirables from vulnerable points, which have been classified. These points would be provided with external tuards from the Norwegian Home Guard, and plans have already. been concerted with the managements on matters of internal security. As an additional precaution, agents have been planted at most of these points in order to establish the identity of undesirables. The Communist Party have apparently a sabotage plan, which not only involves damage to communications and vulnerable points, but also the kidnapping.o certain officinls. Certain Communists leave the country periodically, it is believed for Berlin, where they receive some sort of training. The Norwegians also have information about two sabotage schools behind the iron curtnin, one of which is alleged to be near Leningrad and the other near Warsaw. Satellite Legntions are fairly aetive, and it is thought that the RusBians worl mostly through them. The Soviet Legation is engaged largely in collating information obtained frorn newspapers and technical journals, and from reports which, it ie presumed, they receive from certain members of their staff of to hundred who move about the country ostensibly on trade duties. No attempt is apparently made to conceall the fact of 9 lively connectin between certain memberg of the Communist Party and the Rushian Legution. These members visit the Legation quite openly almost eveny day. /75 After the Lunch with the Norwegians, I spoke to Burt about an S.B. officer attending the S.B. meetings of District 6, and secondly, about our giving lectures to 3.B. as ive had done to other Police Forces. He personally was in favour of both, but he obvioually wanted to sound out Tommy Thompson.on the question of our lecturing to S.B. I made it quite clear to Burt that we did not wish to appear in the role of "teaching our Grandmother to suck eggs", but that at the same time T thought there might be a number of S.B. officers who would learn something td their advantage in listening to our speakers on the Communist Party, and maybe other subjects. I had listened to some of these lectures myself and had found them extremely interesting. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Alei A B.J discloses that the Brazilians got advance information about devalustion. The indictions are that the infomation was imparted by Anevrin Bevan to it the Bank of England, who subsequently leaked. 1S a notoriously unreliable person who gave us a great deal of troublle during the War. 126. 6th October. I spoke to the D.G. about the atomie energy leakage. I said that if it was decided to use the Official Secrets Act in a big way, T thought we ought to intervene. The Aot was designed rimarily for our purposes and if there was any question of its being brought into contempt mpt.oridebated! in the House of Commons, we ought to weigh in. Vickery tells me that things are hotting up for Krishna MENON. He himself has complained to Nehru about all the scandal that is going on about and threatened to resign. Nehru, I believe, is taling the line that if he feels that way he should relinquish his post, but the matter will probably be deferred until Nehru's visit here, which takes place within the next few days. 7th October. I had a meeting with S.L.B., D.0. C.2, 0.1 and B.1.A. on the question of Vulnerable Points. It has been decided that a list of these points should be given to the Chief Constables according to their areas, and that they should be asked to list members of the C.P. who are employed in these places. There is an A. and B.list; we are not concerned with the A. list, which consists of the factories where secret work is going on - for these cases the l1st would be made by us l1th October. For the minutes of the D.G. meeting held to-day, see folder in D.D.G.Sec's tray. Barnett called and was introduced to a number of people in the office and also inspected Mrs. Grist's outfit. He appeared to be much impressed. There is, I think, no doubt that he will give us his full support. This is important, as he will be responsible for all of Safferye activities. Birchall is going; he will be succeeded by Little, and Barnett will be his Deputy. 12th October. I gave a lecture to the I.D.O. on the usual lines. I explained that I was covering the war period again, as owing to the interrogation of our opposite numbers ve had been able to form a fairly accurate judgement as to the effectiveness or otherwise of the various methods that we had employed. VicemAdmiral Sir Charles Daniel is the Commndant. I had to answer a good many questions after the lecture which were mainly directed to the activities of the Ruseians and the Cormunist Party. We had a long meeting at Broaaway on our joint war planning. We were generally agreed on the setting up of a joint theatre Becurity Service, which, apart from having access on occasions to THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 241 QE THE pIBLIC REcOBDS 1887 the Supreme Commander, should work under the Assistant Chief of Staff, G.2, who would also control the I(b) staff. This would ensure that we got the executive assistance that we needed, and would prevent any suggestion that we were operating as a private army. was not entirely in agreement with this - I am certain that he is wrong. We disagreed about the existence of a ounter-espionage section in the S.I.S. theatre of organisation. The purpose of this section was apparntly to run C.E. agents outside the theatre. Jack Easton made a tremendous point of this, and it vas obvious that the S.I.S. planners and the Area Controllers had already put this forward -- and, I think, got some measure of agreement from the Military. AB Dick explained, there was little point in our having an integrated organisation with S.I.S. to deal with counter-espionage and security, if there was yet another section doing the same thing wholly under S.I.8. auspices; this was bound to create confusion. My own feeling was that such cases as were suggested by Easton would normally be reported by the S.C.I. units direct to London, and that in any case they would be extremely few and far between. S.I.S. are to reconsider this matter. We then went on to discuss integration in S.I.M.E. and S.I.F.E. Easton complained - obviously at the instigation of his area Controlle r'S - that S.I.M.E. and S.I.F.E. wene tot producing very much in the way of reports about subversive activities in their area, and that they did not meet S.I.S. requirements. He seemed to have a complete misonception of what S.I.M.E. and S.I.F.E. did. Kellar pointed out to him, in no uncertain terms, that S.I.M.E. and S.I.F.E. were dependent on the one hand on S.I.S. and on the other hand local Police Forces, whom they stimulat to produce intelligence. If intelligence was not forthcoming from these two bodies, there waa nothing that S.I.M.E. and S.I.F.E. could collate. S.I.S. had manifestly failed to give us any information of any value about Comrnunist activities in China, or in the Far East, and we, on the other hand, had been having great difficulties with the Malayan and Hong Kong Police organisations, but some progress was. now being made. Easton seemed to think that we ought to' produce intelligence on general trends, rather of the kind that he read in special articles in The Times. Kellar pointed out to him that we were not there with that purpose; what we really wanted was detailled intelligence on counter- espionage matters which would enable uS to provide the Defence Committee and Commanders-in-Chief with something of an Order of Battle. We could not perform this task unless there was a considerable improvement both in the volume and quality of the information that we received from S.I.S. There arose out of this talk a feeling that Easton did not really understand what integration meant. He did not seem to realise that we had the task of stimilating both Colonial Police Forces and Police Forces in foreign territory as regards strategic defence importance, and that we also had a great deal fo sell them on the purely security side. Integration can only take place. in SD far as B. Division matters are concerned. Thus, both the Head and Deputy of S.I.M.E. and S.I.F.E. must always remain Security Service officers. It is to be hoped that Dick White will be able to iron this out when he visits the Middle East and Far East with Jaek Easton next month. Ffoulkes came to see me. He is just returning to Egunt. asked him what he thought of Jenkins' organisation. He gaveTms I Arispily sketoh ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 2/1 AF THE p1gIC Dcenone of the agents which were being runs He thought thet the organisation, on the whole, was useful and could be built up into something better. There was no doubt that we had to pay a lot to the Egyptian Police to be allowed to remain unmolested in Cairo. At the same time, we got some quite useful information from them. C.E. information from S.I.S. reports was practically vallueless, and they were clearly employing a number of agents who were MAUVE, if not DEEP PURPLE We did not see their political information, but they had now been induced to submit their O.E. inf'ormation te us for vetting before circulation. Both Ffoulkes and Emery believed that if we cease to operate in Egypt, S.I. aotivities will be cleaned up by the Egyptian Police: they know about their operations, but allow them to go on by vintue of the fact that we pay certain high-ranking Police officials. 13th Octoher. Ronnie Reed came to see me about the case of Dorothy WIOODMAN. He is anxious for her to be interviewed and asked whether she can enlighten us as to the identity of ANDRE HARRY II. The matter is somewhat Rellicate as she is Kingsley Martin's mistress, and also closely associated with a number of Labour M.Ps. The D.G. has directed that we should approach the Yard and suggest to Howe that he should detail a police officer to conduct the intervidw in conjunction with Skardon. I had a long discussion with Dicl and Alex about the role of our overseas stations. Alec feells very strongly tha't we should first decide what countries in the area of S.L.M.E. and S.I.F.E. are of strategic importance. This is really a matter for the Defence Committee. We should then consider whether we can: (a) improve the local Securit) Service, (b) give it C. Division advice, and (c+) improve the quality of the information by overt liaison and develorment on the spot. It should be on the basis of these three points that we should press S.I.S. for foreign representation. S.1.S. are too inclined to think purely on the lines of colleetion Df information. What ve want to do is to bbuilld up, for example, the Levant States to a consciousness of their security responsibilities and to improve their general machinery. In this way the flow and quality of the information they supply will be enhanced. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIO RECORDS ACT 1958 APRIL Do(o 179. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIO BECORDS ACT 1958 PRI OO Michael Burley came to say that he is being transferred to Jeuvenile Delinquency, and that he would be succeeded by an ex-member of the sudan Civil Service who has had about six months experience in the Home Office. Thia is certainly unfortunate as Burley has been a great ally and had the advantage of knowing this Department inside out. I said that if he liked I would speak to Newsam, but an he felt that he would have to move sooner or later ir he wag to get on in the Home Office, it seemed inadviaable to do anything. l4th October. Breffitt, Chief Constablle of Sussex, looked in. He was being given a tour round the office. He is a pleasant person and is Prepared to do his best to help us in any he can. It was imphessed upon him that Brighton, owing to its District Party Comittee, was qute important from our point of view. Chere is quite an interesting dispatch in from Sir Brian Robertson, in which he outlines his policy in Germany. He seems to have a very balanced view of the situation and reallises the possibility of a resurgence of Right wing elements; which might in the long run ally themselves with Russia. As I see the position,ng that a Federal Government has been established in Bonn, we are likely within a period of two years, or less, to have lost virtually all control. Everything will follow quite logically after the establishment 01 a Government; they already want a Gendarmerie, which they must have if they ane to be responsible for law and order. They will want the Gendarmenie to be armed, and they already want a Federal Security oP Intelligence Bureau to keep them informed of impending trouble, and to indicate how they can use their resources to the best advantage. The democratisation of the Police on the British model is clearly so allien to all German thought that i't tucan hardly last very long. There are already three small na tionaliat partiee who will, before long, get their foot in the door, but in any case it may be accepted as natural that the Germans will use all the powers that are given to them to terminate the occupation and to regain their lost ternitories. Any other conception would be hopelessly unrealistio. The only chance is to endeavour to harneBF they into western Union, although there are clearly going to be di iffioultiea about this, particularly when it comes to questions like the French oceupatio of the Saar, and the mope difficult gueation of the Ruhr. If the Germans become disilllusioned about their prospects in the Weait, play they a may well consider an unholy alliance with the Russians, who could Dine at the trump card in offering them a readjustment of the oder-Neisse exxpense of the Poles. 190. Ve have been asked to supply a Chairman for the Atlantic Pact Security Committee, consisting of ourselves, the Dutch and the Americans, in Washington. 17th October. I gave a short talk to Police officers from overseas, who have been taking a course in this office. I concentrated on trying to impresa upon them the important relation that security has to investigation. Sams came to say goo-bye. He is retiring at the age of sixty with great regrets. Colonel Fforde, who is attending the overseas course, had a short talk with me. He iB now Commissioner of Police in the Cambia. He seems to get on well with Stephens, for whom he clearly has an admiration. He dertainly realises that there is certainly much to be done in the matter of building up the Gambia Police Force. I tried to impress upon him the importance of getting as much ground work as possible on indigenous move- ments, since although they might not be active in an international: sense now. it tvas highly probable thet they might become So in time of year, if not before. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 18th October. For minutes of D.G. meeting, see folder in D.D.G. Sec's tray. I hnd a long talk with Leighton about Malaya. It is quite clear the the Malayan Pollice have no real conception of what they ought to be at. They are still without any order of battle and do not yet know the names D1 a1l the members of the Executive Committee of the Malayan Communist Party, who are actually controlling the guerilla operations in Malaya. Coveney of Special Branch visited the Colony a short time ago and made a report, which 'Connell. Head of the Speciall Branch, passen on to Grey, with the remark that everythng they said had already been put up with suggestions for its implementation, but had received no support from the Commissioner. Grey sent this letter back. telling O'Connell that he Would be well advised to withdraw it. O'Connell replied by sending a letter in even more emphatic terms and then tendered his resignation. It was this inciden't which had apparently given rise to the Suggestion that the D.G. should go out to Malaya and made recommendations about the future of the whole Police Force. Briages and the Prime Minister turned down th: porposal, and now Sir Alexander Maxwell and Ferguson, Chief Constable of Kent, are to go out. Leighton told me that even with the resources at their disposal, the Special Branch did not seem to have much idea about what they ought to be doing. They were extremely co-operative as far aa he WaS concerned, and on one occasion when he was looking through some of their papers, he spotted a man who was clearly of C.P. executive status. He pointed this out, but nothing vas done for a couple of weeks, when a lette was sent to Penang; no reply was received to this lletter and no reminder was sent for a further period of six weeks, by which time, of course, all 191. traces of the man had gone. Leighton had also suggested that the beat way of discovering the whereabouts of important members of the C.P.. was it keep some check upon their families, either by observation or interception but nothing had been done about thi.s. This being 8o, I personally db not feel that 'Connell has very much to complain about. Nor do I think that Maxwell and Ferguson are going to improve matters. The fact is that Grey knows nothing about S.B. and intelligence work and would be quite prepared to admit it. He is probsoly equally certain that there is nobody in his organisation qunlified to set up an effective organisation If there wene such a person, he would give him carte blanche and his full backing. A man like Jack Morton, or Macdonald, could get things going in about six weeks. and someone of that ealibre is required. Leighton did not impress me unfavourably, although he is not a very attractive personality. We gave a party for Burt and Ronnie Howe. the ex-B.5 officers, Senior Officers here. The whole thing seemed to go with asing. The party was to celebrate Burt's promotion to Commandant. 19th October. Viv rang me about MINCEMEAT. There has been B request from the Admniralty for information: they have been asked by the War Graves Commiission about MINCEMEAT'S next-of-lin. Ve are, of course. the "next-o kin"' as we sent a wreath, but I cannot remember whether any names were put on it. THIS IS A COPY 20th October. ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED Petrie looked in for a talk. IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 ARIL 20( I had a discussion with Dick, Haldane Porter and Derek hambrem about Dick's visit to the Middle and Far Bast. We agreed generalls that integration with S.I.3. could cover only B. Division tatters. C. Division matters in the area and in the adjacent countries would have to be the exclusive responsibility of ourselves.and we should have, moreover, to petain the position of Head and Deputy Head or the organisation I urged Dick not to lose sight of the fact that there was a lot to be said for having our representative in touch with local Police ForceB sitting alongside the S.1.8. representative, since only in this vay could S.I.S. infomation be checked and ampllified on the spot before it was widely disseminated. It seemed to me to be in the interests of intelligence generally that MAUVE o1 incomplete reports should be checked at the outset rather than when they came to be integrated inS.I.M.E. and S.I.F.E. 2lth October. T had a long talk with Maedonald about the Malayan Police. He sai that neither in the Malayan Union non in Singapore had the S.E Bs any proper conception of their tasks. Gray did not himself know how to organise a Speciall Branch, but was reoeptive of ideas; his trouble was that he had noboay whom he considered really sIfficiently competent to organise the show on the right lines. It was a thing that Jack Morton and Macdonalld inimself could do in the matter of a few weeks, but a good deal of dead Wood would have to be Cleared out: 192 ceexeX I attended the Vice Chiefs' meeting to discuss the organisation of security in the Western Zone by the German authorities. Sir John Ddelstone admitted that his committee knew very little about the subject; all they really had vas General Robertson's telegram, to the terrs of which they were asked to agree. I explained the position veny briefly, and SO did Dean of the Foreign Office. The Vice Chiefs agreed to approve General Robertson's plan, but said that they would like the views of the J.T.C. I talked to Dean afterwards he entirely agreed with mne that the Bublic Safety system of decentralised Police Forces was entirely alien to the German conception, and tha before very long the Germans were certain to revert to the old system, by which all political matters were run by Seetion la (3) of the German Police at Land level. COPY ORIGINAL UUUUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF TF PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 AfRiL D01o -0e5ohan For minutes of the B.G. meeting held to-day, see folder in D.D.G, sec's tray. The extent to which information on the International Corrmunist Movement is being collated and disseminated, for one reason on another, by a whole host of different bodies, has readhed a somewhat critical stage. Something will have to be done to rationallise the position. We did draft a letter to Hayter some time ago, but it was withheld in order to see whether our improved relations with I.R.D. would clarify things. This has not been the case, and we are now proposing to send another letter on slightly different lines. I went to see Howe and Burt about the case of Dorothy WOODMAN. Howe agreed inprinciple to her interrogation by an officer of S.B. B. in conjunction with Skardon. It was arranged that the general backround of of Dorothy WOODMAN and the modus operandi should be the subject of further discussion between Burt and Skardon. 173 Howe told me tha't the Yard were having a spot of bother with Kingsley MARTIN, on account of an article which had appeared in the eW Statesman abusing the Police for the part they had played in suppressing disturbances at a Communist meeting. The Home Secretary had switten to Kingsley MARTIN, asking for the name of his nforrant and suggesting that he should appear at a full enquiny. Kingsley MARTIN was hedging. Meanwhile. Burt had rather cleverly discovered the identity of the informant. I also discussed with Burt and Howe the two points which I had previously put to Burt about our lecturing to S.B. and S.B. attending District 6 meetings. Burt told me that he had, as requested by me, sounded the ground; it was distinctly unfavourable and there Was clearly a feeling that it would be somewhat derogatory for S.B. officers to be lectured on Cormunism. Burt said that he did not agree, but that I had asked him to find out and he had done so. I said that if this feeling existed, it was much better to forget about the whole thing, although I thought it was regrettable. I said the lectures were extremely good and that I personally had learned quite a lot from them. With regard to District 6, it seemed to me a pity that somebody from .B. did not meet his colleagues who were working in Police Districts in the Metropolitan Area. We had hoped that he Would contribute something to the meeting. Howe vas of the opinion that something ought to be done and that the difficulty iught be got over by the Commissione attending the lecture. I did not press the matter and do not expect to heur any more about it. Roger and Cuthbert Hesketh came to see me about Roger's magnum opus the GARBO story. It Was agreed that at the moment distribution should be limited to L.C.S., S.I.S, and ourselves. The remaining-copiesouldb kept for distribution a8 and when the occasion arose! THIS ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 26th October. 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 ARIL 20o Tolson came to see me at the request of Keith Randal of the Security Section of Int. Div. Tolson was worried about General Robertson'g telegram, which suggested that the Special Branches of the German Police should not in future be used for political purposes. The Security Seetion ha: expressed strong views about the retention of these Branches, but Charles Haydon had refused to go back to Robertson. The Security Section wanted the S.Bs retained, for the reason that we are building up S.Bs in the Police in t is country. Firatly, they want them to collect information cn the ground locally, and secondly, they want to have a point in the Police where requests by the Lander Bureaux will be received and acted upon with understanding. I told Tolson that we had not commented an this aspect for two reasons. Firstly, we imagined that General Robertson's telegram had the approval of the Security authorities in Germany, and secondly, we had been asked by Baker of the Home Office to keep Public Safety's decentralised lice Forces clear of political activities. I told him about the meeting th the Vice Chiefs of Staff, and their request thet the hole matter should be considered by J.I.C. London. Normally one woulld have said that th vas a matter for J.I.C. Germany - at any rate in the first instance - but it seemed to me that in the present circumstances we might, by havin the matter considered in London first, get General Robertsonis proposals back on to the right llines. There was, I thought, a lophole for saying that it seemed a great pity that the S.Bs shoulld be alllowed to lapse, as they were, i THIS IS A COPY 194. ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION our view, an essential part of the whole security maclaine. THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 082o10 James Robertson came to tell me that FINGAL had written a letter to Martha, telling her that he was resigning from K.P.I.D. as he did not see any propect there and could not earn enough to keep his family. FINGAL had given James a copy of this letter, with an apology that he had had behaved rather like a schoolboy. James told him quite frankly thathe had, and that it would have been much better if he had told him of his intention beforehand. FINGAL made no bones about it that he had written the letter in order to bring na tters to a head, as he did not feel he could go on any longer in K.P.I.D. The wholle incident is typical of FINGAL'E rather tortuous mind. If he had expressed his feelings openly, there is no doubt that they would have been sympathetically dealt with. 27th October. Juxon Barton was brought round by Trafford Smith and Marston Logan, whom he is to replace. I gave him a general talk about the office. He seemed quite a likeablle character, and I gather from Trafford Smith that he is a live wire, which is more than can be said about old Marston Logan! The D.G. gave a lunch to who is going back to Washington. The wholle thing seems to have been a great Success. I had a talk with Holmes and congratulated him on the letter of appreciation received from the Admiralty about the recent sabotage encuiry which he hnd conducted on their behalf. He nad narroed the problem down to two individuals who had a grudge against the Captain of the ship, and to relieve their feelings had placed a bomb outside his cabin. It went off, but luckily nobody was hurt. I had quite a long talk with Mrs. Towndrow and congratulated her on her excellent performance when addressing Scottish Police Forces on the subject of Communism. She seems to have done extremely well and has earned the praise of .0. Glasgow and all others who were present, 28th October. Eunn Montague came to see me about MINCEMEAT, bringing with him his own personal file, from which it appears that the wreath was sent from "Pam and Dad". "Pam" was his girl friend. We can say that "Pam" is no longer traceable and, if necessary; that "Dad" has died and that we know of no other next-of-kin. We can also say that MINCEMEAT, who was gazetted, was attached to the Marine Corps for Special Duties. This 1s quite an accepted formula for saying that he ivas acting as an agent on a special mission. I think myself that it is better that we should say, at any rate at the outset, that "Dad" is untraceable, otherwise we shall get into difficulties about the date of his death the Death Certificate, and heaven knows what! T went to Bee General Browning, who told me he was worried about a man and was therefore closely associated with Prince Philip, whom "Boy" Brovning calllled KIRKLAND BBRIDGE who was raisine funds for the Navy Comforts Fund now looks after. There was some suggestion, I gather. that Derek Curtis-Bennett thought KIRKLAND BRIDGE'S record was a bad one and that it 19-5 had been thought during the war that he was using his position to obtain information, and even to transmit it to the enemy. I said that I was ite sure that if he had been doing anything of this kind, I should have remembered it; at the same time, he S emed to be the kind of person who might be financially,o otherwise undesirable. If Browning wished it, I Would ask the Police if they had any record. He said that he would be glad if I would do this. came over with a draft for the J.I.C. paper on on the Lander Bureaux. It was an extremely verbose and bad production, but ve managed to get it on to better lines. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 29th October. 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 GPRiL 2o10 Trafford Smith rang me up about an East African who wanted to visit this country, France and Italy. There was little doubt, owing to his ssociations , that he was on some sort of Communist mission. The Governor wanted to refuse him a passport. I explained that this was considered here as rather a drastic move, but that of course a passport was not granted as a right but as an act of grace; it could, therefore, be withheld by the Foreign Office. This had rarely been done in the past; the latest example I knew of was MOSLEY. As a half-way house I suggested that his passport might be limited to visit this country. There would, (ever, be nothing to prevent the man from going to Prague, if he could Dutain a visa. Equally, if a passport were refused, he could presumably get here as a stowaway; he could not be prevented from landing if he could prove that he v&'S a British subject. 31st October. Irvine is back from Washington. He said that things went pretty smoothly as the French delegate was most amenable and had plenipotentiary powers. The Americans on the whole, were quite reasonable but a bit slow in getting things referred back. A plan has been devised which will impose what is more or less the equivalent of METRIC on each of the Atllantic Pact zones and will be knownas: ns COSMIC. Agreement has been reached about the use of a cipher machine. There will be a peranent Secretariat Commission in Washington to deal with any ifferences between the zones. when the plan is finally approved, members of the Permanent Commission will be visiting the various zones and looking into the security measures in each individual country which is a party to the Pact. Hollis should be back by the end of the week. The D.G. discussed with John Marriott and myself the FUCHS case. The point has been reached Where FUCHS himself has come forward and informed Arnold that his father has been offered a Profeasorship in the Eastern Yone. 196. Arnold put it to FUCHS that this created a somewhat awkward situation - supposing the Russians got hold of his father, pressure might be exerted on FUCHS to disclose what he knew. FUCHS saw the implications of this and made a somewhat ambigious statement which might indicate that in certain circumstances, if his father's life were in danger, he might be induced to say more than he should. Meanwhile, an approach has been made to Washington suggesting that FUCHS might be interrogated on the basis of the GLINT material, vithout disclosing the source. The D.G's suggestion is that Arnold should have another should talio with be FUCHS, introduced; he might even be asked whether he had, or had had any in which the subject of connection with the Russians connections with them. In my vitv this needs very careful consideration. we What precisely do we want to achieve? I and should (b) have that thought: ie did not (a) wish that wanted to do anything to get FUCHS which might encourage him to leave this country It seems and to to seek me out of atomic energy. employment in the Eastern whether Zone we want of Germany, him to make or a in confession: Russia. were he to do even SO he questipnable could hardly be allowed to remain in atomic energy and he would clearly feel that there was no future for him either here or in the U.S.A.; the urge would therefore be to go to the Russians. If, on the other hand, on the basis of his statement about his father to Arnold, it were pointed out to him with the deepest regrets that it would be embarrassing oth for us and for him if he remained any longer in atomic energy, but that we would do our utmost to find him other suitable employment. This might possibly be the better course. The D.G. still seemed to think that Arnold should interrogate FUCHS further, and that our reall objective was to get evidence for a conviction. I should agree if I felt that such vidence woud be COPY forthcoming. ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 The D.G. announced at his meeting to-day that he ddecided to APRILQOID have an overseas division. It was the view of Bridges that a case for this had been made out. The D.G. said he had considered carefully who should be in charge and whille he pointed out to Bridges that he had able officers inthe department, both he and Brigges had felt that some high- powered officer with colonial experience was necessary. Briages had advised him to consult Lloyd, who had agreed with this view , and Lloyd had suggested, amongst others, Sir John Shaw, late Governor of Trinidad and Colonial Secretary in Palestine. He had seen Sir John Shaw who had accepted the post and would be coming in on January lst. He had also consulted Briages about a replacement for Charles on his retiement, and Briages had decided that this post could be adequately filled by Miss Constant. came to see me with a draft on the German Lander Bureaux for the J.I.C. It was extremely badly written and rather muddled. I gave him some headings and he is going to do another draft before he leaves for Germany to-night. 197. lst November: At the D.G's meeting to-day Furnival Jones mentioned that the question Communists in industry had been discussed by the Ministry of Labour with the Joint Council of the T.U.C. Employers Association. Both the T.U.C. and the Employers were of the opinion that it would be a mistake to make any announcement, and that we should continue to aot on behalf of the Ministry of Supply or the Admiralty in exercising our rights under the contractual clause. This would mena,. in fact, that managers of firms would either have to transfer Communists to other parts of their works, or get rid of them. If there was any trouble as a result of this, the Minister should explain the position to the House, but not otherwise. Neither party was anxious to have a tribunal. The Minister of Labour is going to repbrt these views to the Cabinet. Mitchell reported that the Cornmunist Party, for the first time in many years, have made overt reference to revolution being a plank in their plat- form. came over with second draft, which was still somewhat unsatisfactory. The trouble is t,although he may have bright ideas, he cannot write. We got Polson round and have, I think, got the thing more or less into shape. Kellar talked to me about the overseas division. He is, I think, very disappointed about the job; he feels that it is not only a refleetion tn him but on all eligible members of the staff whose promotion will be retarded for a period of four years. He will, however, like us all, have to do his best to give Shaw all the assistance that he can. Kellar envisages that it is the D.G's wish that he should handle every aspect of overseas matters, including staff over the whole field, not only of the Colonial stations,but of S.I.M.E. and S.I.F.E. This will, of course, lead to many complication and difficulties which will amehow have to be overcome. 2nd November. We have received a copy of the German Black List. Cookie is the only person who has been honoured by the inclusion of his name! The list is a strange one, compiled, I should think, from "Who's Who" and a whole host of public documents, and to a small degree from Intellligence sources. The only KXXXNXXtXNXBXaCKXtxX importance of the Black List noV is that a copy is almost certain to be in the hands of the Russians. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 (9:8. THIS IS ACOPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 ALRIL DOo 3rd November, I attended a meeting of the J.I.C. (o. & s.), S. when the paper on the setting up of Security Services in Germany was discussed. The Committee more or less agreed with our views about Special Branches, which Hayter thought we coulld tactfully put across, as the future of these Branches had to some extent been left in the air by General Robertson. It was suggested that if necessary a representative from M.I.5 and M.I should go over to Germany for Further discussions. I went on to the Immigration Officers' Conference, but unfortunately I missed the discussion on Eire. I gathered, however, that at some future G date a proposal may be made to the Eire Government for an agreement by which aliens entering this country proceeding to Eire can be deported to the U.K. if found unsatisfactory. Similarly, aliens proceeding to this country from Eire can be deported to Eire if' we find them unsatisfactory. As regards the control of the Western Ports, there is a desire to get it abolished, but for Treasury, Ministry of Labour, and Ministry of Food reasons, this is not of course possible at the moment. Alliens continue to find their way into rthe rn Ireland from the South, but they do not find much encouragement owing to the Northern labour laws which prevent them from getting employment. They cannot come on to England without going through the controls, but various evasions are possible and prosecution have taken place against the owners of trawlers or other boats bringing them over illegally. There followed a discussion about D.Ps, from which it emerged that there were 80,000 Balits, Ukrainians, and Sudeten Germans in this country, who have come in in recent years and have been directed to the mines and other industries. A considerable number of them do not take kindly to the particular employment to which they have been directed. A number have deserted and some of the Ukrainians have even gone to the Soviet Embassy to obtain the necessary documents to return to Russia. It is proposed, therefore, that consideration should be given to a scheme by which all those who have resided here for 21 years should be free to take up employment where they like. A point arises here in regard to important war industries, into which some of them will inevitably penetrate. These D.PE remind me very much of the 70, ,000 nemyalbens, German and Austrtan, who were such a headache to us at the outbreak of war. The trouble vias that they had all been admitted without much check on their bona fides and nobody knew anything about them. The same thing might well happen with the Balts, Ukrainians, and the Sudeten Germans. It is, I think, desirablle that we should stimulate the Police to do the necessary groundwork on their allien population. There are two 149. reasons for this. On the one hand we may want them to give us info'm tion about these people if they happen to drift into the B.2 net; it would then be important to know exactly what they were doing at some previou date. On the O ther hand, S amething shoulld be known about them, otherwise on the outbreak of war the Security Service will again be paralysed by enquiries about an alien potential 5th Column. I talked to some S.B. officers from the. north who are down here for a two-day conference. They seemed very pleased with the lectures which had been given to them, and in particullar by one from Max Knight. It is indeed remarkable that we should be thanked by the Police for telling them how to run informants! I warned them about their alien population we had talked to them mos stay about British Communists, but they should not negleet their aliens. We also discussed the identity of informants, and agreement was reached that they would notify us verbally of the names of such informants. I explained to them that we did not wish in any way to pry into their private affairs, but that if we knew the names of these people we might be able to warn the Police that they were not playing straight. Alternatively, we might know that for some reason or other the Party had become suspicious, and it would then be poeeible for the Police to give their informant better guidance, ACOPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION Lth November. 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 APRiL 2013 I attended the J.I.C. Directors' meeting to-day, when there wa's a discussion about defectors. I suggested that the problem could only be solved satisfactorily if we had some scheme in the form of a rehabilitatim centre for Russian defectors or deserters. It was necessary,1 first of all, that these people should be thoroughly acquainted with the English language. They could also be given an opportunity for improving their knowledge of any particular trade. There would then be a far better chance of placing hemreither here or in the Dominions and Colonies. The idea was considered a good one, but, as usual, everybody wanted to know who was going to pay. A report is to go up to the Chiefs of Staff, stressing the importance of defector information and suggesting a rehabilitation centre as the answer to their ultimate disposal. Paddy Bamford came to tell me that he had heard from Sir William Jenkin that the C.R.O. were up-stage on not being told about defectors. I said that this was really nonsense; matters had not yet reached a stage where a high-level approach to Dominion Governments was considered necessary. When that moment was reached, the C.R.0. would of course be consulted. So far nothing had been done except an approach by S.I.S. in Canada on an intelligence level. Bamford also told me that Jenkin was quite anxious to join us and take on U'ren's job when he left. Paddy had told hirm that he did not think that under the changed conditions it would give him sufficient scope. I entirely agree, much as I should like to see him here and to work with him. The arrival of another Knight would be regarded by the staff as one of the last straws! Coveney came to see me. He is applying for the post of -Assistant Chief Constable in the West Riding of Yorkshire, and wondered whether the D.G. on I would give him a recornmendation. I said tha't I would URIGINn ETAINED cneant o-c certainly mention the matter to the D.G. and suggested that he might send me a copy of his report on the Malayan Police, which I did not think the D.G. had seen. I made it clear to him, however, that neither the D.G. nor myself could speak outside our personal knowledge, and that in fact if we did SO we might well do him more harm than good. 7th November. Hollis returned. He has laid the foundations of a security organisation under the Atlantic Pact, and laid. down the terms of reference for the various committees, three of which will be in Washington and two in London. the Permanent Commission in Washington, consisting of the Americans, the Roughly, there will be a zonal Metric system, Co-ordinated by French, and ourselves. The D.G. has told Hollis about the overseas division. Hollis told me thet of course we should do our best to make the system work. He did think, however, that the new Director's functions should be clearly defined. He said, for example, C. Division matters in the Middle East are not satisfactory, would it be his business to go out and endeavour to put them right, or Would it be Sir John Shaw's? The D.G. said, emphatically, that it would be Hollis's business and that he did not intend that anyone should interfere with his matters or with Director B's. He would put down on paper, Very roughly, what he thought the overseas chartter should be. Malcolm Curming and Max Knight came to talk to me about a proposal that the latter should interview William Norman EWER about his former espionage activities, and in particular his onnections with certain individuals in the Foreign Office. Max, who knew EWER, thought that he could quite easily ask him out to dinner and endeavour to obtain his co-operation. I have told the D.G. about this, who approves. came over with a draft for the Chiefs of Staff on German security. uldid not think that it really made the point about the Special Branches and suggested certain amendments, which they agreed to make. What emerged more than ever was the appalling ambiguity of General Robertson's letter. George Jenkin rang me up to say that Laithwaite had had information, emanating, I think, from the North, to the effect that the I.R.A. had told McBride that if he did not get partition abolished within the next twelve months, they would start up their activities again. Laithwaite was inclined to discount this. I said that I regarded it as common form; it seemed to me absolutely inevitable that sooner or later the Irish, supported by the Anti-Partition Leagues, would start letting off bombs in station cloakrooms and putting squibs into pillar boxes. ( said that we had no confirmation, but that he really ought to apply to Special Branch, who had quite a good liaison with the Irish Police. 8th November. For Minutes of the D.G's meeting held to-day, Bee folder in D.D.G Sec's tray. THIs IS A COPY ORIGINAL DUCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 AfRi D01 Marriott and Martin gave me a sketch of the progress in the FUCHS and PEIRLS case, and also in the Australian case. There were four possibles: (1) FUCHS THIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED (ii) PEIRLS IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION (iii) KEARTON 3(4) OF THE PUBLIG RECORDS and one other. ACT 1958 ALRIL 0010 It had xxt been possible to eliminate KEARTON and the otherfairly easily, but considerable enquiries were necessary before it was possible to be satisfied about PEIRLS. one of the few clues was that the suspect had a sister in America who had been a party to the act of espionage. A certain amount is also known about the movements of the suspect. While PEIRLS had a sister, there is no certainty that she was in America at the material time, and his movements did not coincide with what we know of the movements of the suspect. on the other hand, FUCHS'E movements do coincide; moreover, his sister is the wife of one Robert HEINEMANN, a Communist Party member who was connected with the SPEED case. It is, therefore, morallly certain that FUCHS is the man. The Americans have been asked whether under certain safeguards we can interrogate him. Meanwhile, atomic energy have been asked to state exactly what they want to achieve. It seems fairly definite so far that they are anxious, whatever the outcome of the case, to get FUCHS out of atomic energy. We also discussed the Australian case. Nearly all the characters hae been identified, but further progress is slow. There is, however, a hope of another series of messages being uncovered, which may throw a nev light on the whole case. Courtenay Young, I gather, is rather in despair at the inadequacy of his investigatory tools. 9th November. The L.I.C. in Hong Kong have at last produced a memorandum on the internal threat, but it does not conform to the format which we subsequently gave them by telegram. They asked whether we still want a basic paper. I said that I thought they ought to submit a further report, filling in the gaps according to our format, and that in the next appreciation they should follow the format. Meanwhile, we should point out the weaknesses of their last paper. They do not, on their own admission, appear to know very much about the tho most importar matters, namely, the extent to which the Trade Unions, the essential services, and the Government machine have been penetrated. Neither do they say anything about counter-measures. Juxon Barton said that the official Colonial Office view was that trouble would not come to Hong Kong through internal disturbances. Privately, he does not agree with this view, which he says is based largely on information supplied by one Baker, who is the labour adviser. He told me that he was trying to get Baker back here on a course, and that he would send him over to us. I had a further discussion with Marriott and Martin about the FUCHS case. We are still lavaiting a letter from atomic energy, which should me it clear what our objection should be. Meanwhile, Arnold holds the view We that have a clearance with the F.B.I. to interrogate on the SIGINT he cannot interrogate FUCHS further without arousing his basis suspicions. of the source material, but this needs further clearance by the local authorities. 02 Sir John Shaw came in to-day and vas introduced to us all. He wants me to dine with him. I spoke to the D.G. about seveal matters. A suggestion has been made that we should get the Yard to report the time and location when Russian or Satellite C.D. cars are seen. Tt is just possible that this might put us on to something. I discussed the draft of alletter to Lloyd, asking that Police Forces in the S.I.F.E. area should be told limit their biaison with adjacent foreign Police Forces to purely C.I.D. matters, and to keep off Security Intelligence. I do not think that such instructions would be much use unless our Police Forces were in a position to tell foreign Police Forces that they shoulld deal on Security Intehligence matters T suggested that we should send a wire to Dick to discuss this matter and Jack Morton. I spoke to the D.G. about Coveney. He would be pleased to see him but doubts whether he is the right person to put forward the recormendation, as he cannot speak from first-hand knowledge. I told the D.G. about a member of the Colonial Office called who had been detected by Money reading top secret Colonial Office documents in the train. The D.G. thought I should speak either to Sir Charles Jeffries or to the Establishment Officer. James Robertson talked to me about a man called GUNN, who was apparently one of FUCHS'S referees when he got his naturalisation. GUNN, who lives somewhere up north, has a strong Left Wing background and during the war his house seems to have been a rendezvous for members of the Austrian Centre. If this was the beginning of FUCHSI career on the downward path, GUNN may merit close investigation. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION lOth November. 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 RiL 200 Graham has got a particularly awkward case relating to a man called METCALFE, who has drifted from the Ministry of Food into the Colonial Office without being vetted. We have now been asked to check him for indoetrination. He sees quite a number of our security reports fram overseas. His background is not good, but there is nothing really concrete in his file. We cannot give him a Clearance without intensive investigation. There has been another sabotage case down at Portsmouth. Somebody has been putting bolts into the engines of a submarine. The ship has been under repair and a good many dockhands, in addition to naval ratings, have had access. Holmes i8 going down to investigate. brought his successor, Iddid not altogether take to him, but he may be all right. It is perhaps too much to expect we should get anybody as understanding and co-operative as 203 John Irvine has written his note on the integration of counter- intelligence services in time of war. He was asked to write this at the S.I.0. Conference in Paris. It conforms to our ideas of a Theatre Security Service and makes it clear that in peacetime little can be done beyond having a Common format for the order Df battle and for files, so that when war starts integration of records will be easier. He also suggests the allocation of personnel. l1th November. We had quite an interesting morning at the J.I.C. There was first of all a discussion on atomic energy and the revision of estimates. A suggestion was discussed on producing a paper. showing the degree of vulnerability of this country. The D.N.I. was strongly opposed to such a paper, firstly, on the grounds that it would be So depressing that it might induce the Government to reduce their line forces even more than they have done already. Secondny, that the Americans if they saw it would write us off completely, and thiraly, that it woulld serve no very useful purpose, since the Chief's of Staff were fully aware that twenty atomic bombs dropped on this country would more or less put it out of action. Pendred thought that first of all we onght to make some attempt - although on wha't evidence I do not know - to assess the nature of the targets against which the Russians would be most likely to direct.th their attention. He waB by no means persuaded that they would go for industria areas he thought they were more likely to attack docks and troop or ship concentrations. Hayter felt tha't we could not evade the issue merely because our report would be depressing or might have undesirable coneequences. After a good deal of "erystal gazing", it waa decided that the J.I.S. should have a hot at a first draft. There was 8 lightly prickly discussion about the future location of the J.S.T.I.0. Blount had apparently made arrangements with the Ministry of Defence to move to 36 Whitehall within the next month. He had been over these premises and had accepted them on the ground that he could maintain better contact with scientists there than from Bryanston Square. Pendred said that he had mentioned this matter to the 0.A.S.. who had expressed the view that the step should not be taken without reference to the Chief's of Staff. Blount said that he had not consulted anybody about the move, as he thought it was purely a domestic matter and within his own sphere of action. Pendred shen said that he had heard that there waa a possibility of the J.I.B. and J.S.T.I.C. being able to get into some building near Broadway, and that obviously this would be a better solution. Kenneth Strong confirmed this and said that in his view the backng of the Chief'e of Staff for such a proposal, as a matter of urgency, might produce the required result. Blount did not seem too keen about this, as he thought it would only lead to further delays, and taat if it didnot come off he would have lost the opportunity of moving to 36 Whitehall. There was general agreement in the Committe that a move of the whole of F.S.T.I.0. and J.I.B. to one building in the vicinity of Westminster would be the best sollution if it could be arranged. Hayter asked Blount to write a short note about his proposal to move to 36 Whtehalll, for consideration 264. by the Chiefs of Staff. Most people thought that the way this item had arisen was regrettable. Charles Peake, who has just arrived from Jugo-Slavia, gave a short talk. He ethad had an interview, lasting an hour and twenty minutes, with Tito a week or soago. Tito'e room had all the windows bricked up and was lit with flluorescent lighting. This gave him a somewhat peculiar appearance, which at first led Charles Peake to think that his health might be failing. However, on seeing himself in the looking glass, he changed his view! Tito vas apparently in extremely good form and was confident about holding his position. Peake thought that this display of confidence was partly for his benefit and partly for the benefit of Tito and his supporters in boosting their morale. Tito said that Stalin would not attack him for two reasons. Firstlly, it would be the end of Communism, and secondly, he would be afraid of starting a world conflagration. Peake was careful to convey to him that if he were attacked he should not rely on outside help. Tito made it plain that he had taken apeciall precautions to prevent his owIl troops from committing any act of aggression. He felt that Stalin's efforts to subdue Jngo-Slavia by other means had failed; the Army was loyal, there was no chance of serious internal isturbance, and propaganda was getting nowhere. Tito was inclined to argue from this that in the end the whole thing would die down. He displayed, however, a certain nervousness about Albania and Bulgaria, and clearly did not intend to provoke anything in the nature of troublle on their frontiers. Peake thought, however, that he was concerned about this matter lest the provocation should come from the other side and that Russia might, in certain circumstances, try and intervene. There is a large Albanian minority in Jugo-Slavia and, indeed, numbers of Albanians with their families, goods, and chattels, are st1ll laaving the country and setting in Jugo-Savia. Tito does not expect any troublle from these people and seems almost to regard them as an asset He was asked about Hungary and Roumania. He did not think that either of them would engage in overt agreasion, and he was confident that if they did they would get all they deserved. He evidently thought that Soviet sabre-rattbing was designed to force Jugo-Slavia to keep a number of troops mobilised, who would otherwise be employed on reconstruction work. He admitited that this situation was ernbarrassing to him, but was not prepared to regard it as being really serious. Paake said that members of his staff were having no difficulty about travellling the length and bbeadth of the country, but he was anxious that nothing should be said about this as the journeys were carefully planned and instructions were given not to provoke any incident through over inquisitiveness. It waB difficult to estimate the general feeling in the country. The peasants were, of course, grousing about the Government, but there was nothing particularly significant about this, as it was common form for al peasants to complain about their Governments. There was pere haps, a certain section of junio Government officials who were discontented with the regime; this was largely due to the regulations and a feeling of frustration, owing to shortages which prevented them from getting on with their job. In the Party itself, there was no doubt that the majority were behind Tito; at the same time, there seemed to be a few who were anxious not to burn every boat with Russia in case things might member change. of There had been an unofficial but significant approach by a the arms might be available in the U.S. 1f a purchase Americans, Were asking contemplated. what types There of Jugo-Slav Government to the 205. is no doubt that the armed forces in Jugo-Slavia are gradually deteriorating; ammunition. such weapons as they have are becoming obsolete and they must be. short of Hayter announced that there would be no question of recognising the Chinese Government before next January and from what had been said to one of our M.As by his American colleague, American recognition would not be give until much later. Meanwhile, the Americans had informed Chian Kai Shek that they would continue to give him limited support. Deliveries of 200 Mosquitoes from Canada are now complete and there will be no further deliveries, but there are still some 100 B.25s on order from the U.S.A. I had a meeting with B.3 and B.3.a. on our policy with regard to Jewish terrorists. It seemed to me that the first thing to decide was whether Ministers or other individuals, or British property, either abroad or in this country were still likely to be targets. The view seemed to be that there was still some risk that this might be the case. It followed, therefore, that attempts should still be made to collect information about Jewish terrorist organisations and their agents. The next point for decision was whether this office or the Police should be the focal point for stimulating enquiries about these organisationg or whether it should be a matter for S.I.S. dealing direct with the Police. My experience was, however, that the Police were much more concerned with individuals than with academic knowledge of the organisations to which they belonged. They were, therefore, unlikely Even if the information were given to them to piece it together in a satisfactory manner. They would probably look to us to do this, and so would other Government Departments, if the Irgun and the Stern started to commit outrages. There was a slight difference in the case of Eire, in that only one country was concerned; with the Irgun and Stern, France, Belgium and Italy are certainly involved and probably other countries as well, including the U.K. It seems, therefore appropriate that we should remain the focal point for the study of Irgun and Stern activities, at any rate for the time being. B.3. a said they have found the Belgians co-operative, but that ittle information was forthcoming from the French, probably due to the fact that both Moch, Minister of the Interior, Head of the Surete, were Jews. They wondered whether it would be worth whille making any approach through I said that as S.D.E.C.E. and the Surete were at logger- heads, I did not think any good could come pf this, nor did T think we should get much through S.I.S. I felt it WO uld be more profitable to make specific requests for information about a particular individual or organisation known to be in France, and possibly to follow this up in direct conversations with the Surete either here or in France. I made it clear that the responsibility for terrorist activities in this country must rest with the Police, and that we were under an obligation to pass them any information about terrorists likely to come to this country. We also discussed the activities of the Jewish Intelligence organisation, Tt was agreed that this was a commitment of S.I.M.E. and that in our inquiries here conducted by B.3 we should act as a S.I.M.E outstation. The activities of the Jewish Communist Party were a matter for working in conjunction with B.1.B. and B.1.A. ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED DERARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 APRiL 206. Serpell. Alec, who appears to have had hand in it,, that it The draft of Sir John Shaw's charter is being prepared by is more or less on the lines that he suggested. some This IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINI IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 12th November. 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 m2le Doto Trafford Smith said that Juxon Barton had been poking about and had found some papers, now wholly out of date, indicating that someone had taken exception to Stephens either just before or just after his appointment. Basing himself on this, he was trying to advance the principle that before we send an officer to the Colonies he should be vetted by the Colonial Office. Trafford Smith said that in his view this would be wrong; we must be the juages of the kind of people we sent to our overseas stations. The Colonial Office could only intervene if the man'd conduct were found to be unsatisfactory. I said I thought this was right. Trafford Srnith said he would damp down Juxon Barton accordingly. Irvine came to show me his draft for the on the measure of integration of Western Union Security Services which could take place now or in the precautionary stage, or at the outbreak of war. He concludes that nothing more can be done now beyond trying to get some uniformity into personal and subject files which will have to come together in the event of trouble. At the precautionary stage personnel should be earmarked and come into action immediately on the outbreak of war. 14th November. I attended a meeting of the Chiefs of Staff about the German Land Bureauxar Special Branches. Dean of the Foreign Office and Fulton were also present. It was quite clear that the Chiefs did not really understand their brief; they seemed to think that it would be a good thing if M.I.5 and M.I.6 send a representative over to discuss the matter with Int. Div. I said that we had no representation in Germany, that we were only indirectly interested, and that the most we could do was to tell them how we run the Security Service here. This we had already done, and it seemed to me that it was largely a matter for Int. Div. to decide how our system could be adapted locally. I doubted whether we could contribut( much more. I said that,apart from this,W were rather awkwardly placed at the moment; it would be difficult for me to go as my D.G. was going to Africa this week and the only other senior officer well acquainted with the problem was at the moment in Syaney. This led to a general shakingbo heads about too much travelling. It was obviously no good arguing. I could we'll have said that we were travelling largely at the request of the Chiefs of Staff, who wanted security in the Dominions to be put on a proper footing, and I might also have said that if travelling was the thing that worried them most, why were they pressing to send me on a fruitless mission to Germany. They asked who I was under. I replied the Prime Minister, and they began to consider how an approach could be made. I interyened at once, saying that if the Chiefs of Staff really felt that they wanted a representative of M.I.5 to go to Germany, one would go and that there was no question of our standing on protocol. The meeting was quite friendly. 202 I gave a lecture to the junior officers on the usual theme, and the relations between investigation and security. They were quite responsive and asked a lot of questions. I also explained to them how our information and advice was fed into the intelligence machine. 15th November, For the minutes of the D.G. meeting held to-day, see folder in D.D.G. Sec's tray. I saw General Browning. I told him that we had nothing against Kirkland BRIDGE and that arn the Yard information.t amounted to was that BRIDGE was a good organiser, knew how to raise funds, but took a good whack out of them for his own expenses and for the entertainment of two secretaries who travelled round with him. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 APRIL 2oo Ie had a meeting with D.C. C.2, Martin and James Robertson about the FUCHS case, to try and clear our minds before/high-level meeting to-morrow with Atomic Energy. We came to the conclusion that we could not offer to go on with the present investigation indefinitely, which was too expensive, too much of a burden, and too unprofitable if it was to be maintained on the present extensive soale. On the whole I felt it might be better to try and edge FUOHS out and find him some other suitable job, rather than make any attempt to get him to confess, but this must be a question for Atomic Energy to decide. When we know the objective we shall be better able to advise them. Stratton came about his calendars and NKRUMA. I passed him on a firm would be iteeselcome in the Colony. He said that they message received from Stephens, that Aprbsecution of NKRUMA had and his already instituted proceedings. 268 Cumming has completed his memorandum on the disposal of scientific defectors. He recommends that they should be billetted on unfortunate Civil Servants and finally drafted into research jobs in departments in which these Civil Servants are working. This means getting over Civil Service regulations and a provision of funds to compensate them for the appalling dislocation which is bound to result in their household. Personally, I should want a very high price indeed if I were asked to rehabilitate a Russian! 16th November. Tom Bromley came in. He is going as First Secretary to Baghdad. I told him about and his work, and introduced him to Alec Kellar and Haldane Porter. He will, I am sure, Bo anything to help that he can, although he said that he was to be more concerned with administration than anything else and would not in any way interfere with the liaison between and the Oriental Counsellor', Richmond. I saw Sir Charles Jeffrtes and took with me a note by Money of this office about one, a Colonial Office official, who had been reading top secret documents in the train going down to Tonbridge. Without any difficulty Money had been able to read what was in the documents. Jeffries said that he would certainly take the matter up. I asked him specially to keep us out of the whole business, as we did not wish Govern ment servants to think that we spent our whole time looking for indis- cretions in railway carriages. Jeffries talked a lot about his difficulties over the case of Ken BAKER, the Labour Adviser in Hong Kong. While nobody thinks that BAKER is anything approaching a Communist, alll are agreed that he is hopelessly misplaced and that what he tells the Chinese about Trade Unions is not likelly to do them or us any good. He is apparently on probation and the question of his establishment has now arisen. A probable solution will be to give him a two years contact and then dispense with his services; this will entitle him to a bonus. I gather that Creech-Jones is quite worried about the case. I talked to Jeffries a little about sending out teachers to West Africa from the Oxford Delegacy. It seemed to me that,whether they were Communist or Left Wing, they were likely to do considerable harm. I found him in entire agreement. In Dick White's absence I saw Lord Vansittart at his Club. He wished to tell me that he. Edward Hulton, and Rebecca West had some time ago been the prime movers in the establishment of the British Institute for Political Research, 2, Upper Grosvenor Street, W.1. (Grosvenor 44426-27). The Institute was riginally formed largely for the benefit 0f refugees, and was to some extent a kind of Club where they could find their own iterature. The most aotive Director in the management of the Club was a Captain J.M. RADULOVIC, M.B.E., Flat 53, 59 Weymoith Street, W.l (Welbeck 2407). It became clear, not long ago that RADULOVIC was turning the Institute into a Left Wing organisation, and Lord Vansittart, Edvand Hulton, and Rebecca West accordingly resigned. I believe that Sir Ronald Storrs is still nominally Chairman. A Mrs. Dangerfield, who has been actively connected with the Institute, has recently reported to Lord Vansittart that things are going 201 from bad to worse, and that two other individuals, Johh HARE and Maurice EDELMAN, assisted by RADULOVIC, are trying to get rid of all Right Wing elements. RADULOVIC is said to have quite a lot of money, and there is some speculation as to whether it coes from Tito circles or Cominform circles. It is suggested -- on what grounds I could not ascertain - that a woman, who is generally known as SONIA, of 52 Ennismore Gardens, S.W.7. and is alleged to be a member of O.S.N.A., is concerned with the more sinister side of the Institute's activities. It seems that the Police have a certain interest in RADULOVIC, since they have been making enquiries about him from Mrs. Dangerfield. Kord Vansittart has told Mrs. Dangerfield to give the Police all the assistance that she can. The suggestion is that RADULOVIO is engaged in some kind of fraud, and the matter may, therefore, be in the hands of the C.I.D. rather than Special Branch. I do not know what to make of all this, but doubtless an examination of our files will give a fairly clear idea 8s to what is happening. It might als6 be worth while to ask the Yand what they know about RADULOVIC. ORIGINAL RETAINRD 17th November. THE CRECORDS ACT 1958. Apal 0010 Cumming came in to tell me that some Czech official named STRYCH, who is concerned with trade and commerce, had been arrested in Prague. It is alleged that he handed over a copy of the Czech-Soviet trade agreement to a British agent, against whom the Czechs were contem- plating action. Neither S.I.S. nor the Foreign Office know anything about this. He also told me about his conversation with concerning the head of the American visa section. this man had communicated with the Soviet Military Attache, asking to be invited to Soviet parties, as he vas a friendof Mme. KOLLONTAY, and ther Soviet diplomats whom he had met in the various stations in which he had served. was extremely grateful for the information and relieved that we had no passed it through the Foreign Office. is seeing the Ambassador about the case and the D.G. has been informed. I had a long meeting with Roger, F.J. and Felix Johnstone about the Phillips Group. The Chiefs of Staff went us to go over tadHolland and put Phillips' security on its feet. We were all agreed that this was quite impossible and that we coulld only approach PHIllips if the Ministry of Supply was anxious to place a particular contract with them. Phillips is divided into a large number of sections and without knowing the contrast it would be impossible to say that the security risks were. Phillips are apparently heartily distrusted by the trade in this country, whom they are alvays trying to undercut by devious means, and I doubt whether we could ever belleve be any- for thing that they told us. It was agreed that the next stage would 210 Hollis and Felix Johnstone to see Harrold Parker. This to my mind is another instance of the Chiefs bf Staff dealing with a question of detail which they do not really understand.. T waw Newsam about NAHUM and DONOVAN and got his agreement. He then told me that Kenneth Younger had expressed some anxiety about our recruiting young people from the Universities; he apparently thought that we should have "men of the world", and he may, in my view, have been apprehensive about the present tendency towards "infantile rightism"; he probably thinks that the office will get full up with these Right Wing students and SO develop into a die-hard organisation. I told Newsam that he need have no anxiety; we in fact ha to recruit according to age groups, and that quite recently we had taken in people between 30 and 40. Newsar told me that he had had a visit from Gladwyn Jebb, who said that his committe were considering the question of anti-Communist propaganda in the U.K. Newsam made it clearithe neither the Home Office nor M.I.5, or the Police, could run anything of the kind, although we and the Police could supply information. He thought that if anything was done it should be a Cabinet decision and come under the P.M. I told Newsam that in our view the idea was not a good one; we saw no realynecessity for it, as the Press were doing the job fairly well. There had also been a great deal of anti-Soviet publicit, in U.N.0. It seemed to me, too, that it was questionable whether a precedent should be created for spending Government money to counter the activities of a political party which was, represented in the House of Commons. My impressior was that Newsam had said that provided the Home Office were not drawn in he did not much mind what happened. 18th November. I saw Mr. Hayman; Personal Staff Officer to Air Marshal Elliott. He sent for Captain Beer, who produced a list of some 200 names of people to whom the second edition of Lord Mountbatten's book had been sent,01 a personal basis by Lord Mountbatten for comments. In the covering lette: they had been told they could retain the copy for their own persona] information. These people were mainly officers who had served in the campaign. A onsiderable number of copies had gone to the Americans, the Indian Army, the Pakistan Army, and one had lso-been sent to Compton Mackenzie - presumably because he had been commissioned to write up the part played by the Gurkhas (I actually met him in Hong Kong more than two years ago when he was employed on this task). I explained to Hayman that we were not concerned about the vetting of this edition for publication, which was doubtless being considered by all the appropriate authorities < 1 understood from him that a number of excisions had been made on security grounds). The only point at issue was whether the copies circulated on a personal basis by Lord Mountbatten contained telegrams, the disclosure of which might raise a that current the cipher security issue. If this were 80, it seemed to me report should be reviewed by the Cipher Security Board, who were the only body who could. say whether any damage might still be going on. /Hayman 211. Hayman promised to make enquiries and to let me know. If there is any likelihood of current damage, he would like us to bring it to the notice of the Cipher Security Board. Mitchell and I saw Lesching, who had in Sir William Jenkin and another officer. We discussed at some length the case of Rupert METCALFE, who holds quite a responsible position in the C.R.O. and sees our Far Eastern material. He had not been vetted on his appointme to C.R.O. from the Ministry of Food. who knew about his association with certain Communists. He has come to our notice on account of a SIGINT vet. Apparently METCALFE has done extremely well and has earned the praise of all his superiors, who find it difficult to beliee that he is a Communist. On the other hand, our files show him to be in association with some pretty queer people; although what these associations amount to it is difficult to ay. We offered to make an intensive investigation, but we warned Liesching that this might well be inconclusive. Meanwhile, METCALFE will not be initiated into SIGINT material. I have arranged with Horrocks for FINGAL o-reeeive a bonus for his overtime. ORIGINAL DOCUMENI RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS 19th November. ACT 1958 Afil DoiO John Manriotitecame to see me abbut his new Polish defector, who is a member of the U.B. or Polish Security Service. He clearly' knows a lot about its workings in Warsaw and here and also about the workings of Polish Military Intelligence. The man is apparently very afraid of being kidnapped. I told the D.G. about my meeting with Hayman, and also about the one with Liesching.on the subjeet of METCALFE. I also asked the D.G. about the visit of Maxwelland Ferguson to Malaya. I wondered whether they were going to call on us. The D.G. said he had made it clear to Ferguson that we should like to see him, but in the circustances he did not feel that he could very well press him to come; he thought, however, that if Ferguson and Maxwell saw Morton, they would get all the background required. I was talking to David Smith; of W.H. Smith, the other night. He told me that he had had a "go slow" involving three hours delay on the distribution of newspapers. He sent for the Trade Union official, who denied that there was a "go slow" - all that had happened, he said, was that the men had reallised on the previous day that they were doing more than a days Work. A certain amount of argument ensued, as a result of which it emerged that the men were annoyed about a bonus claim which was being looked into by the ordinary body established for that purpose between the newspaper distributing agencies and the T.U. As a resullt of the delay, overtime WaS neceasary. The Foreman went down into the canteen to call for volunteers, but got no response until finally a young man, and fairly nevily joined, said "I do not know what all you fellows think you are doing, but I am signing on for overtime". He walked up the stairs and all the other men followed him.! The impression is that all the other men, although they disliked to "go slow" were terrified of finding themselves on the "other side of the fence". I was talking to Graham about this, and also about the lack of influence that the P.Us seem to have over their men. It seemed to me that the T.U.C. were now so identified with the Government that it was arguable that Labour might be more amenable under the Tories. Graham agreed; he added that normally the membership of the Communist Panty was the barometer of pro-Russian feeling: it should have declined, but in fact it has remained stable at about 40,000. He thinks that the decline. which should have taken place on account of Russian unpopularity, has been made up through a feeling by the workers that their bosses are too identified with the Government and that their only outlet is through the C.P. 21st November. I talked to Mann about the alien problem and urged him to tell the Police that we were not only interested in Communist activities, but in the activities of aliens. It was important that they should do their ground work on this subject; they woulld be expected in time of war to be ablle to express an opinion on their potential Fifth Column. Meanwhile they might detect a foreign agent, and in any case would be in a position to answer enquiries about aliens which we. might put to them from time to time. It was often important to know what an alien had been doing, sau three years ago. Burt came to see me. I asked him about the suggestion that the Flying Squad should report the numbers of certain cars used by the Soviet or Satellite Embassies. He said that he could quite easiby arrange this. If, however, we extended the idea to the traffic branches we ran a considerable risk of leakage. I also asked Burt to let me knovt whether BALLOON had a criminal record. Malcolm Cumming wanted this THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Pei 00 213 THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 MPiL Dick put forward the argument that overt liaison carried with it the obligation to supply information, and that unless wenare prepared to give such information, our liaison is bound to die, This confusionnof thought. I doubt, in fact, whether they have given him some seems to imply much information at all; they have, however, given him a lot of advice, based on their own experience, and they have had quite a considerable divident in return. Martin and Marriott came to talked to me about the FUCHS case. They had seen Kearton, who had given them some account of FUCHS, with Whom he had worked in close contact in America. Kearton coulld not believe that FUCHS was a spy, although it did not seem from anything that Kearton said that this vas ruled out. In fact, we hhad Cockcroft saying the same thing about Alan NUNN MAY. There is, howeve', a suggestion that a woman who was a computor(? and worked with FUCHS and Kearton, might have had the contact with the University students. I gather she was of Russian origin. Neither Martin nor Marriott are in the lease shaken in the belief that FUCHS is the man we are after. Alec Kellar is ull of forebodings about Dick's report. 22nd November. For the minutes of the D.G's meeting held to-day, sce folder in D.D.G Sec's tray. Mitchell asked me whether his monthly report on Communism could go regularly to the Dutch. They have apparently been given a copy onI one occasion. S.I.S. think it may lend to our having to give it to the Belgians. I said to Graham that this in turn might lead to having to give it to the French, etc. I suggested that he should have a word with Irvine, as we did not wish to get into difficulties with the S.I.0. I had a meeting with Perfect, Holmes, Boddington and Mann. Perfect wants to take over the Railway and Dock Bolice and establish liaison with certain other private Police Forces. I said that I could see no objection in fact, it seemed desirable that the Railway Police should be tied in to the local S.B. meetings. I could not see that this could interfere with the duties of C.2, who would continue to have liaison with the Railway Police on matters of sabotage. 23ra November. Mann brought two Scottish S.B. officers. from Edinburgh and Glaogow, to see me. They seemed very impressed by what they had seen here. and extremely grateful for having been invited to visit US. 214. T talked to Graham about a draft letter to the Colonial Office on the subject of a teacher in Nigeria. She was formerly connected with the India League and comes from the Colonial Bureau of the Fabian Society. Cohen of the Collonial Office thinks she is wonderful ('She may be all that is wonderful, but she does not appeal to me !'). Tin-Eye thinks it is wrong that the British taxpayer should have to pay for Communist propaganda in the Colonies. In general, he is right about but there is not sufficient evidence to present the case to the Colonial Office. There is no doubt that whatever the Government's policy may be. and whatever anybody may think of Colonial policy in the past, can make no contribution tewarde easing the present tension among the natives. THIS COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS 24th November. ACT 1958 PPRIL DOo. I discussed with M.E. and John Marriott the proposals in an S.I.C. paper for the establishrnent of a War Room on a Western Union basis in the event of trouble. I wondered how far our records were arranged to meet such an emergency. Irvine suggested that each power should contribu history sheets and notes on the organisation of foreign Intellligence Services. I gather that we can meet these commitments, but there is the usual source trouble. came over to discuss Irvine's S.I.0. paper, which mak reference to the CO-ordination of S.I. and S.0. This has apparently got under Sinclair's skin; he feels that the S.I.C. should not interfere in S.I and $.0. matters, and apparently what Irvine has said, to some extent runs counter to a clandestine S.I./S.0. Committee of the Western Union Powers, which has been meeting recently. Sinclair wants to send a telegram to Paris, Brussels and The Hague, expressing his disagreement with this document and stating that 5share his views. I explained that Irvine had written this document at the request of the S.I.0. and in his capacity as International Secretary. It seemed to me that there was nothing particularly harmful in it, and in any case it was open to all parties to criticise and comment at the meeting which will take place on December 13th in London. I expressly asked him not to make any reference in his telegram to the views of M.I.5, as we did not wish to give the impression to the other Powers that we were ganging up against the Secretary'e proposals. telephoned to me later to say that he had three-quarters of an hour with Sinclair and that a modified telegram was being sent out. He gave mne the gist of it, but it contained no reference to M.I.5. Sir John Shaw showed me a letter that he had received from some Press friend, which made it fainly clear that the leakage about his appointment here had oceurred ir the Colonial Office. Sir John attended the Directors meeting, when we discussed, amongst other things, Dick's memorandum. Horrocks seemed to be in favour of the move to Moascar on Monday and opposed it to-day, on administrative grounds, and was supported by Charles on financial grounds. It was felt that there would be a good deal more building than was suggested, Moreover, we should probably lose about fifteen local employees Fayid. and that the accommodationgob in Ismailia would be considerable. at 215 Charles thought that the 09,000 required for constructing the new building might well end up by being $15,000. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE RUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Rn On the Intelligence side, I said that there were a few things which worried me, and on which I should like to have further particulars when Dick returns. It was decided to held over any further appointmente either to Hong Kong or to Gibraltar. A Naval attachment in the person of BOYTE is proceeding to Hong Kong shortly, and may ease the situation there. It was recommended that,i1 approved by the Indian authorities and General Nye, Kitchin should replace U'ren. T asked whether Kellar had been consulted about this and was assured by Horrocks that he had been. I subsequently discovered that this was not the case. 25th November. Skardon told me about his interview with Dorothy WOODMAN. He and Wilkinson of 3.B. hed been well received and Dorothy WOODMAN had given every outward appearance of wishing to help. She did not in any way resent the visit. She said, however, that she remembered having had a communication from Brussels, from some individual whose name she did know, but that she could give no description of him owing to the considerab. lapse of time, that he had asked to be placed in touch with a technician and that she had introduced him, as she might have introduced many other people, to MEREDITH, whom she knew personally. She denied having arranged any visit of MEREDITH to Dublin. Skardon is now thinking of bringing MEREDITH and WOODMAN together to see if they can reconcile their con- flicting statements. WOODMAN effected not to mind this suggestion. Slcerdon said she had a veny pleasnat, almost motherly, personality. There was no doubt that from what she said,she is of the type who sees a lottof Communists, or certainly did SO in the past, and still thinks that ve have something to learn from Russia, although she dislikes the "purges" and concentration camps. Geoffrey Harrison. our Counsellor in Mosco, came to the J.I.C this morning. He said that when he first went to Moscow he tried to keep his mind completely open, particularly on the question of whether the present Russian policy could be explained by a fear for their own security, or whether it had far wider aims of world domination. He had gomepregretfully to the conclusion that while her own security was a hort-term.objective, she definitely had wider aims, which she might well try to put into force by open agression.when she felt strong enough to do 80, and if in the meantime she had not succeeded by subversive means. He did not Consider that MALENKOV' recent speech, in which he expressed satisfaetion abont Moscow's relations with the Satellite states, indicated any 216 change of heart in regard to wider aims and world Communism, which had previously been stressed by Stalin. He had been impressed by the extent of anti-Western propaganda, of a type with which everybody was familiar Our counter-organisations could not be very effective as they only reached a very limited number of people at some unearthly hour in the morning. The whole idea of Russian propaganda seemed to concentrate on persuading the Russian people that there were two completely hostile camps, that capitalism was in decay, and that it vas Russia's mission to give a coup de grace. Russla's two weapons were the Red Army and Communism, but for the time being, at any rate, she preferred to use the latter. Her tactics would always be opportunist but her basic policy would remain the same. He could see no prospect of there being anything but a state of armed neutrality. At the best, he could see that during the last two years there had been some slight improvement in general conditions. There was more food, more clothes, and in some cases better wages. He did not believe in civil war if Stalin died: he thought that the regime wan much too deep-seated for any violent change to take place. He mentioned a paper by Admiral Stephens, who I think is the American Naval Attache in Moscow, which suggests cutting off all supplies to Russia and the atellites,and also that if this were done the whole machine would crack and disintegrate. Taking a prima facie view,neither he nor the members of the J.I.C. felt that these concllusions were justifiable; there were many fallacies. Nevertheless, the paperr was a well-written one and merited a careful study. It is still possible to do a certain amount of travel in Russia, and in fact, the more recent restrictions have,paradoxicallyenough, made it easier to go to certain places which are not wholly uninteresting. Harrison thought it was now time that we re-appointed an M.A. While we appear D.agree with the Americans on the amount of raw material in the atomic energy field available to the Russians, we do not agree on the extent of their production. The Americans think that the recent explosion in Russia was the first bomb off the line, whereas we are inclined to think that it was an ad hoc experimental explosion. After considerable disagreernent about three weeks ago, both parties seem 997 sure of the bomb having been a plutonium one. The area of the explosion is now said to be the Aral Sea and not Lake Baikal. 28th November. Viv and same to talk about the case of employed by Derby. They had grave doubts about his reliability, mainly based on statements made by PROTZER, the olld Abwehr official who ha s been interviewed on several occasions. The emainder of the allegations seemed to be pretty vague, a S indeed is the one from PROTZER. Characteristically nobody seems to have thought of asking PROTZER whyiihe considered to be a Soviet agent. I asked them to let me have all the evidence they had in writing, when we would go into the case. THIS COPY ORIGINAL WUQUIlENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIO RECORDS ACT1 1958 ARi 200 2'7 THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PLIBLIC RECORDS AT 1958 4ie2oio I talked to John Marriott and Derby about Derby feels fairly confident about bona fides. I had a long discussion with D.C. F.J. and others about FUCHS. The only concllusionswe have reached were that it was essential for D. At. En. to be quite clear as to what they were going to do with FUCHS after his interrogation. They ought to have soe job ready for him at once, if this is necessary. As regards the use of the evidence, we were in considerable doubt as to whether the date would really help, since it might imply that we did not think FUCHS had been active either before or since. Apart from that, it helped to pin-point the source. 29th November. I had another talk with Irvine, when T discussed his memorandum. It seemed to me that perhaps he had gone a. little outside the Charter of the S.I.C., and that we might have to agree on this point. This did not, however, justify For the minutes of the D.G. G. meeting held to-day, see folder in D.D.G. Sec'e tray. Vickery came to tell me that he had received an offer from Seel of the C.R.DO. to arbitrate in a dispute between Int. Div. and the Foreign Office as to the future strength of Int. Div. The job would take him about six weeks to two months. I said that as far as we were concerned there would be no objection provided the Foreign Office and the Military did not feel it undesirable that a representative of the Security Service should carry out this taks. I said that I would discuss the point with Brain and sound out other interested parties. I attended a meeting of the SIGINT Board. The only question that really conceened us was whether clandestine traffic in China should be exploited at the expense of a 5% dimunition in lower echelon Russian traffic. I said that oving to the importance of the Far East to S.I.F.E. we should be quite prepared to agree to this. Travis spoke to me afterwards about closer liaison between Geoffrey Patterson and in Washington. He thought we should urge Patterson to take the initiative in this matter. 218. Hollis spoke to me about the FUCHS case. He thought we ought to get an expert opinion from G.O.H.( on the risks of a cross-bearing on FUCHS and the Australian case. I have asked Martin to do this. 30th November. Hollis tells me that we have now been charged with a mission to examine, on behalf of the Atlantic Pact Powers, the sequrity of Italy, Portugal, Denmark, Norway and Iceland. Hollis would like Irvine to do this job. I said that this would depend upon the next meeting of the S.I.C. on the 13th December, when we would again represent that Irvine had not got a full time job as Secretary, and suggest that he should work part time for us, for which we would reimburse the Permanent Commission. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 ARRIL D0 I dined with Sir John Shaw. We did not discuss the shape and form which the overseas Division should take. I told him as much as I could about the office and its work, and he talked quite a lot about Colonial affairs. He did say to me that in his view our appearance in the Caribbean seemed a bit premature. He realised that trouble in a place like Trinidad could start very easily from some quite trivial incident of an indigenous kind, but he did not see at the moment what contribution we were inia position to make in such an eventuality. It might be, however, in course of time, that outside sources would become more active, but there would be something in collating the general picture. 2219 lst December. Hollis talked to me about Air Vice Marshal LEASK, who is settling in Finland viith his pro-Soviet Russian wife. He is apparently to represent English Electric amongst other Companies and will be running an import and export business. Pendred, with whom I have spoken, has warned the Air Attache. I think he believes in LEASK'S loyalty; but he thinks the wife is dangerous. I told him that if he could get LEASK to let him know if any approaches direct or indirect, are made from Soviet sources we should be interested to hear about them. Meanwhile, we should have to make sureetha English Electric did not discuss any new secret work with LEASK. There is very little at the moment that LEASK does not know about our technical developments in the Air Force. came to see me about the trouble with the S.D.E.C.E. He obviously wanted us to decline to discuss organisational matters at the next S.I.C. meeting. I said I thought it was up to the French to state their case. Ue then said there were people in the S.D.E.C.E. who were inclined to ay that we were trying to build up the Surete at their expense. I told that nothing was further from our minds; we had a professional job to do and if analagous functions were performed by two separate bodies in France, we natuiallywanted to be in touch with them both. We were simply interested in getting on with the work and had no interest whatsoever in French domestic affairs. said of course he understood this perfectly himself. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTIMENT UNDER SECTION 2nd December. 3(4) OF PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 PPRiL 2010 Sir Ralph Stevenson, our Ambassador in Chungking, came to the J.I.C. to-aay. He prefaced his remarks on China by pointing out that for thirteen months there had been no fighting at all by land forces. Bombing, however, by the Nationalists, which could be carried out with inpunity owing to lack of air defences, had been a considerablle s-ource of irritation to the Communists. Owing to the total lack of opposition, it was lesurely and on the whole accurate and effective. It had, for example, prevented the running of trains and river traffic during the hours of daylight. He said there were two conflioting views about the situation in China, on the one hand that there hed been an out-and-out victory by the Communists. on the other that what1 was going on was just a civil war which would ultimately peter our leaving things much as they have been for the last 30 years. He himself disagreed with both these points of view. He thought that what was happening in China was really a continuation Of the revolution of 1911. Chiang Kai She could have completed this revolution but was a victim of his own past and incapable of administering the necessary purge to the whole of his administration The result of his corrupt and inefficient rule has been something in the nature of a general upsurge and it was perhaps an accident that the Communls happened to be there to give effect to popular feeling. In general, the Communist Party are not really popular. There are two things for example which were causing considerable irritation. One was the practice of compulsory indoctrination which meant that after a hard day's work the Chinese were fonced to listen to lectures on dialectical materialism, a subject which bored them and which few of them 220. ORIGINAL LOULIMENT RETAINED VDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION understood. Another cause of complaint was the ride revies. LThereORDs had always been rice levies in China, but until cheACbmiiunists came into pover they had only been enforced in a very desultory way. The land owners of course were more indignant than anyone else as they were the heaviest losers. The peasants did not mind so much as they were receiving a certain quantity of consumer goods in exchange. The Government in China has always to some extent been judged on its ability to stabliize the price of rice and the task of the Communists in this respect had not been easy, but they had nevertheless succeeded in spite of great difficulties in getting supplies to important centres and in particular to Shanghai, which had also been adequately supplied with coal. In spite of this, there was a considera amount of unrest due to the impossibility of foreseeing the future and of "fixing things" in the present state of the country. Sir Ralph then posed the question as to whether the recent events in China could be regarded as an out-and -out Soviet triumph. He thought it was difficult to answer this question. Russia was obviously trying to get back to the sta te of affairs in 19044, particularly with regard to Manchuria. He thought, however, that she would be extremely cautious and that she would not make any attempt at interference within the Wall. She might later on attempt to expand from inner to outer Mongolia. She would, however be mindful of the dislike of the Northern Chinese for Slavs and of Chinas genenl xenophobic tendencies. With regard to Manchuria, the situation had not been eased by the ruthless stripping of all industry by the Russians. The economic and political ifficulties which the Commnunists have to overcome are enormous and there are signs of a certain apprehension about K.M.T. underground activities. DAI LI'S Gestapo has gone to ground and may well indulge in guerilla activities. Law and order at the moment is entirely under the Army which is a serious economic burden. Sir Ralph thought therefore that the Chinese Communist Government would have its hands pretty full in dealing, with internal aggression and would not be likely to indulge in acts of aggression outside its frontiers. In saying this, he did not wish orimply that what had happened in China would not have a very considerable psychological effect outside the country and particularly in South East Asia. He did not believe that there would be any attempt for some considerable time to interfere with Hong Kong, unless some incident arose which would cause China to lose face if she did not act now. Hong Kong 1s far too useful to the Chinese in their present plight for her to contemplate any unprovoked action at the moment. When the Government did decide to liquidate Hong Kong, in his view this would be done by blockade and by the creation of disturbances within the Colony. Sir Ralph said that he had had certain. informal deallings with Communist Party leaders. Their morale was extremely high and they were proud of the Army and its achievements. This, coupled with the suspicion of all foreigners, caused them to be extremely abbupt and rude in their behaviour With patience, however, they could be persuaded to become reasonable. Their behaviour to foreign firms was fairly good, but workmen were encouraged to squeeze their employers and foreign firms were taxed more heavily than Chinese. On the whole the discipline of theArm was good, and property and the individual were respected, but it was made clear that foreigners were only allowed to remain on sufferance. Sir Ralph was certain that the right policy was to hang on, keep the door open and recognise the new regime as soon as possible. 221 There was nothing to gain, he thought, by delay and he was certaint that recognition should be granted without conditions. He was worried about the position inIndo-China where he thought the French regime was in considerable jeopardy. The recognition of BAO DAI had come much too late. If the French had to withdraw, there was no doubt that Indo-China would become Communist and that the posi tion of Siam where there are 3,000,000 Chinese would be seriously weakened. Boucher asked whether the Russians were sending advisers. Sir Ralph said that.} thought they vere sending them in considerable numbers. He was not, however, too worried about this as he thought that in the end they would cause friction as had happened in the days of BORODIN. I spoke to Helsby about the question put by PLATTS-MILLS on the "Daily Mail" report that the D.G. had gone to Nigeria. The question was down for the War Office. I said I did not think it mattered who answered it, provided the reply was "Not in the publicinterest". Helsby agreed and said he would sort the matter out. ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS 5th December. ACT 1958 MPRiL 2010 Admiral Thompson came over at Hill'e request. Trafford Smith had shown him a note by Cohen on the Colonial Office, on which he had expressed grave misgivings about publicity. in connection with the D.G's movements and those of Inspector Barnes of S.B. to Uganda. He had suggested that we might have a conference with the Home Office and Scotland Yard to see what could be done to prevent a recurrence. I said to Trafford Smith that in SD far as the D.G's movements were concerned, he was, well-known to the Press and to the public that it was really impossible for him to travel anywhere without a great deal of speculation. As far as S.B. were concerned, or officers of Scotland Yard, the approach would be through the Home Office. I felt, however, that in view of Colonial Office anxiety about publicity in connection with the D.G. and also certain anxiety in Downing Street, it might be well to explore whether Admiral Thompson could impress upon editors the fact that the D.G's movements really came within the terms of D. Notice No. i.e. the activities and movernents of Intelligence personnel. I explained to Admiral Thompson that it was difficult to make a distinction,a regards the D.G's work, between Communism and counter-espionage, Or military defence matters; the two were now so inexbhicably mixed up. There was no doubt that publlicity in regard to his movements could be extremely embarrassing not only to the work of this organisation, but to other Goverment departments, or indeed in this case to the South African authorities. If the leakage occurred after Sir Percy'e arrival in South Africa, while this might be embarrassing to the C.R.O., the South African authorities would not be in a position to complain, since it would be a matter for their securit authorities rather than ours. Even, therefore, if the visit, and perhaps its purpose, ultimately became known, there was at least a point in keeping it secret until the D.G's arrival in the territory concerned. In the light of what said, Admiral Thompson said that there had been anbreach of security and undertook to speal to the editors of the Mail, the Express, the Standard, the Evening News, and the Kemsley Prese. Perrin came over to discuss the FUCHS. case. We tried to envisage every POSFible situation that might arise. I made it clear to Perrin that in our 222 view the chances of his getting the answer he wanted were extremely remote. One might have a lucky break, but it seemed on the whole more likely that we should be left in a state of uncertainty, if not positive suspicion. What action was likely to follow seemed to us essential; efforts should be made now to explore the ground for alternative work, since it would be undesirable to have any hiatus between the interview and FUCHS' ultimate disposal. Equally, if we were intending to dispense with his services as a civil servant, which the Minister has the right to do, we should consder the consequences, e.8e representations by his Trade Union, by his fellow w.orkers in the scientific field, questions in the House of Commons, the demand for an enquiry, etc. It was our experience that when Ministers found themselves in difficulties of this .sort they were inclined to say that the Intelligence Services had let them down, unless they were allowed to tell the House of the facts. In this case such a course would be impossible. We undertook to explore the legal position about getting rid of a civil servant, while Perrin said that he woulld make engniriesOabout a possible University job for FUCHS. ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIG RECORDS 6th 7:thiDecember. ACT 0T1958 APRIL 2010 For minutes of D.G's meeting held to-day, sec folder in D.D.G. Sec's tray. I had a talk with a representative of the R.C.M.P., McNeil, who has been over here and has been visiting his officers on the Continent who are sorting out D.P.S for emigration. I left for Germany by the night mail with We were met at Cologne and proceeded to General Robertson' H.Q. at Wahn, about ten miles away. Cologne, which I had not seen since before the war, gives the impression of almost complete devastation, in the middle of which the Dom stands comparatively unscathed. At vahn I had talks with General Haydon, Kit Steel, Proctor Thomas, KeithRandall, and Tollson. There was to be a meeting on the following day on a tri-zonal basis to discuss the question of the Laender. The position was that there was agreement in principle between the three powers on the creation of a Federal Security Bureau, which should have no executive powers. The British and the Americans thought that the Federal Bureau shoulld run agents, but this point, I gathered, had not been discussed in any detail with the French. Some difficulty was anticipated, since if the Federal Bureaux were told that they could run agents in Germany, they might well ask "What is Germany? Can we run agents into the Saar?", to which the French would answer ernphatically "no" and "can ve run agents to the other side of the Oder-Neise line?", We and the Americans were not anxious that this issue should be raised, and would be quite content to see the Germans run agents into the Russian zone, and even beyond. It would be difficult for us, however, to say this to the Germans, since if anything went wrong, they might claim that they had British authority and cause difficulty between Us and the Russians. As regards the Laender, the Americans and ourselves were in agreement about setting up Land Bureaux. The French, however, were opposed they only wanted a Federal Bureau, as clearly they thought that if things were centralised there they woulld get a slice of information for the whole of Western Germany, and probably they did not like the, idea of the Germans running agents in the French zone, who might get across the tracks of their own agents. This point, however, was to be debited on the folllowing day. 223. We and the Americans were agreed that the Land Bureaux should have no executive powers and should be allowed to run agents within their own Laender. It had to be admitted, however, that the Land Bureaurwas already perating in thine-Westphalia, and indeed, outside it, and that no action had been taken S0 far to supress it. It was not an efficient organisation it had several members of the old Abwehr and had already created a grapevine which extended to Poland and other countries. If the Land Bureaux Were officially recognised, the British would tell Menzel, the Minister of the Interior, that he would have to confine his Bureau to his ovin Land. He has already been asked to disclose his agents; this we know, in fact, he is unable to do, because many of them are being run second and third hand and are, incidentally, of extremely doubtful quality. Ve discussed the Police. T asked first whether it was desired that the Land Bureaux should be efficient or inefficient. I vas told that the British desired ther to be efficient and to work ther on a liaison basis and in the spirit of Co-operation. That being the case, I expressed the view that there must be a soft point in each Police Force, for two reasons: Firstly, local Forces had to collect ground information intelligently, and secondly, if executive action went required, it was essential to have somebody in each Police Force whouunderstood.th problem and would act with discretion. Kit Steel said that he had had difficultie over this point wit Public Safety, but was glad, however, to be reinforced in his view that this vas-necessary. I said that I understood Public Safety's point of view - that it might be undesirable to call these elements in the Police S.Bs. Nevertheless, if a Police Commissioner was asked by the Minister of the Interior to supply information omD political matters, he would certainly carny out the request and undoubtedly nominate somebody to acquaint himself thoroughly with the problem. Whether this section of the Police was called a 8:B. or Section 1(a) 2(b) or 4(c) did not matter from the point of view of its efficienty. I was quite certain, however, that the Germans would have such a section whether we gave them permission or not. The only point on which I expressed some doubts was the multiplicity of people who would be running agents in the Land; there would be the Federal Bureau. the Land Bureau. Int. Div.. the Police. In the evening I had a long conversation with Dougal Smit of the Foreign Office, who works direetly under Kit Steel. He told me that he was rather alvoice trying in the wilderness". He was certain that the Germans were going to be a source of serious trouble to us before long. the rather plausible idea was being pursued that we must support the moderate elements,i the person of ADENAEUR, and this was in the present circumstances inevitablle. He felt, however, that in the next Government the Right Wing would certainly have their feet in the door and that, wittingly or unwittingly, ADENAEUR was playing their game in the same way that STRESEMANN and BRUNING had done before. ADENAEUR'S public statement that he does not vant an Army at the moment is apt to create a more favourable impression than it deserved. It is, in fact, a godsend to the Germans not to have an Army costing them millions and keeping able- bodied men from rebuilding the country. Dougal Smith agreed with me that we might well reach a moment when the Germans, finding they could not get what they wanted in the West, might make an unholy allliance with the Russians involviing a sreadjustment of the Oder-Neise line. ORIGINAL UULUMVIENIT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 224 8th December. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THHE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 ArRiu and Dusseldorf is obviously etting on its feet again; a good deal of damage has been repaired and the shops are full fumanufactured goods, which I am told the Germans are exporting both to the East and to the West. It will not be long before they undercut as all! The people and the children look, on the whole, well fed, and the country districts are certainly cultivated down to the last inch. Vera Sutherland, who is working for Leo Long, lunched with us and saw me off on the 'plane at 1+ p.I. 9th December. I told the J.1.C. about my visit to Germany and expressed the view that it would be premature to report to the Chiefs of Staff, since no final decision had yet been taken. Kenneth Strong then gave an account of a recent meeting that he had with Alexander. It was clear that Alexander had to fight a considerable battle in the Cabinet in regard to all defence projects, including Intelligence. He could not see the justification for heavy expenditure on Intelligence and seemed to complain that people were always bringing up the Russian bogey, but that in faot nothing had happened. He even quoted Tizard's forebodings about the bombing of London imediately var was declared - in fact nothing had happened for six months. Strong explained to him that what was going on now, in both the Intelligence and the research field7 inadequate though it might beem - did provide the Government with information. on which from time to time they could take action. Such action, for example, as sending troops to Hong Kong undoubtedly had a deterrent effect. He had, too, to bear in mind that verything the Government did was based on Intelligence and that at the price of three million pounds, compared with the defence estimates.whic! ran into hundreds of millions, it was a mere feabite. It seemed to him that the basic trouble in all these criticisms of Intelligence was that the Ministers seemed to imagine that Intelligence was amething that could be turned on and off like a tap without any damage. The answer is, of course, that if you even turn the tap half off for a year, you may have to begin again from seratoh and establish an entirely new hot-water system. COPY ORIGINAL RETAINED 12th Decemher. We had a meeting with 3(4)OF THE RUBLICR RECORDS It was virtualy a suggestion that the Gommitte.e should consider only an exchange of information and should not concern itself in any way with war organisation. I said,'th I did not think thi.s would quite do. It seemed to me wrong that war planning should e held up simply because the S.D.E.C.E. did not like the Surete, and vice versa. I coulld see no reason why we should not leave national organisational matters to the countries concerned, and merely discuss the nature of the information and the form in which it should be presented in the War Room on the outbreak of war. We should also disouss personnel. agreed with this. 13th December. Disk and I spent the whole day at the S.I.C. meeting. We were told in the morning that Item No. 2 on war organisation would be postponed until the afternoon as Colbnel Fourcaud would not be able to arrive in time. After lunch we were told that herwould be coming in the afternoon, and then we were told that he would arrive about 5.15, but finally he did not turn up at all. The impressior of the meeting, and certainly of the Chairman, was that the. French chose to play out time So that Item 2 could not be discussed at. all. Finally it was discussed between five and six, Walravens, the Chairman, being determined that the French should not have their way. I said my piece, namely, that we had expressed the view at the previous meeting that it would be better if matters could be organised on a national basis before we attempted anything on an international scale but that we had conformed to the general wish of the Committee that too long a delay might be involved and that the Secretary should put up a draft plan. Whhlle we felt that it might at this stage be difficult to discuss certain organisational matters, we saw no dificulty in discussing what information should be supplied to the War Room and the form it shoulld take in order that it might more easily be integrated in time of crisis, the language that should be used, and the was supported by the Dutch, who thought that we should have something of the personnel that would be necessary, at any rate at the outset. My view a 026. plan on the above lines and then 8o to the Military with a request that we be informed how the War Room is to tbe fitted into the military machine. Everybody else seemed to agree, except the French who said that they did not think that they could proceed until the matter had bee considered on a high ministerial level. There seemed to have been a misunderstanding, and it was questionable in their view whether the S.I.C. was competent to discuss war organisation, which in France would be a matter for the Minister of Defence rather than the Minister of Foreign Affairs. The meeting decided that the Secretary should remain whole-time at the disposal of the Committee, although he could, if time permitted, be allowed to do certain jobs such as the one he had recently done in Washington in connection with the Atlantic Pact. One of his tasls between now and the next meeting woulld be to visit each Service at least once and record their views on war planning. These would be circulated well in advance of the next meeting, when a further discussion woud take place. Some doubts were expressed about a request by me that Irvine should look into the security of certain countries coming under the Atlantic Pact. It was decided to refer the point to the Permanent Commission. Irvine had produced a useful paper on counter-sabotage, making certain recommendations to the Permanent Commission. An amended draft is to be submitted to each country before the final paper goes forward. I gave the delegates lunch at the Cripps Arms. Einthoven sat next to me and sat next to Dick. Both made it clear tha they wished be in direct touch with us, and they intend to put this view forward when Diclo and come over to Holland in the New Year. THIS ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAING IN DEPARTMENT PUBLIC RECORDS 14th December. 1958. April 2010 Burt looked in to see me. He said that he was Investigating a complaint which had reached the Coramission from the Colonial Office, via the Home Office, that a leakage of information had occurred in connectionw Inspector Barnes' visit to Uganda. Burt said that he was confident the lealage had not occurred in S.B. he thought that it came from the Colonial Office. He said it was curious that the Graphic seemed to get the news first - this he had from a very good source. of the Surete came to see me. He put up a veny good show at the S.I.0. He is young and intelligent. I made it clear to him, in view of the remark that ite had made at the meeting that we had no wish to prevent Prvine going to see indeed we had no power to do SO. On the other hand, it was natural that I should see Irvine from time to time and that when he felt himself in a difficulty he might refer a point to me for advice. He had, in fact, told me that Mr. Starbusman, the Belgian Secretary of the Permanent Commission, had restricted to a few hours. I had, therefore, wondered whether it was in fact worth while, as there would not be time for Irvine to go round to other offices either in Paris or Brussels, or in The Hague. Had he been able to do this, he might have re-written the paper in a form more acceptable to the meeting as a whole. The unfortunste impression, thet we had tried to stop Irvine going was obviously the result of the stupid telegrams sent out by S.I.8. John Marriott took Off to discuss B.2 2matters and a possible visit by Graham to Paris to look into files of the Surete whichrellate to the Rote Kappelle and certain more recent activities of some of its old membe's. 15th December. came to see me to-day and I subsequently took him out to lunch. He made no apology for failing to appear at the meeting of the S.I.C. Dn December 13th, beyond saying that he was sorry that he could not get there, It is, I think, quite clear tha t his action was deliberate and that an attempt was made to play out time in order that Item 2 should not be taken. While does not dispute tha "the further integration of C.E. services naicase of emergency" is recorded in the terms of reference of the S.I.C. he says that subsequent correspondence on a Ministerial level. in France did imply that there were doubts an3 misundestandings in the minds of the French delegation on the competency of the Committee to deal with such matters. I am fairly confident, however, that these doubts did not crystallise until Irvine's memorandum vias brought to the notice of the S.D.E.C.E. by the local representative of S.1.8. This resulted in the S.D.E.C.E. invoking what they calll the "basic law" in the French Constitution, which lays down that intime of wvar alll the forces of law and order come under the military. From this the French argue that the way organisation must be a matter for the Ministry of Defence and not for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. informed me that a letter had already been sent by the Minister of Defence to the Minister of Foreign Affairs, pointing this out. Meanwhile, the system of Services Specdaux, which will comprise S.I., 5.0. and C.E. (including the control of the civil forces) has been agreed to by the President du Conseil. Any separate planning, therefore, for O.E. by the French runs counter to this arrangement. proposal is to leave the S.I.0. to discuss matters affecting the exchange Df information in peace time, but to eliminate the Surete from war time planning by transferning this function to another committee. He asked, rather pertinently, whether we should no object to the Commissioner of Police being represented on a war planning comittee. I said that whilw we should not object in principle, such a question did not really arise in this country since our relations with the Police were the same in peace as in war and were based on mutual co-operation. All the records regarding subversive movements and espionage directed against this country, and to some extent on an international scale, were centralised in our office. (This, of course, i not the case in France, where the bulk of the records are wi th the Surete). I told that while there might be difficulties in the 3.I.0. discussing war organisation, I did not see that there could be any objection to discussing the type of information and the form in which it would be presented in order to facilitate the centralisation of Records in an integrated War Room. If the Surete oulld only be brought into line on this question in time of war, it would be too late. All parties, both civil and military, were represented on the 3.1.0. and, as Committee. We could, of course, put on red coats for a meeting of the far as I could see, would have to be represented on the War Planning 22, S.I.C. in the morning and blue coats for a meeting of the Planning Committee in the afternoon, but this did not seem to me to get us much further! Where we go from here I am not very clear, but I imagine tha the S.D.E.C.E. are Going to maintain their attitude that they cannot discuss was planning in the S.I.0., but only in a committee in which the French element depends from the Ministry of Defence. I saw Newsam and also asked his approval for bringing oven the Polish cipher clerk, from Paris. He agreed to both, provided in the case of we were satisfied that he had really valluable information to impart. I had a meeting with D.B. D.C. B.2 and Perrin. We talked all round the case of FUCHS and came back mor or less to where we started. The only two points which amerged were, firstly, that we must have a clear idea hov we were going to dispose of FUCHS after the interrogation; was there, for example, a job open for him in a University? Secondly, what would be the consequences if he were dismissed from the Civil Service? I said that there was no doubt about a Minister's right to dismiss7 civil servant, but he might have to justify his action in a whole variety of way. It was then that complicated questions relating to the source of our information would arise. Were Minister's prepared to stand the racket, or would they insist on disclosing vital secrets? This had so often happened in the past. Dick. Haldane Porter and I discussed the Lebanon. We came to the conclusion that our only course was to endeavour to get a suitable Police Adviser, to be paid 2,000 a year by the Lebanese Government and the way was open to us to do 8O if at any future date we thought it was forth while and we could afford it. 16th December. Inter-Services Director of Intelligence, Pakistan, came to the J.I.C. this morning. He expressed himself as being extremely satisfied with his visit. He had been very courteously received and arrangements had been made for him to be supplied with information about continous countries on a "need-to-know" basis. He quite undenstood that Intelligence Departments here could not go much further at the moment. He had, however, come here principally to study the organisation and in this he had learned a great deal. George McClellan and Billl Crean looked in for a moment. They are on the Canadian I.D.C. course which has been visiting Europe. Bill Crean may go as Cousellor or Charge Affaires to Moscow. Glazebrook has taken on his job on the J.I.C. George McClellan will be returning to the Intelligence Branch when he has finished his course, and Johhny Leopola will be retiring. 229 Torimy Thompson rang up about a request that he had received from Hussey, Security Officer at the American Embassy, for a lecture on subversive movements in this country. Thompson said he did not want to do this, and in any case could only speak for the M.P. area. The lecture is apparently required for ten Security Officer who are to look after affairs in American Embassied in Enrope. I said that we should not feel very inclined to talk to these people and would rather keep out of it. I recommended to Thompson that he should discuss the matter with John Cimperman, as it seemed to me that subversive movements here could have little bearing on the work of the Embassy security officers abroad. I gave a talk to five S.B. officers from the provinces. They seemed to have been delighted tiwh their visit here and extremely keen to help us: One of them aid that we might with advantage get C.C more interested than many of them appeared to be, since if they did not have th support of their C.Cs it was difficult for them to give the time to S.B. Work which was necessary. He also thought that it would help if H.M.IS mentioned the importance of S.B. work to C.Cs. I told him that we were present at all .Cs'meetingg and that we did get OtOs down here from time to time; we should, however, have to considericy hat moreey RETAINED could do. DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS At the conclusion of the meeting of the J.I.C. tacaeg5, Seel said Doto that he was slightly worried about the security of the top secret documents that he was receiving in his capacity of Colonial Office representative on the J.I.C. He pointed out that Church House was not occupied solely by the Colonial Office, but that normal security precautions were taken in spite of the fact that they had no very special machinery for the custody of secret papers. He had been in the habit .of keeping J.I.C. papers in his safe; there were many of them, however, that he had not got the time to read and he doubted whether he was concerned with much of what went on in the J.I.0. He wondered, therefore, whether in fature the Secretary could use his discretion in submitting J.I.C. and other papers to the Colonial Office. It was left that he would discuss the matter with the Secretary. Perennally, I felt rather astonished by this pronouncement. If I remember right, the Colonial Office came to the J.I.C. at their own request, and it is abundantly clear that if you do not take the trouble to read the papers you are not in a position to take part in its deliberations. While it is, of course, true that a considerable number of items discussed are af a purely military nature, there is quite a lot which affects Colonial defence and defence policy, which I should have thought the Colonial Office representative would profit from knowing. If, however, his sole contribution is to lock the documents up in his safe without even reading them, somebody ought to tell him that he is not taking a proper view of his responsibilities As regards the security of papers in possession of the Colonial Office, somebody might well have said: "If you consider that your securit, is not satisfactory, wasn't it high time that you did something about it??". Personally, I felt that Seel's statement was altogether lamentable, and I am afraid rather typical of the Colonial office outlook 19th December. came to see me. I gave him my usual talk about the office and this led to a fairly long discussion of a more or less. professiona. kind, He was extremely pleasant - in fact a little too pleasant. I took him out to lunch. 3-6 At the Directors meeting to-day we discussed Dick's memoranda. Charles agreed to stump up the 2500 for the Police Adviser in the Lebanon. We agreed to obtain the services of Tolson for the Far East, and also those of Houston who is already there. Fay of the Singapore Police is returning here and will be seen on arrival. Dick elaborated on his memorandum, and personally T am convinced that we shoulld give the scheme a trial, making it clear to S.1.S. that it is a trial. I think it offers a real opportunity for getting a closer grip on the C.E. producing agencies on foreign territory and improving the quality of their work. I think. however, tha't while we can agree to our representatives - such as and John Harrison we ought to make it clear that in our view where there is an overt liaison to be performed it should, wherever possible, be carried out by a Security Service officer and not one just trained in S.I.M.E. or S.I.F.E. Sir Edward Travis, Alexander of G.C.H.Q., Dick, Roger, Skardon and I discussed the FUCHS case from the technical angle. The question was whether if we focused FUCHS? mind on the period of his service in New York we should be Jeopardising the source. Alexander, the G.C.H.0. expert, thought that there was no cross-bearing that the Russians wene likely to get on account of enquiries in Australia. Dick said that he wanted to do this in order to convince FUCHS that we knew he was a spy, otherwise he might reason thatt owing to the explosion of an atomic bomb in Russia the Security authorities were looking for a likely person and in view of his K.P.D. past, had pounced on FUCHS -- in effect that we were really running a bluff. Alexander said that it must follow that the more we onvinced FUCHS that we knew he was a spy, the greater the mas the risk to the source. On the whole, however, he thought that this risk was taken the moment we accused FUCHS of being a spy and that it was only increased slightly by our casting his mind back to New York. It was agreed, therefore, that we should proceed on the lines indicated, subject to agreement by 'ct, which Travis would endeavour to obtainthl IS A GOPY ORIGINAL DOGUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 20th December. 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 APRiL DOo I went to see Gerald Templer at his request. He wanted to know the state of the Australlian Security Service and the progress they had made. I gave him this information. Gerald was also worried about a reference to the exclusion of 33 Communists from various projects including the long-range rocket project. A statement about this had appeared apparently in a memorandum written by Shedden somne time ago. I said that we had never seen a copy of this. Gerald read me his brief, from which there was every indication that he intended to be quite difficult with the Americans on the guestion of passing integrated information to third parties. He was going to say that we never had any concrete evidence of things going wrong or lack of security on our part, and that if there was any it was up to the Americans to produce it. We then discussed the case of and his undesirable brother. with an undesirable wife. I tolld Gerald that we could not justify 231. IS OOPY 20 ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED UINDER SE( ERSECTION further enquiriesinto the brother, who had just done gounstoRos and against whom absolutay nothing was known. He Said he had hoped that we could go further into the case of the bad brothers then-showed-him a summary of the evidence in our file. He agreed that the whole thing mas pretty flimsy and at the same time he felt sure he was right in keeping out of M.0.3 in the absence of any positive information that he had nothing to do with his brother or sister-in-law. He had ensured, however, that career should not suffer in any way and that he should be posted to a job of equal importance. I attended a meeting, under the Chairmanship of Sir Eric de Normann, at which 'c'k Barnett and Saffery from the Post Office, and Bllack and Marshall of the Ministry of Works were present. It was made clear to us that the Metropole Hotel was an unsatisfactory building, grossly insecure in time of war, and required considerable alteration to make it suitablle for our purposes in time of peace. Apart from this, if we moved in, the matter would clearly have considerable publicity, as those concerned have long been clamouring to get it back for hotel accommodation. The Post Office said that the move woulld involve them in a cost of at least $25,000, and would take not less than nine months. The same cost and time would be involved in a further move to Horseferry Road at a later date. The proposition, therefore, seemed a bad one to all those present. The building in Horseferry Road will be linked by underground passages with Whitehall as apart of a general defence scheme. It will also have a certain amount of underground accommodation, which would form a secure War Roorn for both our Services. It is to accommodate ,000 people and will cos't something between five and six millions. It was estimated that the plans cannot be completed for another eighteen months and the building would not be erected before 1957. I asked whether it Would not be possible to construct that wing of the building which would be occupied by our two Services in advance. As Sir Eric de Normann seemed to think that this was a good idea and should be feasible, he has undertaken to explore the position and will be calling a meeting after Christmas with the architect, when he will wish to hear from us precisely what our requirements are. Black told me that at this future meeting they would be glad to have not only our peace time figures for accommodation, but also our war time expansion figures, since it was proposed to put into the main building certain departments which on the outbreak of war would be sent to the country; ve would When take over their accommodation. Major Le Feuvre of the J.I.S. rane to say that he wanted some assistance from us on the J.I.S. paper on Communism in Africa. The C.R.O. apparently were endeavouring to water things down. I said that in 80 far as the West and East Africa were concerned, there was no evidence of Communism as it was understood in Europe, there was no local Communist Party. There was, hovever, a lot of nationalism, which received considerable encouragement from all sorts of people who went out to preach British democracy. It was true that niggers coming here often went to the C.P. This did not mean that they were Communists or that they understood anything about Karl Marx or dialectical materialism: it merely IS A ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED 232. IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION meant racial that descrimination they found the Communists sympathetic becas They had no 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS own show. Le Feuvre and said viere all in favour of the niggere running their representative from here in he the would New Year. like to discuss this matter with a We haver received a letter to the Colonial Office regarding which criticises a report by one RYSDYK, a Dutchman, who has recently been to Nigeria and is now in this country. This Dutchman alleges that while travelling with she disclosed to him that she was a Communist and a member of an organisation which was using education as a means for spreading Communist propaganda. We feel this goes a bit far, although we are quite convinced that of the Colonial Bureau of the Fabian Society can only cause trouble in the Colony, however good her intentions may be. 21st Deeember. We had a further Directors Meeting. ofDick, Charles, Roger and myself, Horrocks being away ill. Charles gave us a gloomy picture of his finances. There was no possibility of extracting any further money out of the Treasury and we were in faot lucky to have escaped a cut, other than what we have had to accept under devaluation. Horrocks I gather, had budgeted for a considerable increase in personnel, officers and O.Rs, including the Registry, but his figures were not very realistic, since nobody imagined that ve should have this personnel by lst April. Somehow wwe should have to bring our budget within the Treasury allotment and this might well affect the arrangements which had been arrived at with S,I.S. in the Middle East and Far East. Charles said that he had already sent a telegram to the D.G., warning him that no increase in our budget could be accepted. It is possible that this might affect the move to Moascar from Fayid, but personally -I think we should try and effect cuts elsewhere, since if there is to be any reality in our integration with S.I.S., it must be on the basis of a joint building. Skardon interrogated FUCHS this morning. He went over the whole ground, knew and, in fact, volunteered the information with certain dditions. beginning with his early career. FUCHS admitted everyting that we He had been associated with the K.P.D. in his activities against the Nazis, and after Hitler came into power he went to Paris where he had been in touch with Otto KADZ and others. He had not, however, engaged in any such activities after his arrival in this country, to which he was extremely grateful for the hospitality that it had extended to him, and for his naturalisation. Finally, Skardon came to the point, when he suggested that FUCHS had been passing information to the Russians. FUCHS smiled and said he did not.quite understand. Skardon then put the point guite bluntly, when FUCHS denied flatly that he had ever done anything of the kind; he could not see why he should wan't to. Skarton took him very carefully over the ground during the period when he was in America, and told him that our information was positive and that we could not disclose our informants, and said that if it was not FUCHS it "could only be his twin brother". FUCHS said that he could offer no explanation as to how tis mistake occurred. He admitted having visited his sister and even possibly to have taken papers with him; he could not conveive, however, that his sister would have betrayed him, even if she had an opportunity mentioned to do so. his Skandon father': spoke appointment to to him the about Securi Officer, al he was afraid that his father might not find his father. He said that he had the Soviet zone congenial and might be rather outspoken in his views, which might bring him to the notice of the Russians and even cause his arrest. 233. He preferred that the authorities should know all this possible situation in advance. It had not apparently occurred to him that if his father were arrested, pressure might be brought to bear on himself, but he admitted tt this was a possibility. He was told that this interview was entirely a personall matter between himself and Skardon and that the accusations that we were making were not known to the authorities; it was, therefore, in his interests to keep his mouth shut. FUCHS demeanour throughout was wholly consistent with guilt or with his innocence and we are, therefore, left with an extremely awkward situation on our hands. 22nd December. Perrin came over, when we discussed the FUCHS interrogation. It was agreed that we would prepare a note in two columns containing the raw material and our explanation of it. We discussed various possibilities; e.g. that of sending someone - to America to see whether we could prise loose nymore information which would have a bearing on the FUCHS case and might be the outcome of a similar case which we believe to be running in the U.S. It was felt, however, that this should not hold up any decision as to FUCHS' disposal; we were in the position of saying to him that having considered the whole matter he could not continue to work at Harwell, and we would find him a job at some University compatible with his qualifications The position of his father in the Eastern zone would be the explanation to the outside world. As far as he knew, the accusations would be purely between himself and our department. Perrin thought that we ought to have a mee'ting with Portal and kcroft, and that at this stage we should not call in Rowlands. He tried to get Portal before Christmas, but this was not possible, SO the meeting was arranged for Wednesday morning at 10. a.m. THIS IS COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENIT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 I went. over to see 'c' in order to tell him about the tragictaffair of Thomas, who has had an operation for tumour on the brain and may well be totally incapacitated. I asked him whether he could either lend us an officer of S.0., of the type of Heseldine, or recommend somebody on a permanent basis. He said he mauld speak to Sinclair. I then discussed with him the incident. He was anxious that should talk it over with Sinclair next week. He then asked me about young WILLERT, son of Sir Arthur Willert, who he said had confessed to the man Chambers, of the "Pumpkin" incident in Amenica, that he had an espionage past. I said that I knew that WILLERT was going to be interrogate but I had not heard that thig vas the result. 234. THIS IS IGOPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 23rd December. I had a tall with Irvine about the S.I.C. and the talk that I had with le agreed that Irvine had no alternative but to carny out his instructions to visit all members of the S.I.C. in Wester'n Europe and get their impressions on what it was possible to do in preparation for an integrated Var Room. When these views had been obtained, we could discuss there and decide upon the line to be taken at the next meeting. I particularly stressed the point that whatever the Freneh constitutional position was in time of war, it was fairly clear that in time of peace the Surete had a strong counter-espionage commitment. It followed, therefore, that they would have to be consulted in the preparation of documents which would form a part of the archives of the War Room. It would clearly be a mistake to leave this until the moment when war broke out. 28th December. I attended a meeting at the Ministry of Supply, accompanied by Dick, Arthur Martin and Sicandon. Lond Portal took the Chair and Perrin and Sir John Cockeroft were present. We went over the whole ground and, in fact, stated the basic information in considerable detail. Skardon gave an account of FUCHS' attitude during the interrogation, and one expressed the view that what he hed said was consistent with his guilt or with his innocence. It was explained to Lord Portal that the interrogation had beer kept in two partis that he had been tolld on the one hand that the presence of his father in the Eastern zone constituted a serious security question which might involve his having to give up his work at Harwell (this was under consideration by the atomic energy authorities). The accusation, however, as to whether he was a spy was entirely a matter between 6ur office and himsellf. It was also madd clear that FUCHS clearly wanted to remain at Harwell; he was confident that he could get a job at one of the Universities and that in view of what had been said to him, he would certainly have to consider the question of his resignation. Portal seemed to take the view that in the light of all the evidence, the risk of keeping FUCHS at Hanwell was a one which coulld not be accepted. He would, however, like to thir the matter over. Meanwhile, we would think of some pretext for a further talk with NUCHS in case he showed any signs of breaking. I went to see Sincalri about a successor for Thomas. I said that we had an immediate commitment which reouined an experienced officer of the type of Heseldine. I asked him whether he could either loan us an office? for a period of six months, or whether he knew of anyone with the 235. right qualifications whom we could take on as a permanency. He took a note of the particulars and promised to let me know. I then discussed intervie with me and told him about the present proposal that Irvine should visit all members of the S.I.C. and get their views on what can be done in a preparatory way in regard to a War Room. Personally, I thought something could be done without impinging on uestions of organisation, either national or international. We could, for example, get uniformity in the types of information that we would chebeoputting into the War Room, and we cloulad also agree on personnel, llanguages, etc. We should, hovever, have a better idea as to whether there was any common ground when we had the views of the interested parties. He agreed and thought that when Irvine's report was issued we should get together for a further consultation. He said there was an added complication, in that as things were Monty waB only responsible for Ack-Ack in the Northern Zone of France; it seemed to follow, therefore, that the Supreme Commander of the Land Forces would have no say in the arrest of Communists, for example, in a place like Marseilles, even if they had authority in the zone of the Armies (9). Even this seemed somewhat doubtful, and nobody was yet clear wha't the machinery should be. He said that he would try and make some unofficial soundings in Fontainebleau. I explained to him in some detail the system of the Services Speciaux. He agreed with me that it had considerable dangers, particularly in view of the fact that the head of the Services Speciaux woulld be of equal rank to the Chief of Staff. He did not think that any other country would accept have such a system. In the case of S.I.8. their theatre organisation would liaison officers with 8-G.1, G.2y G.. &:CG4+, but they did not envisage the head of it being of higher rank than Brigadier. He would, however, have the right 60 direct access to the Supreme Commander', although this would only be exercised on rare oecasions. THIS IS COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS 29th Decerber. ACT 1958 APRIC 9o10. came to see me about vetting of immigrants going to the U.S. According to present arrangements, we vet all foreign immigrants, but only such British immigrants as give cause for doubt in the Americans' minds. Rather a vide view if taken of this latter category, with the result that we have numerous applications for informatio about British subjects. wondered whether we could arrive at any arrangement which would prevent the number of references made to this office. There is, in fact, only one that I could think of - which I did not mention - namely, that ve should supply the Americans with a list of our Communists. I explained to the Americans that the vetting commitment was a very serious one frorn the point of view of the work of this office, since there was a limit to what we could do, and if we exceeded that limit we could only do so by trespassing on the time and work of those who were in fact engaged in building.u the records on which the vet vas made. If, however, he would submit a breakdown of aliens and British subject applying for immigrantvisa We would reconsider bewhole question and see what ve couldido He said that he was being strongly pressed by the State Department to ensure that no British Communists reached the U.3. as immigrants. Kelllar told me that he had had a conversation with Johnson about the to case of He had endeavoured to pacify him in regard the delays wnion nad occurred. These were due to the fact that we had been in the process of putting up the case of and that 236 we had not realised that he had subsequently become interested and that from his point of view the matter was urgent. This had been conveyed to Kella who had passed it on to one of his sections before he left for Malta. Meanwhile, Burt had sent in a report to the Colonial Office of a rather sensational nature. Johnson had obviously put it up to higher authority, without collating it with our information OP being in a position to assess its reliability. This report had subsequently reached us and caused us to revise our original draft. Apart from this, the whole issue was complicated by the fact that was a friend of Cohen's -- and probably Creech-Jones - all of whom are Fabians. Johnson had coupled this with another grievance about courses for Pollice Officers in Singapore, where he alleged that we had let him down. Johson told Kellar that he had never' been treated in this way before, and that he thought there was something sinister behind it. He proposed, therefore, to raise the matter with the D.G. on his return. I can only presume that his Police mind causes him to think that in the D.G's absence we have made a point of ignoring him. I talked to Miss Bagot and Kitchin about an African paper on Communism, the draft of which has been put up by the J.I.C. It is a thoroughly bad paper, one of the worst tha't I have ever seen. Meanwhile, another one has come in prepared by F.O.R.D. largely based on information supplied by us. I have suggested to Gardiner that this one should form the basis of the document, and that the other one should be scrapped. He asked that our representative should go over and discuss the matber.w the J.I.S. on Monday. D.D.N.I. rang up about the vetting of Security Services in Italy Portugal, Denmark and Norway, which we have undertaken under the Atlantic Part. I explained to him that we were waiting for a clearance, since the relevant passage in the discussions at Washington had been left out, from which it followed that if our representative turned up in Italy nobody would know who he was or why he had come. I gather that the matter was somewhat urgent, as until the Clearance is given certain documents and equipment cannot be auppllied to the Italians under the Atlantic Charter agreement. He said he would do what he could and that the matter might be raised with the C.0.S. The American Admiral, Connolly, is apparently worried about the position. 3oth December. I discussed with Perfeet and Thistle operatior "Lancashire Hotpot". It is proposed that we should sent up an officer to run telephone checks alongside the Lancs. County Police, with a view to getting to the bottom of the curious documents yhich have been intercepted by their informant. Before raising the matter with C.O. Lancs. I thought that we ought to assess the position very carefully and decide precisely vihat was worth while and howtfar the Post office could assist. I told Thistle he had better work the matter out with Malcollm Cumming. Lofty came in to say good-bye. He is going fapming He vill be much missed. THIS OOPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENI RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIO RECORDS ACT 1958 APRIL 20O 237. Marriott and Martin camge in to tell me that a telegram from Washington considerably amplified the previous one in connection with the FUCHS case. While in some ways it strengthened the case against FUCHS, there was a corrupt group with a date September 20th, which, if it applied to FUOHS:! movements, did not fit the case. It is evident that we are on somewhat shifting sand, and that it is never possible to be certain that ne have got the correct solution unless we have all the groups in the sentence. This is rather disturbing. Mennwhile, I understand that arrangements have been made to send a good deal of the ran ma teriall over here. This should help us to a considerable degree, but it 1s really a pity that it could not have been done before. At meeting of the Cabinet on December 8th. a deeision was reached about the employment of Communiste in induatry. It amounts to this; that we should continue the present policy, by which under the terms of the contract the Minister concerned has the right to object to the employment of any particular individual on world connected with this contract. No public announcement is to be made and no tribunel 1B to be set up. XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX