A The National Archives (c) crown copyright Catalogue Reference:kv/4/468 Image Reference:1 POL F 3-24-90 SAV15 I LIDDELL DIARIES FILA CO s Form 924 SEE ALSO LIST INSIDE COVER Sonal No. Stm Date Stor Star Domonation Seral No Soriat Nu. Duslurtion Date enigration POL F 53-24-90 FILEALSWES rnuolt Hov TOvPACNIVET TAWIOAGAUDY ein tintqu tpui NI 16 T T IHTI a th tu in This A COPY 1. ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS 26th. ACT 1958 September 1946 E We have now got IRA LANGE,aI TURKUL under interrogation by Gilbert Ryle and Kop. Although TURKUL has said that IRA is a N.K.V.D. agent. the latter strongly denies this. Both of them, however, have lied and have had to retract. There are signs that the ice is beginning to craok. Nothing has been said, BO fan, to dicredit Gilbert'e thesis and much has come out which confirms Hil? and Wakefield came to see me about the case of a man called GOODE, who on our recommendation was arrested in Italy as a renegade and detained, contrary to our advice, for a period of five months. GOODE is now threatening action for wrongful detention against the Secretary of State for Var, unless he can obtain the name of the individual responsible. The Treasury Council are pressing us for the name. We are saying that the local military author- ities are responsible since we have no Doers,and that in ouD covering letter we made it clear that detention should only take place if this appeared desirable on account of the military situation in the area. T recommended that we should stick o our line and that Wale field should discuss the matter with Cussen, who initiated the ease. and if necessary g0 with @ussen and see the Treasury Solicitors. At the B. Meeting to-day T raised the question again of foraign airlines establish- ing of fices at our aerodromes and the need for clloser liaison with the Immigration. authopitics. I told the meeting that at the A.L.O's conference last.wecl I had stressed the importance-o of their getting to know the Immigration people of all ranks in 1. ondet to find out what people were passing through their hand eto. I told the meating that the D.M.I. had ssued an order to the effect that M.I.5. is noit a part of his directorate, but that there is a close hinison between us. Himsvorth gave a talk on the B. B.5. Press contar I said that the person vihto does the cuttings should find pit fromiall sections "hat their regui rements in this direction wee. Mitchell said that the LEESE escape noute affair vas much clearer,n that LOESE has been witing letters to various people in hich he refers to the "Argentine affairs "Britiah Paasports for males to go to Eire ete. the N.E. referred to/list of people from this office who handle matenial. He said we shall shortly have to fall in with ISIC requiremente in this respect, and suggested thnt when the nen organisation comes into being Senior officer should supply liste from their sections of all secretaries and registrans who have tD handle the materinl a 118t of officers having been already suppli He also mentioned a list of language oualir fications which he was trying to compile. He said he would make a complete isti&souild discuss it with DE/A as to ho these people can he made available. Ned neid came to see me about RENNIE ASSOOIATES. His American friend, who had asked aor nformstion about South America had been told that the organisatior did not receive sufficient support to male enauiries B6ible. They did not say havever, whethe they were opening up activities in Europe o the British Commonwealth. Ned does not thin that Itis contact can go back to them agaon on this subject. If, however, he sees an opportunity of getting a Swede or Dutchman to do so, he will take it. 3 15 September 27th. Jacl Barrov came tD bee me. He is no connected with a Company which has an important Tiaison with Franco ROSST, a large engineering company near Milan. He wi1l be concerned with the sale of their products within the Empire and has representatior in Hong Kong. the Caribbean, Singapore and other places. He thought that we might po8Bibly find his Ldpire contacts of uBe to 1a. T am going to discuss this matter further with him. Sin John Shaw and Me. Gurney, his auccessor as Chef seeretary in Pallestine. came to see me and Bubsequently sati the D.G. Gurney has been initiated into OATS - T explained to him the position of Dur D.$.0. and of S.I. As Gurhey had been previously in both West ana East Africa I talked to him about the proposal that we should have a D.S.0. in Nairobi. He theughtth that probably this was right, but he was emphatic about this officer covering West Africa aa we. He pointed out that: it would be easier to aend someone to West Africa from here than to Band someone from Nairobi. He did not thimi that there were any but purely local problems in West Africa and he mentonec that anybody coming from East Africa to dhseuss the affairs of West Africa would get a bad Start oving to a long-standing breach which was, of course, slbdued but neverthelless existed. The D.C. told me afterwards that Sir John Shaw, while having a very high opinion of Kellar'B knowledge and ability, felt that aB a bucceasor to Douglas Roberts Giles of the Palrestine Police would be better choice. I told the D.G. that Sir Join Shaw had a very limiter knowledge about the wholle organisation and work, and that I doubted very much whether he had any idea wha't the head of S.I.M.E. was was called desirable upon to to do, have or what there. type Personally of person I it was 4. convinced that the appointment of Giles, who was a Levartine and extremely teuchy, would be a disaster. It is unfortunate that this should have happened, since Shaw has confirmed Douglas Roberts'e view whch I am certain was Eiven purely out of pique. Moreover, Douglas Roberta contradicted himself completely when he said that Keilar would not be suitable as he is not a soldier and then recommended Gilles who is a policeman. Curry came to talk to me about the carding of a report on the Hungarlan Intelligence Service. The Registry were asking for a ruling. and were evidently hoping that this cold be a matter for S.I.S. I said that while I was certain that there ough't to be discretion, i.e. that it was not necessary to card cipher elerks, ete.: it was essential for US to card our Opposite numbers and their agents. We had been made responsiible for the defence of the realm,ir SD far as security matters were concerned, and we, therefore, had to card in ecordance with Dur responsibilities If anything went wrong as a result of not carding, the secbion concerned would be res- ponsible and not S.I.S. Or the Registry. Ruefan, late of 020, came to see me. He 18 at present employed by the Bnitish Council in Paris. He knows Bobby Mackenzie, having been with him at school and in the Gunners but has not made his acnuaintance in Paris. I told him that I thought he ought to do SD. He also told me that he had been meeting Baudreiul in a soc1al way. I told him that I did not much like Baudreuil, and that he had better watch his step in any relations with Bobby Mackenzie, aB Baudreuil, knowing that Ruffer wan an ex-hember of M.1.5., Would be almost certain to suspect that he was up to no good. 5. September 30th Dick White returned to-day from leave. T discussed with him the quest1d of his going to the Middle East. We came to the conclusion that as he eDula not get out there until the end of the month,i would hardly be worth his while going unless the D.G. feels that he has to make a decision oi the spot about Douglas Roberta'e successor, Cussen and Wakerielld came to see me about GOODE. Cussen is quite clear about the legal DOBItion. He eaye that only the local Oommander on the spot or the Minister of War can be indicted. He will see the Treasury Solcitors. He himself would be prefectly ready to give evidence as an ex-Army officer. We also discussed the case of Admiral Thomsonts leakage to Freddie KUH about the cuts in his articles in the Sunday Despatch; these related to Treland. An aptiele appeared in the Chicago Sun, stating that these cuts had been made on account of the co-operation that nad been received from the Ene Government during the war. clearly Aamipal Thomson told KUH. We agreed that owdng to the lapse of time and laok of any publicity given to this ma'tter in this country, it would be better to let leeping dogs the. If, however, Admirall Thomson became troublesome in the future it would be a8 well to have the information on recond. Bertram EDE has returned from the Caribbean with KIRBY-GREEN. T discussed with him his future. He does not want to run B.3.0. nor is he particulariiy keen to become A.1.0. Scotland, although he would not mdnd this JOU if there were nothing else for him to do. He seels to think it would only be a part-time tob and that for the reat of the week he could shoot or fish. I said that this was not quite my idea of the job. What Bertram would really like to do would be to aot as an adviser on Colonial matters to myself,and be sent abroad on missions Biminar to the one that he has just carried out. T said that in my view this was really a reversion to the old Overseas Control idea - E did not see how he could perform that function without cutting across the tracks of B.3., or without knowing all about the Intellligence of the area which he was visiting. He seemed to think that the joh was different and that sich a nowlledge Woui7 not be really necessary. I gathered that i it were decided that his services vere not relwiPe in this onpacity, he would Like to applly for the Foreign Office job, although he did not wish to leave the department. He asked that his name should be put in provialonally. He ther told me about his ideas for running the Caribbeany He thought that the Head office ishoud be in Washington and that the D.S.0.8 in the Colonies should be removed. I sadd that I liked the idea of running the show fron Washington, but that T had always understood that this wtaa unacceptable to GoveInoos and to the Golonial Office. Bertram said thet he had escertained that thin was Bot So. I also said tha't I thought we should have to retain some pied-a-terre in the Colonies. The idea appeals to IES, as it provides a additional argument to 'cr for the establishment of an Office on American s0il. It would, T think be for consideration whether the office shou had be in a Washington preference for DT New New York. York, as Stephenson he felt that always i1 you visited Washington it was easier to get access to the people you wanted to see. If you were resident there they were nelined to put you off. October lst. T took over from Harker and, in the D.Gis absence, tha't the tool J.I.c. hiB had weekly accepted meeting. his recommendation Harry said that Creedy should investigate the question of peciprocity and the exchange of information with the Ruspinns. While the War orrice, Armirality and Air Ministry are worki.ng it on a reciprocal basis, the Ministry of Supply are handing things out right and left. Hollis raised the question of two histordans who were members of the Communist Partyand working in the Cabinet offices. Althenrh they might ot be engaged on confidential Bubjecta, it as not unikely that they mixed with other sople who were. These eoplle would not know that they wene talking to members of the Coramu- nist Party. Suggested to Hollis that he should have a tall with Cplonel Walker, who spole to me about them at the club the other day - one of them was taken,D aainst or advice and the 0 ther ivas taken on before the result of the vetting was received. Alec Keilar returned from Leave to-day. Victeny and Bamfond came to see me about their H-O.Is. At present they are only supplying to D.I.B. such information as the Interim Government requires. This of course, does not include anything bearing OT the activities of the Congress Parity. On the Other handy mbers of Congress, such as MENON, ae in Dlich with R.P. DUTT and also with Molotov a Paris, which is clearly a matter of interes to the Foreign Office. The H.O.W. which produced this information can nd longer be Bponsored by the India Office. It is suggested, therefore, that we should take over the responsibility. A somewhat similar situation exists with regard to Burma. I said that I did not think there would be any real diffiquiity in our doing this under ou2 Charter. I ould, however, sneak to Maxwelll. The present Government in India did not like the Communiists, mainly because by suppe orting Russia they indirectly assisted Great Britadn during the war. NEHRU, however, is y. prepared to take a fairly tolerant view of this. MENON'S connection with NEHRU indicates that he, MENON. Wants NEHRY to take an entirely DrD-Russian line in a1l international dealings. MENON and DUTT saw NEHRU a short time ago in India and are Believed to have,ir some degree at any rate, won him Over to this point of view, The D.G. told me that he had seen the P.M. tho had said that df any matter of importance cropped up during his absence I eoud have acesa to the P.M. at any time. He read the memoranaa on TURKUL and VEIZMANA and also a note by Hollis on the Peoples Panty and Arnold LEESE. The P.M. vas interested in all these three things. He appreciated the position abont BULLDOG and wished tha't any important items should be brought to him pereonally. He did not wish them to be given any other circulation. He said that he had never heand of the Peoples Party or of LEESE and would be very glad to have some further information. The D.G. said I or Hollis would 8O over and see him. The P.M. said that unfortunately Dur memoe randumn about the visa had arndved after the Cabinet meeting which had decided on its date. gradual He abolition appreciated, at some however, not too the far arguments distant that we had Dut forward, which the D.0. reinforced, and said that he woulld speak him to the about Foreign the creation Minister. of a The Ministry D.G. asked of Defence and hoV thig would affect our position He Bald that it was his f1rm intention that we should remain under him in his capacity as Prime Minister. I tallced to the D.G. about the Caribbean plan and our rppresentatior in the I.S. He wanted me to Pursue the matter as fart as possible with 'Cr during his absence. T have warned him not to talk to the P.M. on the subject until we reach a complete impasse. 1 thought that iot migh't be more amenable to Dur having ar office in . Washington if one of ite purposes was to pun the Caribbean, for which we were responsible. 2nd october 1946 Harold Caccia rang to say that the F.0. had turned down Bertram for the security job. T thinlo he gave the impression that he was going to run something on slightly Gestapo lines. T am sure he had no intention of doing this, nor do I think he would have operated in that way. It is a pity, but the F.0. have apparently made up their minds that he is unsuitable. I discussed with Dick, Kirby Green and Cllayton the proposal that K.G. should run the Caribbean from Washington. Dick seemed a ittle bit vorried about this. He thought it woulld be a bad thing to give the impression that we vere running Colonies from Amnerica ana if there were an officer there for that purpose it might invite criticisin if Congress got on to it. I said T did not think tha't this need happen. K.G. Would go to Washington as our liaison officer. The Caribbean area would be run by two D.8.0.8, one in the north and one in the south, in Trinidad and Jamaica respectively, and K.G. would only go down and inspect them occasionally. Meanwhile he would carry liaison with the F.B.I. and R.C.M.P. Machell looked in to see me. He has a job With Kemsley'e press. He is writing leaders for the privincial papers. He hopes ulltimately to 8o to America. The D.G. held a meeting to discuss the ashington situation. It was officially agreed that we should proceed and that I should try and clear the ground with not. If nom is adament I could eithergo and see Bridges or await the D.G.'8 return. 10 October 3rd, 1946 At the J.I.C. today we discussed the Gorunist paper. DMI remarked that nothing was anid about North Africa. I intimated that this was really a matter for SIS. DMI said that he was worried about Greece.After our troops left what sort of intelligence organisation we were going to have? What woulld happen to SIME and DSO point? I Bugeested that if it were acceptable it might be possible to leave somebody behind under suitable cover as we had done in Syria. Elmhirst said that the evidence about alleged roekets falling in Sweden was entirely Inconellusive. So far not a bit of anything had been found on the ground. I told Bertram about the F.O. decision. T had a word with the D.G. about our representation in the Midde East. T said that I thought we had to go forvard with the firm conviction that we had the best man we could possibly put into the Job as the head of SIME in Alec Kellar, and that we Bhoula say BO to the Comnander in Chief and hope that the proposal would be acceptablle to him. We could very easily canvas opinions, but we should always find some whiah were pro and some which were adverse and many of the poeple consulted would not reallly have any proper idea of what the Job was on what kind of a person was required to fill it. He had already had the opinion of Roberts who began by saying that Kelllar would not do because he was not a soldier and then went on to suggest Giles who wa's a Levantine policeman. Sir John Shaw had expressed great aamiration of Kelarte work, but when asked whether li. he or Giles was the better choice had said Giles. In fact, Sir John Shaw had no elue as to what the head of SIME had to do or what kind of a person was required to fulfil the appointment. The DG has now seen the late Crin-C, General Paget who had expressed firmly the opinion that Giles would be totally unsuitable. Meanwhile the D.G. had had a hint from Rymer Jones, the Inspeetor General of police in Pallestine that Giles was expecting great news from him. Ny view of this talk waB quite valueless. We new the situation, what was required, the person and what they werre capable of, and the decision should be ours subject to the agreement of the C-in-O and noone else. D.G. agreed and said that he vouild proceed on those lines. He then told me that he had seen Gater and that it was agreed that the D.G. should Visit Nairobi. He would probably be taking Perfect with him. Captain caiger came to see me about the Lambay-Rush pigeon service.. He is our pigeon expert. He is, in fact, the nearest thing to a pigeon that I have ever seen: He talks, thinks and dreams about them. He has had pigeons since he wae a boy and his father had pigeons before him. I asked him about the homing instinct. He said that the matter 1s quite unsolved. There is however, one curious fact, namely that in a sun spot year all pigeons go hay-wire. sun BpotS are, of course, minute radio active particles though hov they affeet the pigeonsl homing instinet nobody knows. This gives some colour to the suggestion that pigeons might be able to home on an electric beam, in other words that you might have radio-controlled pigeons. There iB apparently a slight suspicion that a man in Scotland who is particularly 12, successful is actually doing this. Caiger does not believe it. 4th October 19146 John Phipps came in to see me. He has returned from Nuremberg. T discussed with him the judgement. He said that he thought that it might have been better than it Was and that in certain points the local pundits may well think that it was over-eriticism. It had however to be borne in mind that it was an agreed judgement and that agreement was not always easy. on the whole more trouble was experienced from the Americans through a muddlle-headed idea of first principles and law than from the Russians. As regards the sentences he thought that their exeoution waB inevitablle in view of the faet that many people had already been dealt with and were being deit with every week for having carried out the orders to which many of the accused in the dock put their Bignature. E had lunch with Tangye who gave me his press report. He made it cear that it did not pretend to be anything more than Fleet Street goBsip and he Seemed quite prepared for me to say at any time that it might be a comittment which we did not wish to continue since it vas doubtful how far it came within out charter. on the other hand, we might feel, and Norman Brook might feel, that it had certain uses and that Tangye'E contacts could be useful in other ways from time to time. E do not think that Tangye would really mind if we ceased to employ him. I Said that I should be seeing Norman Broolt and 13. considering the whole position. If I felt honestly that we could not justify the expenditure I woulld let him know. 5th october 1946 D.G. left today for the Miadle East with Horrocks. oussen tola me that he had entirely satisfied the Treasury Bolicitors in the case of GOODE and that if they had to name anybody responsible they would name the officer in Italy who gave the orders for arrest. As regards Admiral Thomson and the article in the Chicago sun stating why the paragraphs on Eire in his Sunday Dispatch articles had been punged, we decided that oving to the lapse of time it was better to let sleeping dogs lie. The Chicago sun had not been copied over here. 7th october 1946 I vent to see the P.M. at his request in order to give him further information about the British Peoples Party and Arnold LEESE. Ne discussed generally the Fascist movement and I think I gave him all the answers he required. I said that of course the one common factor in an the various Fascist groups was anti-semetism and it seemed a pity that the reputablle Jews could not-d something to call their disreputable kith and kin to order. The P.M. agreed, but said that the trouble was that they always hela together. He was afraid that the Fascist elements had a good deal to work on, particularly in the East End where boys in factories were sometimes ruthlessly exploited. He asked me to come and see him again whenever 14 I wanted and to keep him generally in touch. 0 lunched with Perks. I explained to him our anxieties about the visa and about the whole work of Lifting incoming travellers falling on his 1.0.5. He seemed to take the whole matter rather lightly, in fact he told me in some ways he viewed it with favour. He wanted his officers to use their powers of observation and intuition and to be thoroughly well trained in spotting undesirables. He always in structed them to Look at the travelller rather than at his passport. He was not, however, too sanguine about all his personnel, many of whom are recruited at E6 a week. He fell in Very readily with my suggestion that A.L.0.8 should be in clloser touch with 1.0.8 and suggested that in future they should attent 1.0. conferences when Perks himself went town to the porte He undertook to let me know when he would be maicing such visits. Ann Glass has returned from Italy where she has been sifting documents in the Ministry of Popular culture. She is going to work in B.2. I saw Harola Bcott today about Kirby Green. He readily agreed to his transfer: OTT the condition that he would hand to us all his pension increments and receive in exchange pension rights with this Department from the date when he Joined the police. I talked to him about the via abolition. He entirely agrees with all our views, particularly about the Alliens Branch and the inadeguacy of the Immigration Service. He has made a strong stand about retention of identity documents for travel to Ireland. 15. 8th October 19446 Cimperman called to see me with a letter which he had received from the Bureau asking that we should be informed that contrary to a statement in the Amnerican Press, lr. Hoover had communicated nothing to Drew Pearson about the Corby case in Canada. There was a leak through the Press before the case broke and some colour was given to the suggestion that this had occurred through Hoover by the fact that Hoover knows Drew Pearson through cuneo and that he might have been interested in forcing the hand of the American government to make arrests in the U.S. Colonel Neillans, former O.C. Dundee, came to see me. He 1s now carrying eut speciall investigations for the Ministry of Food. He is ready the successor to Charles Teggart. He wanted to know whether we could help him with a banking account. He had a black market case on hand in Blackpool and Liverpool where large quantities of Tate & Lyle sugar had been going to icecream merchants. Two of his own officers, one an ex-inspector of the Manchester police, in Blackpool vere involved in tipping off the gang when raids were being made. He wanted to look at these mnens' accounts. I said that with the greatest regret we could not help him. There had been a general enquiry after the war with a View to deciding what our peace time charter should be. Allthough the services that we had rendered with regard to black market offences during the war were thoroughly appreciated, it was desirablle that we should be connected with nothing of the kind in the future. We had therefore a definite order fromthe P.I1. to which we were bound to adher. He 16 fully understood the decision. I said, moreover, we no longer had any powers under the Defence Regulations which would give bankers the necessary cover. right came in to see me for a moment. He i8 joining Magan, our D.8.0. in Palestine. BLuns Dick, curry, Anthony and I discussed the case of Padgham. Anthony had just Been him in Germany and he was in a very Lovr state. His de-Nazification waB not Complete and he had not, therefore, been able to take up his post ab Oberreghrungsrat He did not think he could atick the winter in Germany. We have all fellt that there is not much future for him in this country and ve should do all we could to alleviate hiB lot by getting him petrol and food. If he could have a small car he may be able to live with his brother just outside Kiel instead of in some dingy boarding house. Padgham seems unable to face up to realities. I suggested that Dick and Anthony should put all the facts to Vansi ttart and get his backing for our point of view, Since Van's advice carried great weight with Padgham. 9th October 1946 I saw Norman Brook and gave him Tangyel report. He said that while he 1iked these reports and that on occasion he took quite usefull action, he coulld not say that they were vital to him in his work. If, therefore at any time we thought that the expense was too great he would not press us to retain Tangye's services. He waB very pleasant and said that if ever I thought he could be of assistance T vas to go and see him. 7 A man called TURNER, late of the Sudan Police, called to see me on the recommen- action of Harold Scott. He had been invalided out of the ServiceB. Whille he is now quite fit he aid not thinlo that it Would be fair to himself or to US to offer himself for emplloyment in the Midale East Or in any hot climate. He would, however, be quite prepared to work either whle time in this office or part time. I told him that if anything turned up I would let him know. He knows Arabio quite well. Had a long talk with D.P.P. mainly on the subect of FIAT who had recently produced an interesting report on L.0. Farben. The report shows very extensive remificatlons of I.G. rarben in Europe, America and even to some extent in this country. There was a possible case egainst two individuals here who had diverted a shipment of some vital raw material at the beginning of the war, but he felt that these people were too small fry to arrant prosecution. He agreed however, with us that PIAT should continue its work for two reasons. Firstly it was desirable that somebody should know the extent to which these vital industries were controlled by a foreign power, and secondily, because forms such as I.6. Farben might well be used as a cover for espionage. The matter 18 to be discussed by the J.I.0. Harry Allen attended a meeting at which Monty spoke ta the military Attaches on 24th September. His main points were: (1) National character. Without strong national character a nation will go to war. (2) No parsimory regarding scientific research. (3) Dispersal of new war industries. (4) Preparedness. A small regular army backed by a large territorial army the whole to be a balanced force ready at short notice. (5) Conseription. The problem he has been studying in America is how to train officers and men quickly. on Intelligence he admitted that before the war comanders did not really understand or appreciate it for what it was worth. He felt that this wa's now quite changed and the Higher Command saw the matter in it proper perspective. Monty iB now a strong Bupporter of 'I'. In fact, operations and intelligence are to inter-change their personnel as much as possible. Monty said that in U.8.A. he was asked whether Armies, Navies and Adr Force were not dead already owing to the atomic bomb. His answer was You muck about in your labs and places and have no responsibility. I have a responsibility to advise my Government on What to dd if, for example, things bloww up in Palestine. Arn I to advise the dropping of an atomic bomb, or several, on Palestine or do I advise the despatch of an armed force?u 10th October 1946 saw Maxweil today and talked to him about the abolition of the visa. II exxllained to him how Vital the visa was to our work and said while T realised it would go in due course, it aid mean that we should be more and more dependent on the Immigration authorities. He welcomed the poposals which T had inade to Perks that we shoulld 7 get into closer contact with Immigration Officers, but he did not hold out much hope of improvement. In fact, rather doubt whether he thought improvement was necessary in the work of Immigration officers. I said that what had really brought the Visa into dispepute was the lack of staff in the Aliens Branch of the Home Office for dealing with applications. T cited to him the case of the applicant in the U.S. who applied in February and was still waiting for an answer in June. He said that they wene doing what they could to obtain better accommodation and facilities for the Alliens Branch, particullarly as regards Traffic Index. Apparently their filing system is very out of date. T was left with the impression that nothing would be done to improve the Imnigration Service until there was a complete breakdown. I met Miss Nunn going out and repeated to her may anxieties. She was extremely sympathetic. She said that there vaS alvays some inconcllusive going on in By Division of the Home office and that they were like a bottomless pit ab regards staff. Nothing seems to ease the situation and they were permanently in a muddle. saw D.M.I. on the question of Greece and eft with him a note showing how our interests woulld be affected if S.I.M.E. withdrew. He agreed that we shoud remain and said that he woulld be quite pleased to give us one post as Assistant Military Attache. As regards the other post, possi bly in Salonica, I suggested that Wickham'e polce organisation might provide suitable oovery I told him that there might be some opposition fromt'on at our remaining at all. Ve considered 20 Me considered whether it would be better that he should tackle "oM or that I should. I thought, however, it would be best to clear the matter with the Middle East first. I outlined to the D.M.I. the lecture I was going to give to the Impenial Defense College which goes pretty far. I thought that this waB necessary when peaking to officers who might, in the future, be responsible for giving S/iBsistance ve required. I intended to explain to them that ve han the control of the enemy's Intelligence Service throughout the whole war and our machine had been turned over to successful deception for D. Day. He entirely agreed that this was right. 11th October 1946 discussed Ede'e position with him and with Charles. It seemed to me that whether Ede accepted the job of A.L.0. Scotland or not it would be impossible to appoint him until the D.G. returned. The Scottish police had expressed a desire for a police officer of their own choice and the D.G. had promised to give the matter his careful consideration. If, therefore, Ede was to go to Scotanda it would be for the D.G. to go uD there himself and explain the position. If 1 made the appointment they might well think that IT was trying to put a fast one across they in the D.G. absence. It seemed to me therefore, that Edeis appointment should remain in abeyance and that he should go on leave if he wanted to untill December. Nigell de Grey came to see me. He had been making a tour of the office. I 21 explained to him the general principles on which ve worked. I had 8 word with "oir. I discussed with him my lecture to the Imperial Defence College. He agreed with the line I was proposing to take. We then talked about America. I was insistant that if we had an officer there he should not share his office with Peter Dwyer. "on saw my point I think, but was obviously eluetant to make a final decision He anted me to discuss with Kim Philby what the division of functions would be between our officer and Peter Dwyer. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 FeR DO 14th October 1946 I gave a lecture to the Imperial efence College on the work of the office lasting about an hour. Thereafter I was questioned for another bour. This was something of an ordeal, but I think it went fairly well. 12 General Slim, the Cormandant and former comnander of the 14th Army in Burma, was in the Chair'. There were about 40 students including Ly budding Chiefs of Staff, 2 Australians, 2 Mew Zealanders, 2 Canadians and 2 Anericans. I -began by telling them our bJectives in three fields namely Intelligence Services of potential enemies, subversive movements and security and showing how the three were closely inter-relatea. I then gave them the principles that ve adopted in our Work in conneetion With each field. In the second part I gave an account of our worT from the period immediately preceeding the outbreal of war to the conclusion of hostilities, and in part 3 I told them what our organisntion looked like on the ground, where it waB found and hov it fitted in to the machinery of government. I took the lid off completely on the question of getting control of the enemy's orgenisation in British territory and for the the turning purposes over of deception. of our D.A. organisati I explsine how this had been done, and what its effect had been, and hovt the facts had ultimately been checked against enemy intelligence reports and the tatements of Keitl, Jodl and Rundstedt. At question time I was asked more about Fascists and Comunists than about anything else. None of the questions wa s difficult to answer. I got the impression that prior to my talk most of the officers present had very little lmowlledge of the kind of work ve did or the way ve did it. T left ther with two points: firstly the extent to vthich we depended upon the Services, the Government Departments and indeed the community as a whole, for security sense. If their security sense was bad much of our Work might be a vaste 23. of time. Secondly E said that I honed that I had impressed them with the immense importance of the counter- espionage and deception W eapon which we had build up by means of double-agents, since were it not for the number that we had obtained and the success of these operations, many might regard them flu as too fantastic to be believed, We had found it difficult to convince peoplle in the early stages and had, consequently had considerable difficulty in getting their very necessary co-bperation. got the D.N.I. to unch at the Travelle and afterwards brought him along fo the office for a talk. He saV Harry, Dick, Alec and Roger and I think felt that his visit had been profitable. He is an extremely pleasant individual and I feel a great improvement on his predecees THISI COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER RSECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIO RECORDS ACT 1958 Fes POIO 1bth October 1946 I saw Krymer today. He is absolutely on his beam ends. He gets $16.10.0. a month from the Polish army on which he has to keep himself, his mother and his two children. He wanted my support for his application to join the Control Commission. AS he would not be receivin any more money untill November ist and had already pawned most of his belongings 14 I gave him a cheque for C10 which I told him to regard as a purely personal thing between myself and him. I made it quite clear that the office could be under no obligation to him. Burt came to talk to me about his visit to Treland. He went ddwn to Dublin where, he was received in a most friendly manner by General Murphy and by the Garda, rticulariy Gantley and Carroll They promised to co-operate faithfully with him. We considered several applications at the Appointments Board today. The most promising seemed to. be who would be a suitable worker for Roger HolLiS. He is of the academic kind and clearly has no great ambition. Another man, is worth further consideration. He went to the University for a year and felt that he would like to know more about human beings. He tool various jobs such as a lorry driver. and grocer' S assistant for a year and then went back to the University. He subsequently did extremely well in the Army, getting the M.O. and mentioned in dispatches. He is the kind of erson who would want to be kept very busy and would have to work under somebody he thoroughly respected other- wise he might become troublesome. I discussed with Kellar certain BULIDOG material. We aid not think it vas of sufficient importance to gove to the P.M. We have now agreed not to send BULLDOG material to the/coimissioner unless it has been to the P.M. or unless it is material which is of purely local significance. 25 16th October 1946 T spoke to Kim. -about the officer which the Palestine police want to send on a roving commission in Europe in connection with illlegal immigration. I said that frankly we thought this a bad idea and woulld be glad to know whether he and his chief agreed and would be prepared to back us up in our reply to Palestine. He spoke to "on who said that he entirely agreed with our point of view and provided we were not rude would endorse anything we said. T.A.R. brought in an army friend of his who is a possible for A.L.O. Seotland if pde falls down. He has a distingui- shed army record as a C.8.0.1. and seemed a very allert and pleasant person. I had lunch with He was rather disturbed about what he described as a natural reserve by those officers with whom he was in touch here. He quite understood the position, namely that we would be anxious about passing information in the present circumstances lest it should get into the wrong hands on the other side of the Channel. He said that he thought that things generall in the intellligenee worl.a were settling one and that reliable peoplle such as Bonnefus were getting control. He would be in a better position to give us assurances in about a month's time then we should see the effeet of the nevi constitution and the new Government on the intellligence worlla. Meanwhile, he said that he was watching our interests very carefully and passing things on in a form in which they could not do us harm if by any chance they THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION 21 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Feb DLOo got into the wrong hands in Paris. He would be quite prepared to give us a guarantee not to pass certain information on if we were at all worried about the source. He said that he was conducting no offensive operations here at all. He vas merely concerned, apart from acting as liaison officer, with a study of the press and an explanation of the significance of the various articles or extracts which he sent over. In this connection he mentioned de COUROY'S leaflet. I took the opportunity o1 telling him that de Courcey Sometimes hit the nail on the head, but was by no means alvtays accurate and that he had a way of obtaining informatio by posing as an official or unofficial representative of British intelligence. I wanted him to understand that de COURCY had absolutely nothing to do with any Government Department Or any intelligence department, and in faet that M.I.5. or M.I.6. would fly a mille from him. I happen to know that he, by innuendo, had been suggesting in Paris that he had something to do with M.I.6. This was totally untrue. I promised I would do anything I could to help and assured him that he personally had the complete confidence of all officers in our Department. Drew asked me about the Canadian Royal Commission Report and the extent to which it had publicity He was speaking on behalf of the Lord President who wanted us to consider whether anything further could be done towards getting lessons home in high quarters. I told him that the report had been dealt with by The Times, Weellly Review, The Sunday Dispatch and a special weekly called Tidings by 22 Douglas Reed. 1,400 copies were on order from Canada, 400 of which had been earmarked by the F.O. to send to t heir representatives abroad. 17th october 1946 went over the accounts with Chares and liss Constant. They seemed to me to be admirablly done. Krymer came to see me: I put him on to someone in the War Office in the hope that he might get employment as an interpreter at one of the resettlement campe. I heard later that this had failled and therefore put him in touch with Dick Butler who had said he Would do what he could. I had a discussion today with Harry, Dick, T.A.R., Archer and M1S8 Clay. It was decided that a point should be establlished in B. Divison for the collation of all papers dealing with Babotages Poston of B.lvA. woulld be the officer. The arrangement would not affect the present responsibilities of Archer for preliminary investigation of sabotage cases, and Boddington would remain in 0.2 for the purpose. It was agreed that the Service Departments should be informed of the division of responsibilities and that they should be instructed when in doubt to apply, in the first instance, to the head of 0.2. 18th october 1946 I had a discussion with Kirby Green, Cuming and Furnival Jones about passages for our overseas officers. To get K.G. back to the Caribbean we have to move 28 2 the local G.0.0. to send a telegram to the priorities Boand. We feel that suitable priority ought to be granted on the D.6.is request. Furnivell Jones says that the principle adoped is that if we expect the army to pay the G.0.0. must be the person responsible for saying what people coming to his area should have priority and that if we interfere the War office may say that they wont undertake to pay for our transport. We are going to see what can be done. MR. Van Miliingen, who is the brother-in- aw of Jook Baifour, came to see me about a job. He seemed an intelligent fellow. Before the war he was in the Bombay & Burma Corporation and during the waT he worked for both S..8. and S.0.F. in the Far Hast. He evidently took B poor view of S.1.8. He is not and ous to return to the Far East, but woulld be ready to go to other Darts of the Empire or to work here. He is going out to Indo-China for his company on a two months visit and will get into touch with me on his return in case there may be anything for him. He is aged about 44. Colonel Sprunt came to see me again. He was anxlous to know whetther we could take him on probation. I said we never did anything of the kind unless we had a definate object in view. T think his real object in suggestion this was a fear that he might be whisked away from his present omployment in the Control Comission London. He then asked me Whether I would recommend him to S.I.8. This I have undertaken to do as I thought possibly his knowledge of Turkish might appeal to Kin Fhilby. 7 9 We saw Brigadier Major at the Appointments Board today. While we liked him ve fed that his age, 53, and his seniority would make it difficult for him to take employ- ment abroad under officers who would clearly be very thuch his junior. We told him too that we were barred from taking on the permanent staff anyone Of his age. We thought there might be a possibility of employing him in 0. Division if this or would be congeniall to him. on this point ve advised him to consult Harry Allen who knows him personally. He struc. me as being a very pleasant and alert person. He has had quite an interesting career during the war doing a variety of jobs, one of which was to organise the stay-behind army here if there had been an invasion.He clearly had the greatest admiration for the people who serve under him in that onnection. I attended a meeting of senior Immigration Officers at tho Home Office to which Perks had invited me. A variety of subjects came up for discussion and it was made abundantly clear that I.0. did not think much of the quality of their staff. This is not surprising S most of them are being recruited at 86 a week. with the e xception of two or three, the I.0.S themselves did not strike one as being particularly bright. Most of the running vaS made by Jevel of Dover. I took the opportunity of explaining to the meeting how important the work of 1.0.S was to our organisation. We relied on controls which, unfortunately were being constantly relaxed, to hellp us in our enquiries and to marrow the field of investigation. Antthing we could do, therefore, to assist I.0.S 30 in watching our interests could only have tremendous advantage for our organisation. I therefore welcomed the opportunity of attending the meeting and also Perks' kind offer to allow our A.L.0. S at attend local meetings to I.0.S. I said said that I felt that it was only by knowing officers personally at ports and discussing various cases with them that we could get good co-operation. This seemed to be quite well received T then raised the question of the Suspee't Index. It is Clear that it lies open on the desk in front of the alien when he is being interrogated and with accormodation as it is today at the ports no other system is really feasiblle. We have to take it, therefore, that if we put a man on the list and he comes through the port he is allmost certain to b ecorne aware that he is suspect. 21bt October 1946 THIS HISSACOPY S A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UINDER RSECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 FeB 2010 Briiscoe came to tell me that papers connected with the Geran censorship 3/. centre at salzburg were being shared on a quadripartite basis. This presumnably means that the Russians would be aware of many of the inks and reragents-employed by the Germans. It seemed desirable that ve shoud at least know what the information wais and how much the Russiana had learnt. 22nd October 1946 At the J.I.0. today we diseussed propar ganda in the Middle Hast and against Communism and the paper prepared on this sbject by Kinkpatrick. Some doubt was thrown on the ability of Kirlpatrickle existing organisation to handle the matter and a caveat waB entered that it might be necessary to reform P..E. on a modified sealle. Strong seemed to think that a plaming seetion was necessary and an executive section and the planners should be in close touch with the various intelligence departments. I asked what the machinery woulla be for transmiitting any contribution that we might have. Hayter said that he woulld go into thia and let uS know. Bevin hag apparently issued 8 direetive which makes it clear that he 1s only prepared for the moment to carry out propaganda in the middle East. A paper is, however, to be prepared by the J.I.C. for the Chiefs of Staff showing what the effect of Communisi in any part of the world may have upon our strategy. In this connection ve have been asked to prepare al paper showing what the Comnunists coulld do ot might do in the event of a war with Russia, I have asked B.1 to put LD B draft. A proposal to sen a Limited number of renegades from the Soviet Bphere in Germany to 32 this country was turned down. It was apparently thought that if some inducement and a home here were held out ve might get more information. I said that I thought this was a very two-eaged weapon and invited the RuBBians to plant people on us. It would be much better if Buch peome were dealt with in the 2one. As regards Lectures to the Imperiall Staff College as distinct fror the Imperial Defence College we are not bo be called upon, Hayter will explain our position in the general set up, and D.M.I. will deal with counter- intelligence. I Dromised to let them both have a short brief. Spercer came to talk to me generally about Inelana. I explained to him the position and said that would take the first opportunity to introduce him both to Dan and to Sir John Stephenson. 23rd october 1946 Ian Carrel came to see me today and was subsequently put before the Selection Board, including Halleolm Johnston. Ye made his terms of service quite clar to him, including the possibility tha't if there were a drastic cut he would have no right to employinent elsewhere. He seemed very keen te some to us and made a thoroughly favourablle impression. His whole record is excellent. We told him to thinie things over and let us knve. B.A. Hilli came to tell me about the WIOKS case. There is a rather complicated Legal point and the Court of Appeal have reserved their judgement. There is no doub't about WIOKB guilt, but if the case is upheld it may cause an awkuard precedent for reviewing old statutes or regulations. THIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCTAMGNTRETAINEL IN DEPARTMENT UNDERSECTION 33 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS 2D1c If the sentence is upheld ttere will almost certainly be an appeal to the House of Lords. If the proceedings are quashed it will m an that those of four other renegades will probably be dealt with in a similar manner. 24th October 1946 Win Scott brought General Peabody to see me. He was formerly, I think, Military Attache here. He is now to return as head of C.I.G. in London. He is a pleasant individual. I told Adam that by agreement with Hastings they had decided to too any enquiries about the Jewish connections of peoole who were to be initiated into There had been a case where S.B., having been asked to make indireet enquiries, had callled the man up on the telephone and told him to come round to the police station. It was inevitable that this sort of thing would happen if we gave the police any exouse for making enquiries. The only t hing to do vas to aak if there was any record and to make it clear that no enquiries were to be made. Hastings had agreed. At the B. Meeting today Archer raised the question of a Chinese mission at the GLoucester Aireraft Co. The Chinese had a contract for the building and desighing of jet engine. The Chinese were being instructed on an csolescent engine, but were being taught by the same designers and engineers who were engaged on workfo a new top secret engine. There seemed to be nothing, for it but that the Chinese Woulld become aware of the existance and performance of the new engine - in fscit thew were 34. already talking in terms of 700 m.p.h. A curious feature of the whole position was that the Russians, who had a contract with Rollls, and there the Chinese had previously been, were asking no questions and were not in the least bit curious. This was considered rather alarming in View of the fact that every Chinaman has his prive. Vickery came to see me about certain document affecting Krishna MENON. These were communications between NENON and NEHRU. Vickery did not feel that in the present set up he could pass this information direct to the F.O. He would, therefore, arrange for S.1.S. to do so if that met with our approval. We should, however, keep copies. Charles, Dick, Ede, Kirby Green, Spencer and D discussed the question of Trinidad and the withdrawal of Tufnell-Barrett. It vaB agreed that Kirby Green should carry a letter from Us couched in suitable terms informing him that we could not give him, Turnell-Barrett, permanent employment. K.G. would take this down to Trinidad aa let us know the re-actions. Meanwhile we would try and think of a suitable suocessor to Tufnell-Barrett. The D.M.I. rang up to say that fromn a paper he had seen it v/as just possible that we might witharaw from Greece at the end of this year. T told him that Dick would be looking into the whole question of our representation in Greece as soon as he arrived in Cairo. 35. 25th October 1946 Krymer rang uD to say that there was no change of his getting emplloyment ab an interpreter with the Pollish Resettlement Corps. T put him in touch with Dick Butler who hed kindly offered to try and find him work. Dick and I had a talk with Kim Phillby about Washington. I had not previously realised that S..S. vere already situated in the Embassy. T had imagined that "C" wanted to go. into a joint office somewhere in town. This seemed to me to create an entirely satisfactory situation since if we could get a room in the Embassy we should be forking in the Embassy and not under 14.1.6. We agreed tentatively that (1) esvould have our ow1 representative with the right to make contact with F.B.I. and 0.1.G. as and when we desired. (2) ve would have our own ciphers. (3) We would work in Close Collaboration with S.I.8. and if DoBBible have our records linked by a common index. (4) we should be responsible for cases directly effecting the defence of the Realm and that S.I.S. youlld hande cases predominantly of foreign interest. we should have to rely on our two representatives sorting these matters out on the spot. I said that we would draft a letter on these line8 to "ou and that 1 hoped we should have his backing in asking the F.0. for the necessary cover and accomnodation. T went to look at the new building. It 18 not very impressive, but may improve with redecoration. Its worse feature 1B its inaccessibility. 36 The AmericanB have refused to receive TURKUL and IRA back in their zone. T have, therefore, written to Shoosmith asking whether he could take them in C.S.D.I.0. Gilbert Ryle has put in his final report and Clop has made a minority report which does not vary much in substance, but slightly in emphasis: Olop feels that TURKUL was only a subragent and that IRA WaUS the central f4gure. TURKUL' main idea vas to sit on the fence and provide himself with a get-away whatever the outcome of the war might be. He re-assured the RESSians by wittingdy passing informatdonl to IRA about White RusBian organisations. He must have been pretty sure where it was going Burt told me that he had seen Le Man and shown him Scotlana Yard and the Law Courts. He wanted to know whether he should introduce Le Man to his friend BOILANTCHR. I said that, on the whole, we were not enxious to encourage Le itan to builla uo any sort of organisation here. I was fairly confident that he was not doing SO at the moment, bu't if he had a contact like BOULANGER the temptation migh't be too great. I had a meeting with charles, Dick, Alec and others in Preparation for the subsequent one at the War office on our military ceiling. It was agreed that T should try and get a ceiling of six officers and permission for other officers to wear uniform wherever this might be necessary. It was further decided that we should try and regularise the position with regard to our accommodation in our various stations abroad. In some places we provide living aecommodation and in others we do not. As the War office 37. are paying we thought that they ought to consult with Brigadier Page and try and get the whole thing on an agreed and uniform basis. I attended a meeting at the ar Office with General Browning, the Military Secretary, in the Chair. Sinclair, Templer and Kenneth Strong were also present. It was agreed that we should be given permission to wear uniform subject to D.P.S. confirmation, provided our officers had previously been commiss- ioned; that we should reduce our ceiling to 6 by the end of the year; that any officer attached to us should, at the end of two years, make up his mind whether he was going to remain with us permanently or continue his career in the army. Browning was extremely frremy grAdGOPy hellpfull. ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN IDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 26th October. 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORD ACT 1958 FG3 Do1o I gave Diick a brief before he roft to enable him to discuss various matters with the D.G. on his arrival in Cairo. These included Giles's proposal to send an fficer to Europe to deal with Jewish illegal immigration, our representation in Greece after the withdrawal of the troops, and SIME'E proposal for the attachment of Police Officers. I also gave a letter to Dick to take to the D.G. telling him what has happened since he left. 28th October. Briscoe came to talk to me about collecting all available data about Russlan lcnowledge of secret inks. There is a certain amount already in our files but we want to ensure that anything in this line comes oun way. T said I thought that we ought to make an approach in the proper quarter, both to the British Sone in Germany and Austtria. I launched with Anthony to discuss the case of PADGHAM. We have decided.i view of hiis depressed state, to bring him back for two oD three months. but not until his de-hazification proceedings are at an end. Robi MENDELSSOHN arrived yesterday from Switzerland. He has had some remarkabie experiences during the war, and it is little short of a miracle that he is still aliv Being unfit to serve, he was employed by the Reichsbank for various matters affecting foreign credits. In 1913 he realised that things might became difficul't for his mother, so he started to try and find out ways and means of getting her out to Sweden. He vas not able to save his aunt. who was to be taken away to Auschwitz, So gave her an overdose of veronal. He approached a friend about his mother and was told that his only possible way of getting to Sweden would be on an Abwehr ticket. He found a sympathetic character in Oberst HANSEN, who was subsequently made head of the Militarischesamt of R.S.H.A. He declined to do any espiona ge work, but said that he would b willing to explore the ground for the opening up of peace negotia tions, As it was necessa that some sort of report on his visit should be passed to the R.S.H.A.. which, of course, could not include peace negotiations, he made one up, even before his departure, in collaboration with the Abwehr. He Visited Stockholm three times in 1923 and once in 1944, and on each occasion saw and the American Military Attache. He managed finally to 39 get his mother out On payment to the 8.8. of Some 100,000 crone, which he managed to raise in Sveden. They tried to get 200,000, but when he Baid that this was impossible they allowed his mother to 80. he was warned never tD eave her alone HS the S.S. had a way of kddnapping people after they had Eot their money. In 1944 he received an approach from LUNGBEHN, who was Apparently aERDCiated with Himmler. The approach S,o8tensiblly at any rate, on Himmleris behalf. The suggestion was that he should So to Stockholm and try and get the Alldes to agree to the following protect; Himoler would get rid of Hitler. The Allies would be allowed to come in on the Westy and German forces WDllla be turned over to repel the Russians, Robi said that at that stage be did nat see HIOW such a proposal could be entertained for one moment by the Allies, particularly if Himmler were to remain in pover. f he went on BuCh a mission, he would want omething concrete to talce with him. He went back to his farm in Wurtembung and awaited a final anser. After two weeks he heard that LUNGBEHN had been arrested by Himmler and sent to Orianenberg, where he was kept in fairly honpurable detention, but yas Finally liquidated after being in prison for nine months. Robi has some idea that LUNGBEHN wnet to Switzerland to negotiate with Dallag the Ameican President'e representative, and tha't the tellegram-either one of DULB or an American telegrpm from Switzerland to Moscow - WaS intercepted. coupling Himmler and LUNGBEHIN as the instigators of the peace proposalls. This telegram got into the hand of WOIE the S.S. man who negotiated the peace terms with Italy. WOLF taclled Himmler, who sa that hin only way But was to throw. TUNGREHT overboand. You Nobi eacaped 18 little shabt Df a miracle. On his last journey bael from 40 Stockholm, where he BayB everyboay seemed to know about everything. he felt almost certain that he would be arresbed by the S.8. oD arrival at Terpeihof, ever! though he had an O.K.. paab. In anticipation of this he consumed almost a whole bottle of schnapps Orl the aeroplane an hour before he arrived. Before hiB departure he had been found waiting in the cold and had been aaked in to the 5.8. Mess B the Aerodrome at Temnelhof. He felt this was a rather extraordinary Btuation, where he, a Jew was sitting with twelve S.S. men. not discussing war, bib merely their wives and families, ete. At the end of the war he was over-run by the French in Wuertemburg. Two Moroccans entered and ushered himseii and his cousin out at the point of a bayonet, They were made to stand with their faces to the wa1l and their hands tied, while the two Moroccans Leaded their rifles. Having atood there for ten minutes, a French corpor. al arrived and suid the whole thing Was a mistake - they were looking for two S.8. men who were fiping at the troops. Robi said he aid not know quite whether to laugh, ab it seemed SD extraordinary to him that after al the risks that he had talcen in fighting them, he shoud finally be shot 86 an S.S. man himself! Another amusing incident was the entry of two huge bearded Honoccans into the Dom of-his cousin. had just had twins. They were, of course, fully armed. They loolced round the room, caught sight of the twins and a huge grin appeared OT their faces: one of them then pulled out a 500 franc note, placed it on the tablle sadd "pour les b6bes' and went out. Robi, of course lew a large number of those who were liquidated fon their participation in the putschi. H e puts the total of those executed a't something ike 1,500. HiB wife was imprisoned four 02 five weeks by the Gestapo. He thinks mainly 41 because they wanted to get some excuse for turning him out of his farm. He constantly went dovn to see the Gestapo officials, but was never serfousiy questioned himself - once he was asked wha't he had been doing during the war. He replled that he had been concerned ith foreign credits for the Reichsbank, which Seemed to satiaf'y his interrogators. His wife. were eventually releaaed without any explanation. He has certain constructive proposals tD make. He thinks 1t is hoeless to axpet agreement from the RusBilans to run the whole of Germany as ant economic unit. The only thing te do 1a to aocept the iron curtair and try and put the West on to a sound economic footing - tD do this it B necessar to consult with experts in 811 the fariDus fields, i.e. banking, industry, agriculture etc. Robi coud integrate Bultable people and they could, if necessary, by got over here. He thinks that if this is not done, and advantage is not taken of the swing to the Right in the recent elections Germany will graaually Bink into Communisr and Btarvation. He talked to Ned Reid about this, who agreed with his views and pit him into touch with Playfair, the financial expert in the office of the ontrol Commission in London. He told Playfair about his proposals and mentioned the kind of people he had in mind; one was a man called ABS, who was in the Reichsbank Playfair took the view that it voula be impossible to use a man who had served throughout the war in an instituton which had been supporting the Nasi regime. Robil said that if this attitude was maintained, lt would be really impossible to do any: thing. It was cleanly no good digging out some old financier who had been out of the swim for the last fifteen yeas. He aug ested that I should see Playfair and try and get some sense into him. - 42 29th October. At the J.I.C. today we discuss ed the paper but up by the Inter-Departmental Committee on Secublty on the subject of dealing with the Rusadans on a 5 qua pro go basis.. IL had been agreed that Attaches should work on a strictly recdorocal basis. This agreement was.. Thowever, being torpedoed by the Ministry of Supply, who were letting Russian rereseny tatives into fectories. They had, in fact, a contract with Rolls for the supply of Niene Jet engines. The Committee took the view that, hile it might be difficult to oerate on a strictly reciprocal basis singe the Russian wanted to buy things from 0s, and we dla not want to Day anything from the, 1t was 1mponrtant to see that the security safeguards were adequate. In the case of Roll, which 5 BO far from being the position, since Russian technichiane were sitting in the factory and hob-nobbing with al our technteians whe were working on highly secret contracts. It was decided that thig whole matter should be referred to the Chiets of Staff, and we refer asleto put in a paper showing exactly what the bosltion WAS at the factory and, if possible, whether there were any Communiste employed on the pentlcubar work in hand. The general view seemed to b that it was questionable whether the supply of ten obsolescent.je engines, Which wore merely for the purposes of nstruetion in tha manufacture of Jet engines and ould be pulled to pieces was really sound. For B short term financial gain, which would not necessarily lend to any further orders, we were giving instruction to our potential enemies. Curny came to tell me that he had been ordered by his doctor to talce three months leave. told him that he ohghtato wind up his current 4t 43 work and get away as S001 as he coulld. Shoosmith telephoned about his message regarding BORRMANN. He had had a reoont that BORPMANN was in Switeerland, and he thought that the case should b e handled in London. I said that T would take the matter uo with M.I.6. as isoonas I got his telegram. This I have done and they will handle the enquiry. olonel alker telephoned to say that he had oken to Brigadier Latham about Trevor- Roper's preposal to white a book on the 'putsch'. He said that, provided the Foreig office gave their approacl, he thought that Iatham would be able to colllect the oqutS that Trevor-Ropey required. ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAIN IN DEPARTMENT UNDERISEOT 30th october OF THE PUBLIC RECOR Hollis talked to me about ALLdAShing ofFe820io Cormunists. According to the late D.G's ruling, ve have for the last two yeans only been carding important Oommunists. Member- ship of the Party has now fallen from 60,000 to 42,000. and we can take it that those who join now are not doing in a spirit of enthusdasm for the Ruasian advances, but on account of fanatical enthuslasm for al mat the Party stands for and in spite of the esent Rusalan atmosphere. Hollis feels that we are misleading the departments for whom we vet if we do not at least card all industrial workers who are members of the C.P. He feels, too, as 1 do, that if we are to fullfil our responsiblities to the J.1.0. and Chiefs of Staff, whe have asked to prepare a memorandum on the potentialities of the C.P. in time of crisis. we must at least know where Party members are situated. It would be no excuse,i after twenty-fite years of study, to say that although the names were in 44 our records, we had never canded them in account of pressure of work. Howe gave a lunch to Harker at the Dorchester, at which Charles and I were present. PAGE came over to discuss the question of establishment and general service pRom vided by the War Office to our out- stations. in order to keep down the secret service vote. He was 'extremely helpful and promised to do a1l he could. He will deal specifically with the case of S.I.F.E. and also discuss with the authorities concerned in the War office the question of putting our other stations on a similar basis. I sent to see o' about the employment of who is of Russian origin. Ve want to take her on for Russian work. We had made every enquiry that we coul and were: satisfied, as far as itwas possible to be so, that shewa all right. T did not, however, wish it to get round that vTE were employing a Russian woman and were conseguently insecure. If, therefore, 'ot did not like the position, on account of any opportunities which might give this woman access to his information, I woulld much prefer not td bake her on. He said that he, in fact, had Whiite Russians and Poliss himsellf and that it was a rise he thought we both had to take. 45 Oebober 31st. Harold Caccia rang to say that Orme Sargent had Give his overall approval to Tnenonm Roper's bool, provided it was submitted in the same way aa the Last Days of Hitlert, and that Trevor-Roper'a work did not in any way elashiviththat that being donc by Theeler- Bennett, who is working principally on the Nuremburg trials. Sir John Kennedy, formerly D.M.O. came to aee he. He 18 going Du't governor of Southern Phodesia. He was extremely friendly and expressed his willingness to do anything he could to treilp L1S At the B. meeting tD day I referred to a complaint which hnd been lodged recently by one of DuP .3.0'8. who said he received information directly beaning DIT his on area but sas not informed of what was going on at home and in other areas. I asked that all of ficers shottle bear this in mind-as it wag eBBential that the D.S.0'8 should have a good baokground of the general security picture, as ie the Governor o.-n-C. saa.omething of interest in the FreBs abiut Fascista or Communiste, etc. and asked the D.5.0. about his stock would be very much reduced 1f he were unable to answer. Kellar said that arrangements were being made for the iBsle of an Overseas Bulletin and that probably B.3. would be responsible for the distribution, but it itvae waB up to enoh section to supply contri- butions. I Said this waB EL good idea and asked all officers to send i11 their contri biltions while a case was current. I said I thought the Bulletin would be of particular interest to D.8.0, 6 hata, B1ra1tar and the Gariibbena areaat Kellar saidibe hoped this Wouldbe brought into operation in the New Near. +6 I raised the subject of the acquisition of technical nformation by the Rusedane which had come UP at the J.I.0. yesterday. The J.I.C. took a poor vilev of the Standing Inter-Departmental Committee on Security report and several inconsistencies had been found. They wene particularly worrisd concerning the security-side of the matter, particularly the situation at Rolls and GLoucester Aircraft Co. They are very Iceen to put the whole position, before the Chiofs of Staff. They vere inclined to take the view that the Rusrlans had bought the ten engines to pull to ndeces and from the long-term commercial view the promorition WaE net much good. Purnivell Jones said ne had heard at the Cabinet offices an official reflection on this matter. to the effect that the Chiefs of Staer wouldunot have approved the Bale of these engines to the RuSBlans had they contemplated the remotest posability of their going to the factory to see the things for themseilvea. Archer shid that he thought thi had occurred through ignorance in high places (i.e. the ministry of Supply) and that if the machines were sola it Has obvious that the purchasers would want to see their goods. After further dlscusslon, I said that a hiote of this Bituation WaE to be incorporated in the paper which Holis prepaninig for the T.T.C. Burns spoe about one. IDSNER of the Czech Intelligence, who had mung up from 0alo Oalo-and and Bent his vrerugreetinge to evenybody particularly Sinclair and John Noble. He had Joined the new azech Intelligence, but there was reason to believe that ht would. not have got thie job vithout Russian Banction, He appeared to be doing counterrintellligence Biae, the pffansive as swell a the defensive I said that all officer should be carefiil in their dealings with him, 47 T.A.R. asked who shoul be pegronsibile for matters conected vith the Ohsanel Islands. He thought B.3.g. sheun bre responsible. I said that it should De horn mind that these people hed in particular loyalty to amvone except temgeilves, an a grrentt numba had eollaborated in order. PPo- bally, to Have the own 1ives. I asked Snencer Do undertake het few susueoits there are in the C.I. 1.E. said theie is NTOW an arrangement where 101 externalll cables whether they touch this count or not, are centralised in the Trafo Analysis Groun at Nastcote. If a pperBoi is out on the Vateh List It is now givena se ial number ondei theit tlie originating ofP1ce1 can be more reasily treeed. M.E. sadd he vas mtoait anoinas that all peuues'ts for this blacs-listing should TD through B.4 and not lrougl Col. Alllan ar hitherto. echer paised the -uession of the carding of civillans employed ON Lona terLr seoret research Von here who weri TO7/ applying for natar naturiliastion. ation. Ie thonght they should Le ncept on reeond in the Regdistiy. I agreed On the grounds that ir a man had been natugllised it did ot necesramily moan that he WVaS entirely free from sispiclon. T Hoke Areher to take u1.e To with the Registry. A Capbain GARDITER cate here on the pecom:eil- dation Howve. He seemed a gice young Fellowbut,apart from his kceenness, has ND particular qualifications. I teld him tha't ive would bear lis name in mind but that me h nothing to offer ham ait tt the momen't. TAR has eoposed that he, M.E. and Fnival about Reeistiy and the extent to which 1 Jones theuke cavasa sections for their view is serving their purpose. T said that I 47 thought this an excellent idea, but I did not ah to TroGeed until either I had had a word with Potter, or until Horrocks's retun. T ao not wish to give the impression that I am trying to interfere with Horrocks's department during his absence. II shall certainly take the matter up on his return. Pattergon taked to me about Censorship. The question arises a6 to hat our pellations S. ould be sith the Censorship Testing Dent. in any future va. Should it be unde control Or should we thnou off En event tD nu1 it? Experience in utn to-date secret ink methods will, of counge, be wi th Hedger and with no-one else. I am proposing to have a prelimin- ary meeting with Herltert andtisodd G6Pthe subject. ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION Novemberstasbe THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 Fe Dloo The Control Commission find themseves unable tI take ove3 TURKUL and RA. We have, therefore, to take the matter Wp again with the Americans. I was asked by the J.I.0. about Bi1l STHTHENSON. Apparently the Amenicans wish to give him a decoration At the Appointments Board to-day we decided to take on for a probationany year. He has done veny well with the Control Coasissio and 1s obviously a veny keen D fficer. thiink he will make good material. I spoke to Cookie to-day about the two soies. hearly whose three months. cases he has He had Bald nor that for he was S0 busy that he had been unable to make any progress - goodness knows that he does! He was full on complaints about Orr's 49 records, which T gather he has mainly destroyed. I suggested tactiully that he should send the two cases over to me and that I would get Hill to deal with them. He seemed quite agreeable to this suggestion. November Lth. Ede. tole me to-day that he waB rather veering round to the idea of taking the job of A.l.0. Seotland. AL the A.L.Os Conference I explained to them the vorR of the J.I.C. and also talked to them on the subjec't of immigration and visa policy. Rodney DENNIS and G/c CARY-fOSTER, the new Foreign Office Security Officer, came over to see me. 4 Roaney is his deputy. The visit was purely a formal one. I gave: CARY-GRA a brief survey of the work of the office and of the organisation. He vas seen by various other officers as well. I told him that we were. of "course; interested in other peoples security, although ye did not ivish to inter- fere in any way in their domestic affairs. If, however, they had a case of leakage in this country which could not be normally explained, it was our business to take up the e. I saw the D.M.I. I told him that I had had a rather vague hint ffom the Middle East - I was referring to Horrocks' letter to Chariles - that KELLAR for some reasonto: other was not acceptable as the head of S.I.M.E. T asked D.M.I. whether he had heard anything to this effect. He summoned Kenneth Page and both of them confirmed that they had not heard even 8O much ab a whisper. D.M.I. said that he 50 linew KETJAR and liked bim, and thought that he was e atremely competent. If he vene asked he youid certainly support lis appointment. He of'fered to telegraph to the Chiefs of Staff in the Middle East. but I said I thoughit at the moment it would be better if he dic not. I then went round to Broadvay, where I put a similar question to tor He said that Likewise he had heand o whisper and that h in facit, would be exprenely Pleased to know that Kellar was in the Middle East. He their safety. understood his sources and would look af afo THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENTUNDER SECTION 8(4) OF THE PUBLIC BECORDS ACT 1958 FER 2Olo. I told 'ot that we had a somewha similar carse, where MacNeal had asked fo information about BING, the Labour Whip. We were hot prepared to give this informatil and went suggesting that MacNeall should apply to the Prime Minister. If he presses UB o hand over the information, I shall be forced tossee the P.M. S/ Novemboy 5th. At the J.I.O. to-0ay we discussed the paer on a possible attack by Russia on this country. The matter had been gone into in considerable detail by the J.I.S. the Chiefs of Staff Sub-Committee and the Technica and Scientific Warfare experts. They had assumed that the Russians would sweep through Europe and then mount their attack on this country. The D.M.I. expressed the view that it was more likely that their attack would be of the Pearl Harbour variety, and that we ought to be prepared for it to be launched from their present bases. He also thought we should consider the possibility of a landing by a large number of parachutists. Nobody, I think, imagines that we are going to be at war with Russia wi thin the next five years, but it is good to see that the matter is being given every consideration. The Air Ministry have agreed to allow our officers to wear Air Force uniform when serving abroad, provided we make special application for them in each case. stating the circumstances which make this necessar; Bill STEPHENSON rang me up to say "Hellol'. He is going baclo to America. While he has a home in Jamaica he still retains his office in New York. 31 2 THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 FeR oo At the A.L.o's Conference I raised with C.2. the question of what work the A.L.O's could do for C.2. in the provinces. 0.2. were clleanly very jealous of their own preserves, but I gather that they do already make a certain use of A. .L.0.8. They thought, too, that if bottle-neck factoriex where no 53 5 3 particularly secret work is going had to be covered, the A.L.0's might well take this on. A.1.0.s. look after untilities in the provinces and in the London area. The view held by C.2. is that this work can better be done from London, where the necessary contact can be maintained with the Ministries concerned. T am not entirely convinced about this. Cavendish-Bentinc} gave a talk to the J.1.0. about Poland, with particular regard to the Order of Battle of the Russianew He estimates their forces at 144,000. D.M.I. think that they have over 400,000. I am inclined to think that Cavendish-Bentinck is nearer the mark. He and his staff have evidently been travelling about a great deal and all the indications were that the Russians were pulling out to a considerable extent. The Poles dislike them heartily and and they are, therefore, perhaps reluctant to aggravate this antagonism. Further, they are afraid that their troops may go bourgeois. D.M.I'S information comes mainly from Right Wing Polish sources which would, of course exaggerate the Russian menace. November 6th Watt discussed with me the appointment of his successor in Scotland. I showed him the file of one, Sergeant CRAWFORD, con- cerning whom a letter had been written to Shinvell by Counsellor Crawford, J.P., of Uphall, West Lothian. This lletter showed that the 6ounsellor was aware that the position of Regional Security Officer, Scotland,would soon become vacant and that the D.G. of M.I.5., in whose hands the appointment lay, was Sir Percy Sillitoe. He strory recommended his brother,o the 54 Glasgow Police and thought that a recommen- dation from Shinweill "might well be the means of putting one of our own kind into a good Government Department" George Mathers, Labour M.P. for Linlithgow, has also written about ORAWFOI to Bellenger, requesting that Sgt. CRAWFORD'E qualifications for the post of M..5. Regional Security Liaison Officer in Scotland should be given every consideration In our case we have replied that the name has been noted and will be considered with those of other candidates. Watt had some misgivinge about the acceptability of Ede in Scotland if the Scottish Chief Constables had expressed their desire for a Scottish policeman He said that he would be quite prepared to carry on for the time being. Group/captain Jones and Mr. Hooper of the L.S.I.0., same to see me. I explained to them in broad terms the work of the office and what we had done during the war. They seemed to be extremely pleased with the reception they had had and were quite over- whelming in their compliments. They are, I think, genuinely out to co-operate to the ful. Jones has sent in a most glowing letter of thanks. I told Kellar about the telegram I had received from the D.G. provisionally appointirg Magan as head of SIME until a final decision could be made about Dougllas Roberl successor. Meanwhile, he wanted Foulles and Thistle to go out to Palestine. I could give Kellar no reasons for this decision because I had none. It was obviously a great shock to him. He thinks that almost undoubtealy it vas due to poison which had been dropped about by Douglas Roberts. I told him that I had seen the D.M.I. and 'c' and satisfied myself that there was no objection here - in fact not even a whisper had been heard about 55 his being unsuitable. Kellar, I think, feels that this is more or less the end of his career in the Security Service, parti- cularly since a number of people both inside and outside the office were under the impression that he was going to take up the appointment. He himself had made it clear to all enquirers that there was no decision in the matter. People will, of course, thi that there must be something wrong with him and his stock is likely to go down. I urge him not to prejudge the issue until ve real: knew what the reasons for the decision vere, November 7th Sir Arthur Dixon came ,really to pass the tin of day with the D.G. and to mention a friend of his who was in touch with a Nazi school- teacher, a matter which I explained as politely as I could was not likely to be of any importance. He talked about the Canadian spy case and was very interested ti see a copy of the Royal Commission'e report I lent him a copy. He is now head of the National Fire Service. At the B. meeting to-day I raised the J.I.0. points regarding the method of attack the Russians might use on this country (see page ),and Cavendish-Bentinck talk on the Russian Order of Battle in Poland. Curry said that B.2.a. has been divided into B.2.a. and B.2.h.; the former consisti] of Irvine, Scott, Miss Cape and Miss Glass and dealing with all satellite countries, an the latter consisting of MissChenhal Mrs. Mrs.Quin, Miss McCallum and Miss Gunn and dealing with Allied countries. Curry also mentioned the case of an ex-memb of the Czech Intelligence in London who came 56 over here last week, namely Lt. Otto REIMANN. He said he had come over here to be demobbed, but after a five hours talk with him Mr. .Curry said he was convinced that he was working for the "other side" and that he had come over to find out all he could about the set-up of M.I.5. Derbyshire said that REEMANN was trying to get a job in the British zone in Germany. I said that Shoosmith whould be warned about him. Hollis saw THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOGUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT TEDDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIO BECORDS ACT 1958 ACT 1958 FeB 9o T.A.R. said this was covered by C. Division, but Jo Archer said that this sort of work called for highly specialised people. I said that the S.I.S. scientific section would be useful to us. Furnival Jones said that Harold Caccia is going to South America shortly and was. there anything on which he should be briefed. I said there was nothing. Irvine gave a talk on the Polish situation explaining in particular what our conflicting interests were with S.I.S. We, on the other hand, have to protect the: Foreign Office against accusations that London is being used as a centre for intrigue against Warsaw. Our interest in D.W. Poles is con- siderable, as they would probably be used by the Russians for espionage purposes. Irvine spoke about the attempts of the Canadian Govt. 57 to get Poles from Italy who night be suitable for emigration to Canada. They had met with wi th considerable difficulties because a large number of them had been engaged in fighting with the Germans and were thought to be unsuitable on that account. Whey they asked the Poles whether they had any other candi- dates, they finally produced several hundred of a much better calibre. The names of these people had not been put forvard in the first instance because the Poles did not like the idea of their best citizens becoming absorbed into the Canadian population. They wanted to keep such Poles in a separate commu- nity, wi'th their own schools and newspapers, etc., 80 that they coulld be called upon in time of need. In fact, the Polles are really preparing for a future wan against Russia by the Western Powers. when they hope to get back the wholle of Eastern Poland. Kellar asked Irvine if the Jews in the Polish resettlement camps in this country were segregated. Irvine said they are segregated at the moment but will be re- distributed later on. A contingent of Pollish Jews will be arriving in Southern Command soon. Kellar said that in view of the fact that there are indications that terrorists are already in this country, it might be as welll if Command were asked to keep any suspicious Jews under observation. Irvine said that the only possiblle solution was to try and agitate for permission to send them back to Palestine. James Robertsor suggested that any Buspicious Jews should be kept in Italy, but Irvine said this was not possible at the momen't as all the Polish Forces were being withdrawn from Itally as the War Office do not want them to be left there any longer. Kellar said he thought this should be taken up separately. 58 Mitchell said that of 230 Communist candi- dates put hp in the Municipal Elections only one got in. He said that the C.P. campaign for recruiting and boosting sales of the "Daily that both Workers were down had not in numbers. been successful I said and this was interesting and thought that the Russian attitude probably had something to do with it as people who were enthusiastio before may be feeling a little doubtful now. Spencer said that, contrary to an agreement reached between the F.0., the 0.0. and ourselves, the visa has been abolished for American citizens travelling to Jamaica. We were not consulted regarding thig reversal of Foreign Office policy, and the Colonial Office, although they put in a pleas, felt they must endorse the F.O. decision. Spencer said he had sent a minute round to sections concerned regarding this matter. I said I did not feel we could do much about this now that it was a fait accompi unless we asked the F.O. what they intend to de about it. The whole burden wili now falll on Immigration in Jamaica, which is pretty weak at the best of times. Kellar said he thought the F.O. would take the line that tourist traffic to bring in dollars is of primary importance. I said a report should be asked for from Kirby-Green, unless we had already had his views on the subject James Robertson referred to a telephone can received by F.M. Montgomery's M.A. yesterday afternoon. The caller said that if bloodshedcontinued in Palestine, retri- bution would be carried out on the War Office and other Government Depts. I said I had spoken to the D.M.I. and he is going to send someone round to speak to me on the Subject, Archer drew attention to an articlle by Chapman Pincher about the production figures of atomic bombs in America. He said the figures given are dangerously near the truth 5 and we may be asked to assist in an enquiry as to how the leakage took place. I said it would be like looking for a needle in a haystack SD far as the Min. of Supply was concerned. Hill said thar Drew has taken this matter up with the Min. of Supply in order to get confirmation from the Americans as to the authenticity of the story. Marriott said that the Soviet Embassy have had ten new telephone lines installed, in addition to the five lines that were there already, at 18 Kensington Palace Gardens, where the Soviet Press Section is to be housed. I spoke about the trouble ve are having with the Americans in the Far East,ie S.S.U. operating on our territory. KRYMER came to see me again. What seems really necessary is to get him, firstly demobilised and then naturalised. Thes is the only way in which he can obtain permanent employment of any vallue. AIRY talked to me about his position,witr particular reference to his retirement from the Forces. He said that he had no wish to go back to duty, since there was obviously no future for him in the Army. He could not say that he vas performing a very strenuous job at the moment. On the other hand, he was perfectly happy to remain in charge of his area, so far as I can see, indefinitely November 8th. Colonel Cole, who is M.A. to the C.I.G.S. came to listen to a record. It was thought he might be able to identify the voice of the person who had telephoned him, stating that IRGUN intended to get the C.I.G.S. The voice was apparently a different one. bo D.N.I. told me that Admiral Oliver had attended a meeting of the Bacterial Warfare Committe and wa's disturbed to find that there was no representative of the Security Service present. He thought that the Professors might well commit indiseretions about the publication of information,an that they needed guidance generally on security matters. He had ma made this suggestior to the meeting, but it had not been very weill received. In fact, the view had been expressed in one quarter that the Committee did not wish to have a Gestapo in their midst. I said that we would certainly consider the matter, but that T wondered a little whether anybody who was not a scientist could do very much good. ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION November 39th. THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACIT958 Fs DO1o Serpell came to see me about the case of JAHNKE. He succeeded in tracing two reports mentioned previously as being in JAHNKE'S possession. These seem to have been compiled by This seems have led to the suggestion that may have been ELLI. Personally, T am unable to believe that there is anything wrong wi but of course one never know November l1th. At the D.G's meeting to-day I raised the question of vetting. T was relieved to hear that we do vet personnel, down to the lowest levels, in offices where Top Secret information is handled. I also discussed the question of carding Communists. It seemed to me that on the present ruling we would hardly fulfil our responsibilitie since only important Communists were carde 61 3 This question had two aspects, firstly the vetting problem, and secondiy our responsi- bilities to the J.1.0. and Chiefs of Staff, who had asked UB to assess the risks from the Communist Party in the event of war with Russia. It seemed to me that in future we should have to card all industrial workers. also we might include agricultural workers ani housewives. SPRUNT came to see me. I promised to find out whether there was any opening for him in the J.I.B. I told him that, s0 far as we and S.I.S. were concerned,there. no immediate prospect of a job. November 12th. 'c' came to see me. I showed him the letter that we had had from the Americans about their operation in the Far East, and my suggested reply. He entirely agreed with the line I was proposing to take. T said that T proposed to sound the ground in the Far East with Commanders-in-Chief and Governors, and then raise the matter with the J.I.C. I thought it better that we should get the Amnericans to co-operate with us in the field rather than turn them down flat. I discussed with Kellar and Charles Butler the possibility of finding someone for Irag. We have two Indian policemenand Charles is arxious to take on more people on the basis of Mallcom Johnston; he woulld prefer them to complete their service with the Indian Pollice and take their pensions. We are aaking Malcom Johnston to explore the ground. In the present circumstances they might very well be prepared to burn their boats. 2 T have had a letter from Dick, in which he makes it clear that his visit to the M.E. has been anything but pleasant. He found himself faced more or less with a fait accorpli The D.G. and Horrocks were persuaded that what was required as Head of SI.M.E. was a big administrator, and that Kellar was not the man for the job. Douglas Roberte had been putting in a certain amount of poison and had talked a lot about "levels". My telegram had been il-received - the comment was "What has this demand got to dd wit 'C' Dr the D.M.1.?1 Dick explained, as was in fact the case, that clearly my intention was to strengthen the D.G.'E hand by clearing the positior in this country,i case he was meeting with local bjections to Kellaris appointment. as had been indicated to me from the rather eague letter which had been sent by Horrooks to Charles. Horrocks was apparently worried at his letter being quoted, although exactly why I do not know. Dick made it quite clear that in his view what was required was not S0 much an administrator aa a man who really knew about the Intelligence needs, but seeing that the D.G. was adamant he played for time and suggested that Magan be brought up from Palestine, and that the final decision should be deferred until the D.G. returns. He got the general impression that the D.o. thought that information was being witheld from him and that attempts vere being made to rush him into appointing Kellar against his better judgement. Dick explained to him that Kellar'e appointment had been discussed a long time back, and that everybody at Head Office was of the opinion that he was far and away the best candidate. As regards itholding information, this apparently had been planted in the D.G's mind through his seeing a Situation Report in Palestine which he thought waB interesting. He wondered why. he had not seen it at Head office. Dick said thatt beports of this kind 6 3 came in constantly, and that if the D.G. was kceen to see them all he would spend all day and all night reading them. The D.G. had apparently - aided and abetted by Horrocks - drawn up an instruction to Magan that any reports which he considered of importance were to be sent to the D.G. personally. Magan spoke to Dick about this, as he said that it went entirely contrary to his original instructions: was he not in future to write to officers who were directly concerned? Dick took the point up with the G. and Horrocins and asked what it meant. said that it was, in fact, the very negation of organisation - with the Horrocks touche - and that it would create an impo- ssible situation. The D.G. made some lame exxcuse and then collapsed - the order is to be revised. The D.G. had various suggestion for the Head of SIME; General Penney'E brother was mentioned and also two policemen- one named Nielson, who had been with the D.G. in Glasgow and subsequently went to the Control Commission. Dick happened to know about Neilson, as he was sacked from the Control Commission for incompetence. From what we know of Control Commission standards he must have been very incompetent indeed!' Dick returns by sea and should be here on the 18th. Horrocks arrives on the 16th by air from Narobi. The D.G. goes on to retoria. November 13th. THIS IS A GOPY ORIGINAL DOCUENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENI SECTION 3(4) OF THE BUBLIC BECORDS ACT 1958 Fa F32910 64 Gray, Inspector General of Palestine Police, and Catlin. his assistant, called and were seen by Kellan. Robertson and myself. They had two points to raise: firstly, the question of the Palestine police officer who is coming to Europe. Grey explained that the real purpose of this officer's visi was to recruit agents from Europe and filter them back into Palestine by legal or illega] means. This was necessary as it vas impossible I explained to to recruit Gray that agents T fully in Palestine under- stood the position, which had been made Crea beforehand; at the same time, there were very considerable difficulties if, for example, his representative intended to operate in France he would undoubtedly come up against the Frenuh police and this might seriously jeopardise 'C's relations. I thought, therefore, that he woulld have to obtain fo's approavl and co-operation. I suggested that he should call at S.1.8. and undertook to fix up an appointment for him, which I did. As regards Richardson. who had been suggested for this appointment, we did not think that he was altogether suitabl but we recommended to Gray that he should see Richardson himself and make up his own mind; meanwhile, Colonel Quill had other possible candidates. The other matter discussed was the proposed C.S.D.I.O. for Palestine. I explained to Gray that this question had bee under discussion by the J.I.C. and that it had been submitted to J.I.C., Cairo, for final approval. We would do our best to get the necessary equipment. There were two obvious points with regard to the security of the operation: (i) we were interested in the security of the equipment itself and would naturally he interested in ensuring that it did not come to the notice of un- authorised persons that the equipment had bee installed in a particular building. I thoug 65 65 too, that it would be necessary to have some- one at the head of the organisat tio who was reading(? the "map" interrogations and also the "cross-roughing" reports. That officer shoulld brief the interrogators in some detail since they would show a atural keenness to cross-examine prisoners on the "cross- roughing" information and might well give the whole thing away unless they were closely controlled. Sir Charles Wickham calle at my request. He is leaving for Palestine to-morrow. I asked im whether he would be prepared to give us cover in Salonica under his Police organi- sation when the troops withdrew. He said that, provided the Foreign Office waw no bjection, he would be delighted to do so - if necessary the man could be in Police uniform. I asked Kellant talk to him abot Palestine generally. I gathered that he wae much impressed by what Kellar had to say and by Kellar'E general knowledge of the whole set-up. Wickham said that his impression was that things had really gone too far, and that whatever was settled in Palestine, terrorist activities were likely to go on. He was inclined to think that the only way of cleaning the situation up might be a military operation, combing the country out from top to bottom. I said that I was rathe inclined to think So too, but that whenever these things were suggested political pressure was brought to bear; it was invariably said that such an operation woul prejudice future conferences. Hilgarth came to see me about Ignacio MOLIN He said tha't his Assistant Naval Attache in Madrid, Gomez Beare, had used MOLINA as an agent and had got very good service out of him. He thought therefora, that it was unfair that MOLINA should now be penalis and kept out of the Gibraltar area. I bb suggested that Beare should came and see Spencer and give a fulllaccount of what his relations with MOLINA had been during the war. I did not tell Hilgarth what our information was about MOLINA. There are very good grounds for thinking that he passed on the information to Berlin about the bogus "Monty". Monty arrived on the 26th May, 1944, and a telegram was sent from Madrid to Berlin on the 28th May, reporting his arrival. This deceptior had been carefully planted on MOLINA, who was put in a room in the Governor's house, from which he saw the bogus "Monty" walking up anddown with the Governor. My own view about MOLINA is that he played happily (?) with both Bides. It may be, however, that he cannot do so much harm now. There were, of course, many other reports stating categorically that he was passing informa tion tothe Germans. ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED UNDER SECTION November l4th. PUBLIC RECORDS I had a meeting with Brisce Cumming., Grogan and Hedger about the definition of functions between Hedger's laboratory and Censorship testing in time of war. It was clear that and knowledge about secret inks in any future war would be centered in Hedger'e laboratory. We all felt, however, that it would be undesirable for HEager in time of war to have anything to with censorship testing beyond passing to them all the Information he coul and receiving from them any data which might have a bearing on the subject. It ras,essen tial, however, that we should maintain control over testing methods employed if we were to give the necessary protection that might be in use by our double agents. It was decided that we should discuss the matter with Herbert on his return fro America 7 For Minutes of B.Meeting see B.Division Weekly Meetings Minute Book. I had lunch with He told me that Dutch Intelligence was in a FTuid state, but the future of Eindhoven was precarious. He was going over to Holland himself and would know more about things on his return. paid a long visit to the Registry, which 118 certainly a very fine piece of organi- sation. While it undoubtedly does very good vrk and handles an enormous number of documents, it is not to my mind wholly suitable to meet Intelligence needs. There are 21 people in the L.U. department who do L.Us for the whole office; none of them is a specialist in any particular line. They go to the Index, either with a slip of paper supplied by Head Office or with the last paper that has come in, but they never see the file unless circumatances are very exceptional. This means that the L.U. girl is in no sense a specialist,an in no sense going to the index as an Intelligence officer bent on solving an Intelligence problem. The vetting L.U.S are easier, in the sense that the particulars are fairly complete and are set out on a pro forma. The Intelligence Us, on the other hand, are much more difficult, as the particulars are often of necessity vague. I discussed with Potter the question of carding the Communists. I thought that there was something slightly dishonest since there vere many Communists on our records who were not carded. Things had changed,sin the D.G's ruling, in two respects, firstly, enthusiasts who joined the Party during the war had falllen away - anyone Joining now would be doing so with a fanatical faith in the Soviet regime. Secondly, the J.I.C. End Chiefs of Staff had asked us about the potentialities 68 6 8 of the 5th Column in the event of a war with Russia and the action we were proposing to tal It seemed to me, therefore, that we must at least card as much as we can about industrial workers, in addition, of course, to the intellectual groups. We might, on the other hand perhaps disregard agricultural workers and housewives. Potter pointed out that he might want extra staff for this, and that it should be accompanied by a weed out of the index of the individuals who were no longer aotive members. I also suggested to Potter that we might with advantage canvass section in the office to find out xactly what the difficulties were with regard to the Registry, and that having done this it would be profi- table to have a meeting. With regard to policy files, on the other hand, we needed two things; firstly, aa thin(?) file which Would sh exactly what the policy was at any given moment, and secondly, a supplementary volume which, if we wished to change policy, would show us exactly why a particular policy had been adopted at a particular time. November 15th Bobby Mackensie came to talk to me about the possibility of having an fficer working in Passport Control, Paris, who would deal with Jewish matters. He suggested Foulkes. T said that I should want to consider the matter very carefully, but that unfortunately Foulkes had just been ordered out to the Middle East. THIS IS A GOPY ORIGINAL DOCU 11 RETAINED LDEPARTMENT UNNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Fee 2oa THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 FEB 201o Spencer tells me that not only visas but passports have been abolished for Ame rican tourists visiting Jamaica, the Leewards and Windwards, The Colondal office have let us down on this in spite of our protests. Burt tells me that as far as he can ascertain the publicity about the Jewish woman was due to a leakage either from the Liverpool Police or the Imigration. Pat Stone came in to see me I told him I ad now seen a letter from 'C' agreeing to our having an office in Washington. In 80 far as it is possible we shall do our liaison work with C.I.G. through General Peabody in London,rather than in Washington. E dined with Marriott, Milmo and Stamp. November 16th. 70 November 18th. Horrocks. to see me. He told me that the D.G. had been impressed by the size of organisation of S.I.M.E. and thought that an officer of considerable administrative experience was required. I think it is emphatic that Kellar's name had never been discussed with the people in the area. confined my remarks to saying that I stil thought Kellar was entirely suitable for the job, but I was somewhat worried about Magan being taken away from Palestine - quit the most important position at this moment - and the denuding of B.3.a. in London by the departure of Thistle and Foulkes. I though too, that if we were always going out into the highways and hedges to look for new people when appointments of this kind became vacant, we should never get any good officer to shy in the department. Horrocks made no comments. Dick arrived back to-day. I told bim what Horrocks had said. He said that in So far as not mentionging Kellar's name, it had clearly been bandied about all over the plac and opinions were canvassed, even with Jenkins. Jenkins, apparently, caused a certain amount of trouble by not wishing to work under the Head of S.I.M.E. It was, however, made clear to him that he would hav to, and I gather that hehas nov accepted the position. Dick confirmed to me everything that he had written in his letter, and expressed himself as being profoundly dis- turbed about movigg Magan who had just settl down in Palestine, which was obviously a mos tmportant place at the moment. In addition we had, of course, to some extent dislocated 7 / B.3.a. at this end by being forced to send out Foulkes and Thistle. Dick had seen Dempsey with the D.G., and Dempsey had said that he would prefer to have a civilian rather had, than a therefore, soldier or been a bogus opened soldier. for the The immediate dooe appointment of Kellar, if this had been thought desirable. Dick does not think that the Head of S.I.M.E. is a big administrative appointment. The heaviest responsibility, is in Palestine and is local. What is really required is a man who knows the Intelligence in the area and can stimulate other peoples otivities and get them the assistance and backing that they require. It seems to us that Kellar would admirably fulfillthese requirements. At the D.G.'s meeting to-day we discussed the vetting of Canadian Immigrants by RCMP representatives and Security Liaison with the Railway Police and Ministry of Transport. (see Mins. of D.G's meetings - 1946 - held D.G. Sec.). Kellar talked to me about his own position, and he has thought about it a good deal. While he does not dispute any decision that is made, he feels that if it is considered tha he is not qualified, after hhis considerable length of service and intimate knowledge of the area, to become Head of SIME, there Annot really be much future for him in this office, and that his only course will be to Look round for something else. I told him nott to worry about this for the time being. came to tall to me about getting Mrs. RUSER back to Spain. This iB going to be quite a difficult operation. I advised him to consult with Tommy Hapris., who knew the ropes pretty well. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION OF HE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 Feb 2010 72 I had a meeting with Viv Philby and at Broadway, about the representatives of the R.C.M.P. who wanted out assistance in vetting immigrants from this country and from the Continent. They have sent over a with whom we are already in touch. It was agreed that he would also be placed in touch with Passpor Control white we would vet anybody who it was known had been resident in the U.K at any time. ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION I had Pat Stone to ainnerHe PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. Feb 2oto At his request I went over to see Belrenger, Secretary of State for War. He told me that he had had a note from the P.M. containing a suggestion that BING had abused his positio during the war in giving away military information to Communisbs, and whether, in fact, BING was a member of the Party. I sai that I was a little surprised that the P.M. had not, in fact, referred this matter to us direct, in view of a somewhat similar case thi we had on a previous occasion, where he more or less directed that he wanted to deal with matters of this kind personally. In view, however, of the fact that Bellenger had had a letter from the P.M.., which he read out to ma, I felt that I was quite authorised to go ahead. Bellenger was very sympathetic and quite understood my embarrassment. T told him that I would consult our files and come and see him again. I thought it wise to tell him that I should be speaking to the P.M personally, because it seemed to me that the case involved certain principles on which ve should like to be quite clear. Did, for examp the P.M. expect us to fulunteer information O: this kind. If 8o, was it to be done to the Minister responsible or to the Prime Minister himself? I explained that our aim and object 73 was to remain entirely non-Party in all these matters and to avoid any suggestion that the Department was a Gestapo. Mr. Bellenger thought this was H very right and proper and said that he would, in fact, mention the point to the P,M. himself when he saw him about ORIGINAL DOOUIENT RETAINED November 19thTMEN UNDER SEOTION OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS Burt came to see me about Poles. The Fe6oid Commissioner wanted to know whether we should tip off the word in the case of any undesir- ble Polish jews being given leave from any the camps in which they were situated, I said that I would go into this and let him knov what we could do. I saw Bellenger again. I told nim that I had personally examined the papers about BING, but there was no indication whatever that he had abused his position as an officer to communicate information to the Communist Party but but that it was proved beyond reasonable doubt that he was actually a member of the C.P. Bellenger did not ask me for the source of my information, but he did say that it was of course a serious accusation. I told him that the documents in our possession did not in my view leave any room for doubt. I think the information was perhaps a slight: shock to Bellenger, although he knew, of rse, that BING was. strongly Left in his tdencies. We had an Appointments Board, but did not decide to take on any of the candidates. Hollis brought me Mitchell'e paper on the potentialities of the Communist Party here in the event of war with Russia. It is extremely well written and well balanced. It shows that the membership has declined from about 60,000 in the peak period of 1943 to about 37,800 - with probably a hard core of 10,000. These people are placed in all walks 14 of life and are particularly strong in some of the industrial Unions. Potentially, they could do a very considerable amount of harm if they were not interned. We llaid stress upon adequate knowledge of where these people are 1o be located, and the immense importance of getting they out of their positions from the wofd "go". Any delay would be disastrous. I went to see the P.M. at 9.30. I found him in the Cabinet Room huddled up in his chair and, I thought, in a somewhat exhausted condition. He had, of course, just been through the incident of the revolt in the Labour Party against our Foreign Policy. told him about the sumons that I had had from Mr. Bellenger, and that,in view of the letter from the P.M., I had thought fit to go ahead and give him the informat on that he required. I did, however, think that a matter of princip was involved. I handed to him a questionnaire asking him generally what action he requires ti take in the case of .Ps belonging to subversi movements, and in the case of M.P.S who had close contacts with subversive movements. Wi out answering each question in detail, he said that he thought that he alone should be informe in every case where we had positive information that a Member of Parliament was a member of a subversive organisetion, whether that member waE also a member of the Labour Party, the Conserve tive Party, or any other Party represented in the House of Commons. I thought he was not very specific; I gathered that he fel that he had a responsibility to the House and country to see that such members did not get into positions where they might constitute a danger to the state. They might either be members as members of the Government, or kbes if they were in the Opposition as members of Royal Commissions or Parliamentary Delegations. I then talked about Palestine and the attitude of Ben GURION, who was anxious to make the 75 attendance of the Agency at the coming being limited to: conference conditional upon the discussions (a) a return to the pre-White Paper situation and the British mandate wi. th limited immigration, or (b) partition, wi th a viable territory for the jews. If these were not granted, Ben Gurion was in favour of breaking off relations with the British Government and transferring the Agency to the United States. Weizmann was counselling moderation and the Ing into the Conference on an unconditional basis. He intended to go full out for partition at the Zionist Conference at Basle, and was not unhopeful of carring the position and taking Ben Gurion with him. I then told the Prime Minister about KOLLEK and explained to him how we had had previous relations with this man in Palestine, and that we were in touch with Agency representatives both in Palestine and in Cairo. I told him that the measure of this co-operation was limited; it had never led to the actual pin-pointing of terrorists - it had generally taken the form of notifying us that something was likely to happen somewhere within the next 24 or 48 hours, or that the terrorist was believed to be in Jerusalem. In fact, the Agency told the authorities just as much as they thought was good for them and had always endeavoured keep the strings in their own hands and to imply that they were the people who were governing Palestine and not the British Government. The P.M. remarked that they were singularly tortuous people to deal with. Lastry, T told MimI about the paper that we nad put up to the Chiefs of Staff on the Boten- tialities of the Communist movement in this country in the event of war with Russia. I all this. got very little reaction from the P.ME Yabout ORIGNAL DOCUMENT RETAINED DEPARTMENT SECTION OF THE PUBLIO RECORDS ACT 1958. Fee 2010 71 He kept on repeating their names and saying: "Really, I should never have thought it". This is quite interesting, since has, in fact, been a member of the Party since 1920. I found the P.M. an extremely difficult man to talk to. He was, of course, tired, but he hardly ever responded. You say your piece and when you cone to the end there is a long pause - you then begin the next item on the agenda. I thinlc it is to some extent due to a curious shiness, which he radiates, and, indeed, imparts to his visitors. He does not of ten look you in the face. I had the same impression on the other occasions when I spoke to him, and, from what I can gather. from others who have seen hiim, it is his usual form. After I had finished my piece there was a further pause; 1 therefore got up, saying that I did not think there was any other information to communicate to him, unless there was anything special that he wanted to know. He then bundieds oft of fOPY his chair in a somewhat confuseal stater BETAINED NDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION November 208h4 OF PUBLIC RECORDS 1958 Briscoe came to see me about MUELHEISEN, 2ot0 who was the principal chemist dealing with secret ink for the Germans during the war. MUELHEISEN is now in the British zone in hospital, but is anxious to return to his wife in Munich. who is being persecuted by the German authorities on account of her husband's former activities. It was felt desirable that we should get MUELHEISEN over to this country. I said that I was doubtful about the wisdom of this, since he would obviously be in possession of our secrets, which at any time he could impart to an enemy. If he discovered a new form of secret ink, therefore, we could not make any use of it. Further, we could never prevent him from going back to Germany to visit his relatives or from imparting his knowledge to the Russians in thig 72 country, if he were So inclined. I felt, therefore, that, subject to anything S.I.S. ha to say, it might be hetter to try and find him some suitable employment in Germany. our aim and object should be to get him interested in some forget other about subject secret and ink. nK.ORIGINAL hope that DOOUMENT he wold RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLC RECORDS ACT ACT1958 1958 Fe8 DalS At the J.I.0. to-day a number of subects were discussed off the record. I explained to the meeting the action that we proposed to take th regard to the encroachment of American C.I.G. on our preserves in Hong Kong and Burma The 6ommittee agreed that the line tha't we wer taking, namely, of oo-operation in the field, was the right one, provided the Colonial Offic Burma Office, and the local civil and military authorities were also in agreement. The D.M.I. raised the question of Greece. I said that we could, if it was considered desirable, continue the activities of BSIC -w an affshoot of SIME at Athens - under A.M.A. cover, and in Salonice under cover of Wiokham's Police Mission. - There was a discussion about Staff Courses. It was disclosed that an Egyptian had been invited to attend, and that his presence had the support of D.M.I. and C.I.G.S. D.M.I. went so far as to say that if the Ruasians would give us reasonable treatment, he woul be prepared to see/Russian staff officer attending these courses. I think he felt that this was a fairly safe bet, as reciprocal treatment by the Russians was, to say the leas problematical. D.N.I. took strong exception to the presence of foreigners, except American The Egyptians were notoriously leaky and if the were present the course really would be open to the world. He saw no point in teachi our potential enemies how to fight a Naval battle. A.C.S.I. said that the Air Force ran two course, one for British subjects and one for foreigners, but that they might run 78 into Treasury difficulties in future. The meeting thought that courses for the Army and Navy should be run on similar lines, if this could be arranged. D.N.I. entioned that the mines which had led to the disaster in one of our destroyers in the Adriatic had been purposely sown, and that material indicated that if we made any attempt to enter any Albanian port we should be fired upon. There seems to be little doubt that rather Minister operations are going on at certain ports on the Albanian coast and that the Russians are hehind it. T saw WESTGARTH at Room 055; his son was with him. I told him that somehow or other my name had been mentioned in connection with his projects,and on the strength that of if any he statement had obtained that the the money British Government were behind him,it might be rather a serious matter. He said that he did not know how my name had got mentioned, but that there had never been any suggestion that I had anything to do with his financiall schemes. I explained to him that he must not get it into his head that I could use my influence in any way to further his interests. T thought the best thing he could do in the present circum- stances was to make as full a statement as he possibly could to the Police, giving all the facts. By what he told me it seemed that Mrs. Salisbury had parted with her money without any conditions at all, and that it Nas in the nature of a personal gift. If this vere 8o, there could be no complaint. We parted on perfectly good terms. )olonel DALLEY, formerly of the Malay Police, same to see me. He has been offered the job of Director of the Malayan Security Service. as te has some not suggestion yet accepted that it, he had partly run becuase away at there the time of the Japanese occupation, and partly ecause he feels that the Malayan Security service in its present form is to some extent 79 redundant. As regards the first reason, he says that he did not wish to be a prisoner throughout the war with the Japanese,an that he subsequently engaged in guerilla activities behind the Japanese lines, was captured twice and escaped. He originally conceived the idea of the M.S.S. on the lines of S.I.F.E. but in view of the establishment of S.I.F.E. , he thought the position was unsatisfactory. Either there should be an Inspector General to cover all Malayan police forces and to atimulate S.B. activities, or the M.S.S. should be reduced to about six in number and should ollate information received from police Special Branches. He disapproved of an independent organisation without any executive powers and without any authority to extract the necessary intelligence from the police. He struck I thought what he had to say a boub the M.S.S. made good sense. T passed his information on to Malcom Johnston. I feel a little that Malayan Security is usurping the functions of S.I.F.E. November 2lst. Miss Bagot talked to me to-day about foreign Communism generally. There is a certain amount of evidence to show that Par is hs coming a kind of Comintern centre, somewhat the lines of the Western European Bureau of the Comintern, which in the 20's was situa- ted in Berlin. She feels fairly confident that there must be some clandestine method of communication which W e have far been unable to diseover. I suggested to her that she might check the handwritings of certain likely Communists against the outgoing Paris mail from the London area. Minutes of B.Meeting in B. Division Weekly Meeting Minute Book. 60 Dick and I lunched with Vickery and Bamford, when we discussed the various eventualities which might arise if an eIndian was appointed as Head of D.I.B. Smith, the present D.I.B., advised that we should take over I.P.I. and appoint a liaison officer with D.I.B. in India - they in turn should appoint an Indian as liaison officer here in London. This has already been tentatively been discussed in India with Patel, and the suggestion lis that we should S end out someone from here to cllinch the matter with the Indian authorities. THISIS A CEOPY ORIGINAL DOGULTANT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIG RECORDS ACT 1958 FEB Dol0 November 22nd. TAR came to see me about He was doubt- ful whether we ought to approve his naturali- sation. I said that he had given loyal service to the Department during the war years and that I felt, in the absence of any positive informa- tion against him, we were justified in makeing the recommendation I tallked to Harry Allen and Archer about A.L.ua looking after vulnerable points. Jo is getti out ahmemorandum on the whole subject, which I shall discuss with the A.L.0.s at their next meeting. November 23rd. 7I - 1- 1 O X 2 THIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARITMENT UNDER SECTION 8(4) OF THE FUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 FeB Doo November 25th. D.G. Meeting - See minutes of meeting in file held by D.G. Sec. Colonel Pitman came to see me. He is an Army officer and served in Indiand for most of the war has been head of the Intelligence and Security Dept. in Uganda. This Department, though staffed largely by police, was entirely independent and worked direct tothe Governor and ran its own agents independent of the police. Colonel Pitman talked about the the various intrigues in Uganda which had culminated in the general strike He had 3 apparently warned the authorities at an early stage, but the administration had done very "i little about it. He evidently took a poor view of the administrative officers - many of whom had gone to seed and indulge in various mal practices and immoralities. He seemed les8 worried about the Indian problem than the native problem. The Moslems were backed by the Aga Khan and were acquiring a considerable amount of property, but they were mostly of a poor class. The Hindus were equally poor in quality. So far there has been no serious reaction due to the situation in India. lonel Pitman took a poor view of Holt and also of Pearce, in which opinions he was undoubtedly right. Nash, on the other hand, had found favour and had done a good job. He was very sorry to hear of Nash's illness. Colonel Pitman 's job has been taken over by his Deputy, a man named Sharpe, and he himself is going back to the Colony in March to. do a job in the Game Department. He made a very 2 favourable impression and I am sure would always be a useful contact of our D.S.0. I gave a short lecture to Naval officers of the Dominions and certain S.0.Is who wene goin a course here at the Admiralty. I talked to them more or less on the lines of the lecture which I gave to the Imperial Defence College. A complaint was made by the S.0.I., Rangoon, about HUNT. I had explained that our u.S.Os had a local responsibility to Governors and Commanders-in-Chief in their areas. S.0. Rangoon said that he had never been able to ge anything out of HUNT, who had always given the impression that he only reported to the Prime Minister. I said that this was entirely wrong and that I would see what I could do to put it right. Captain Hale, R.N., of Singapore raised the question of the S.0.I. in Shanghai, who is in fairly close touch with our D.S.0. in Hong Kon and carries out enquiries of our behalf. He 24 said that this S.0.I. might at any moment be asked to withdraw by the Chinese. If this were to happen the area would be entirely uncovered from the Security point of view. I said this was really an S.I.S. mitment and that we had no authority to place anyone in Shanghai. A suggestion was then made that perhaps an A.N.A. might be appointed. Halle also drew attention to the fact that everywhere in the East the Navy were coming more and more to relly upon Chinese as servants, orderlies, etc. He wondered whether the authorities, were alive to the dangers. I said that the same situation existed in Foreign Office Embassies abroad and that,while we as a department had no responsibility, we were constantly drawing attention to the risks that were being run. I thought his best line .would be to raise the matter with the J.I.C. in Singapore and report back to the J.I.C. in London. ORIGINAL DOCUMENDT RETAINED DEPARTMENT SECTION November 26th. OF THE PUBLIC REGORDS T-1958 Peter Hope came in to see-me He 1e having quite a lot to do in Paris, since in additior to being an administrative officer,hthe, handling the security of the Embassy had beer put on his plate. He says that in viev of the threats of the Irgun, the Embassy is bristling with armed guards and detectiv 1. In practice, however, this does not amount to very much. He made an inspection one night and found the majority of them absent. He is tying up internal security as much as he possibly can, but finds it an uphill task. The Ambassador is generally rather bored wi th the whole business. I recommended to Peter to have a talk wi th B. since as far as our information went the risks in Paris were very Considerable. 85 November 27th. The Dominion Naval representatives attended the J.I.C. They were concerned mainly with ethods of communication with J.I.C. London. The Canadian High Commissioner is to have Military, Naval and Air advisers attached to his staff. It was thought desirable that if possible there should be communication between the Secretaries of the J.I.C. in London and the J.I.0. Canada direct. In Australlia the position is more complex. There is a Captain Buchanan in London who passes J.I.C. papers to the Defence Minister; from there they go to the Defence Commi ttee, which should pass them on to the Controller of Intelligence, Brigadier Chilston, who has under him the Asutralian J.I.0.. J.I.B. In practice, however, these documents generally get stuok in the Defence Committee. There isk however, direct communication between the three Service Intelligence Depts. here and their opposite numbers in Australia. It was decided, therefore, that Ds of I. should tip off their opposite numbers when a J.I.0. paper went to the Defence Committee. In New Zealand the Chiefs of Staff have a Secretary, but there is no J.I.C. They had not apparently been receiving the J.I.C. papers from here at all. New Zealand has one representative in Melbourne, who makes contact with all three Service Intelligence Departments. It is proposed, however, that they should have an integrated staff in the Australian J.I.C. and that they should have a representative on the Australian J.I.C. for all domestio matters. We had an Appointments Board, but did not decide on the acceptance of any candidate. 86 THIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED November 28th DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS The D.G. arrived back to-day.l 1958 MaR Doo I discussed with Courtenay Young the Malayan Security Service, which seemed to me to o_be be getting rather across our tracks. He agreed that the position was not particularly satisfactory, but thought that it would work and that there was no possibility. of adopting Dalley's suggestior of an Inspector General looking after local Special Branches. For Minutes of B. Meeting held to-day see Minutes of B: Division Weekly Meetings. November 29th. I attended the J.I.C. again, when the area to be covered by Intelligence in Singapore was discussed. It was felt that the duter area should include India; Ghina, Japan G and most of the Pacific up to Honolulu) Australia, New Zealand and Indonesia. All Intelligence coming from this area would be relevant to the Commanders in-Chief in Singapore, although they would only have direct responsibility as far north as Hong Kong and as far west as Ceylon. It was thought that the C.I.S. in Singapore, which a joint unit of the three Services, should be abolished and that we should reverttto the J.I.C. system with a J.I.S. consisting of Service representatiges, a Foreign Office representative, a Colonail Office representative,an someone from SIFE. This body would prepare papers for the J.I.C. and also deal with political matters, information on which was required by the Commanders-in-6hief. 87 THIS IS A'COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC REGORDS ACT 1958 Ma 2010 Theresa Clay came to talke to me about Colonel MEINERTZHAGEN, who had received a mysterious visit from a man sho said that he was a representative of the Irgun. He did not disclose his identity or his address, but wanted a message passed on to the Home Office to the effect that the Irgun did not intend to carry out terrorist activities in this country, largely, I think, because they realised it might prejudice their chances of getting money from their financial backers. MEINERTZHAGEN had been to the Home Office, but he was not prepared to give his informant away or to help us in establishing his identity and movements. I explained that it Wo ould be SN extremely helpful to us to have these, since to some extent I was inclined to doubt the bona fides of the message, which might well be that the Irgun wanted the authorities to relax their vigi- lance If we knew where the suspect was living, we might find out names of those with whom he was associated. Col. MEINERTZHAGEN 78 had apparently been appraoched in view of his active sympathy with the Zionist Revisionists. Theresa said she had seen a woman outside their house and wondered whether she was a Police agent. I said that, So far as I knew, the Police had not been informed but T would find out. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIG REOORDS ACT 1958 MR Do10 3/ This 1C AOOPY ORIGINAL DOUUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 MAR 0o I dined with Gray and Kelllar. T like Gray very much personally and I think he has tremendous guts. November 30th. I had a talk with the D.G. to-day and told him about some. of the things that have been going on during his absence: the possibility of our representatior in India; the proposed arrival here of an Irgun terrorist, and our meeting yesterday at the Foreign Office. go Gray and I went to see Sir Frank Newsam. THISUIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNVDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLG RECORDS ACT 1958 MAR Too Newsam them Suggested that we might have a talk with Maxwelle Maxwell took a much more favourable view. He thought the risks were nggligifle and was quite prepared to make a recommendation to the Home Secretary to that effect on Monday. December 2nd. The D.G. took his meeting to-day and said that his tour had been very satisfactory, and 9/ that he had succeeded in getting the full co-operation of Northern and Southern Rhodesia and the Union, allll of whom were very keen to worio wi th us. He made no mention of S.I.M.E. I raised the question of the A.L.0.8 covering non-secret factories. The D.G. seemed to think the idea was a good one. Adam brought to notice a number of cases for additional vetting, mainly for the Air Ministry, but also for the Navy. It Beemed to us that certain of the requests were unreasonable: the Air Ministry, for example, wanted all their air rews vetted - presumably because they had access to secret equipment. I said that we had always regarded equipment as issued to the troops more or less as public property; there was little to be done with regard to its security. Theresa came to tell me that MEINERTZHAGEN had been followed in a car in a more than obvious fashion. He had tested it out by pulling into the side, which the following car had done as well. He thought this was just a clumsy manpeuvre by the Palice and was very much annoyed in consequence. We had a meeting with Charles, Dick. Horpocka and B.3.b. on accommodation for S.I.F.E. There was no doubt that Singapore feel that we are not looking after their interests, and they are in despair about the latest news that Killearn is taking over the house that we had earmarked for ourselves. This, of course, is entirely due to dilatoriness on the part of the War Office. who had authority to buy from the Treasury. Horrocks said that the D.G. was in favour of our getting grants from the Treasury to do our own buying. I said that while this would be satisfactory, it would be a great mistake if this moneywa charged to the secret vote: there would inevitably be a cut in the secre't vote sooner or later and we should end by finding that ourselves and S.I.S. were spending all the money on houses and motor- 92 cars, and that nothing was left for Intelli- gence. If, on the other hand, the Treasury were prepared to authorise the War Office, or the Ministry of Works, to honour our signature and to pay the money from the open vbte of either Ministry, it would be an excellent plan. It was decided to draw up a paper, showing our commitments, and get the D.G. to see Bridges. The D.G. spoke to me about Gray. He thought it was a curious thing that the Commiasioney had asked Wickham to go out so soon after Gray's appointment. He himself had heard complaints about Gray from the Police that he did not understand Pollice administration. I said that T had a great admiration for Gray, but I did not, of course, know what the com- plaints were, although I had the impression that Gray was doing his u'tmost to build up the Police and to get they many things which they obviously needed. It seemed to me that the situation in Palestine had got beyond a matter of Police administration. The fact was that most of the Police were extremely tired and that, with the exception of people like Conquest,whom Gray regarded as being worth more to him almost than the whole of the C.I.D. put together, xmey were extremely few and far between. By and large,most of them had thad it and it was not surprising in the circumstances. It seemed to me that it waB now open war- fare in Pallestine and that little short of a military operation, or a settlement by which the Jews would be in a position to olean up their own kind, would really provide a sollution I talked to the A.1.0.8 and to Jo. Archer. Jo is writing his memorandum about non-secret vulnerable points, but has not yet worked them out in areas. There are some 150 points under consideration. He thinks that the division between the A.L.Os and 0.2. should be secret factories and non-secret factories, and that fo the sake of cO-ordinating their activities on factory lines should be controlled by 0.2. This seems reasonable enough. - 93 December 3rd. Miss Nunn tells me that no information about Colonel MEINERTZHAGEN has been passed to the Police by anyone in the Home Office. Either, therefore, the Police have got on to him on their own, or he has been followed by the Irgun. Miss Nunn thought that perhaps we orht to discuss the matter with Burt, urging h to lay-off if in fact he is carrying out observation. Watt came to see me about A.L.0. Scotland. He said that he had seen Merrilees, Superin- tendent in Edinburgh, who had heard talk about Cormack, who is in fact his Deputy. He personally d oes not think Cormack atall suitablle. Watt thinks that if we do not make a decision before long, the generall talk in Scotlandawil go on. He does not think that Ede is/suitable suocessor to himself. I told him to have a talk with the D.G. about the whole posi position. TAR and I attended the "wi Board. 'o!was-in the chair: the three DS Of TM DYew, Wingate and Hayter were present. TAR made an ext- namely good statement on the work of I.C.I.C. Inter-Service Combined Information Centre). e explained, for the benefit of the new Ds of I. exactly how the system worked during the war and how it might work in the future. At the moment there seemed to be no very definite policy. It Seemed desirable to establish some ething in the nature of I.C.I.C. points in various theatres, and to centralise aho passing over of alll information in the hands of L.C.S. L.C.S. should also have a lnow- ledge of what D.A. channels exist. This was generally agreed. The question of bringing in the Americans was discussed, and it was thought that for the moment,, until they settle down, it would be 94. better not to make any approach. Later, however, something might be said to General Peabody. Mainly, it was agreed that the Controller should get into touch with the appropriate scientific bodies and see whether it was possible to mislead the Russians on scientific development. Hayter, on behalf of the Foreign Office, said that he could quite easily use certain selected members of Missions abroad for putting across indiacretions'. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT1958 MAR 2010 December 4th. At the J.I.C.w discussed the draft to the Chiefs of Staff on the subject of the future Intelligence.{ set-up in Singapore. It was agreed to give them two alternatives: either the C.I.S. or the J.I.C./J.I.S. systems, with a strong peeference for the latter. We have agreed to give the local J.I.S. an officer from S.I.F.E. S. D.N.I. said that his S.0.I. in Shanghai was being made an A.N.A. At the Appointment Board to-day we decided that an offer should be made to Jack Morton of D.I.B. to take the post of D.S.0. Irag. Malcolm Johnston had ascertained that MORTON was pre- pared to accept. I sent and saw Burt. I told him the Colonel MEINERTZHAGEN saga. He ascertained that no observation at all had been carried out on Col. M. or his house. This would seem to indicate either persecution mania on the part of Col. M.. or that he is being watched by the Irgu 95. This COPY Burt agreed with me that there point in the Police intervening TETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION December Sth.e THE PUBLIC RECORDS MAR 2o/0 For Minutes of B. Meeting head to-day see Minutes of Weekly Meetings of B. Div. The D.G. talked to me about gettinga block grant from the Services for esermice personnel in S.I.M.E. and then the officers on the Reserve. He and Horrocks had an idea lat these officers would be returned to their Service on the outbreak of war as trained counter-Intelligence officers. I said that this was just the moment when we should be requiring their services, in fact we should be contemplating a 200% expansion. The D.G. then suggested our taking on extra Service personnel. I said that I thought this would be unsatisfactory because they would have no fixed job. They could not indefinitely be looking over someone else's shoulder, and if they were any good would undoubtedly say B0. James Robertson talked to me about the note which the D.M.I. requires for the C.I.G.S an the facts of the "blowing" of in the White Paper. We have not been able to deal with since, and have now gone over to Hasbings, characteristically ks that all this has got nothing to do with us and says that he will be seeing the D.M.I. himself. T said I had no bijection to this, rovided he did not suggest in his note - as he has done on previous occasions - that M.I.5. let the party down. I gather, however, that he is taking the line that it is by no means certain that the present state of affairs is due to the blowing of He thinks it is more on the lines of general precautions( (?). I told the D.M.I. that he would be getting his note from S.I.S. He said that Hastings had spoken to him and he sensed that there was some kind of petty jealousy. q6. The D.M.I. thought the whole thing was rather stupid. December 6th. Dick prepared a very outspoken note on the present decline in morale, both here and in the Middle Sast,owing to a lack of a decision about the Head of S.I.M,E. and about various other matters affecting S.I.M.E.'E organisation He took each item point by point. When it came to the Head of SIME, the D. G. said that he had been gravely concerned by the lack of administration in Roberts's office, and that in his view what was required was an experienced administrator. He thought emphatical ti that 4agan was the man. Curiously enough, Horrocks nas been saying the same thing! I said that It was nothing new to me to hear that the lis 1dministration last visit, of had, SIME in was fact, bad. expressed Kellar, himself after in very deftnite terms on the subject. In any ase, he could not be held responsible for this state of affairs. I thought emphatically that te was by far and away the strongest candidate 'or the post: everything that he had done here and the Middle Eabt showed that he was qualified oth on the Intelligence side and as an administ- ator. Moreover, before coming to us he had eld quite a responsible position as Secretary f the Employers Federation, where doubtless dministrative ability was required. He knew he whole area and all about the Intelligence roducts obtained and required from that area. e knew his staff and had theirffullcoonridence. e had been signally suocessful in carrying he highest ranks in the Middle Bast - particu- arly Lond Gort,-who consulted kim on almost verything. It seemed to me, therefore, that D go outside in order to make this appointment as both unnecessary and extremely iscouraging D e many good officers employed in this Department. should never be able to keep good officers if whenever jobs of this kind turned up we looked around elsewhere. The D.G. asked Horrooks what other candidates there were, and Horrocks 7. had to confess that SO far he had not been able to trace the mythical Penny. the alleged brother of the late D.D.M.I all that had been ascertained was that D.D.M.I. Penny had not got a brother! The D.G. then said that he was considerably impressed by the arguments that I had put forward, par- ticularly that one which I also put forward th that anybody taking over the Head of SIME should have had considerable experience in our office in London, and that it was our general policy to have a complete interchange officers at home and abroad. We did not wsh to build up a Colonal Service and a Home Service. He reserved judgement about Kellar, but the impression was that he is veering round to givieng Kellar the job. Horrocks, characteristically remained silent. I said. that if he decided to appoint Kellar, at the very worst he would not let him down, and I should be very surprised if he did not make a signal success of the whole job. We decided to send Stewart out as No.' 2 in SIME, vice Hamblyn who has resigned, and to put Shotter at the Egyptian desk. It is to be made clear to Jenkins that his information 1s to be filtered through the Head of SIME, who will brief the G.O.C. B.T.E. at Ismailia. Only on very rare occasion may it be necessary for Jenkins to see the G.0.C. himself. Hornby is to be taken on as an extra hand. THIS S A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 MaR 20(0 I asked Hill whether he wanted to retain the Bervices of Tangye. He seemed to think that Tangye might be quite useful to him and therefore agreed that Tangye should be kept on on the present basis until the 3lst March. 98 The D.G. spoke to me to-day about 'o''s weekly report to the Prime Minister. He wondered whether we ought not to have a similar report. I told him that we had had a monthly report, but that we had dropped it as it became rather repetitive. It seemed to me better that we shoulld have something really important to take to the P.M., and that we ought to be careful about reporting to him matters which affected other departments, as he might get them out of perspective: we should then find ourselves in trouble, either with the Minister or the Permanent Under Secretary. I thought that senior officers should be capable of bringing any important matters to the notice of Directors and they woulld bring them to my notice if there was anything that they thought the P.M. ought to know. I would talk to them on this subject. The D.G. seemed quite satisfied. Miss Chrenhalls came to see me about a letter which one, Gunnar JENSSEN had written to Lucas-Tooth, who had passed it to the Prime Minister. It related to the Cuban spies who landed here in 1940 with sabotage materiall. JENSSEN is an international spy who *x has worked for the French and the Russians. He is stateless and we have never been able to get rid of him. He arrived here in '41 as a seaman and was interned, exdept for a brief perido when he was relleased to S.0.E. He has a greivance and is now criticising the statement made by the Prime Minister about the projected German landings in 1940. He got his information about the four spies, whom he belittles, from being interned with them at the Beltane Schools. He alleges that a dog kept by PACHECO cost the British Govern ment 1.000. The dog was, in fact, kept a't PACHECO'S expense and cost him E300. A Moscow despatch dated 26th August reviews the position of the Red Navy and its post-war development. When the position was reviewed in July, 1945, the British concluded: (i) that 99 the Soviet Union 9 again a first-class power with world-wide interests, would make great efforts to increase her navall strength, (11) that for some years to come, however, the Soviet Union was l1kely to be fully occupied in restoring her naval position in the Baltic and the Black Sea: (iii) that it was doubtful whether the Soviet Navy, even when expanded, would ever become more than a loyal helper of the Red Army., but (iv) that it woud be unwise to overlook the poasiblle implications of the re-emergence of Russia as a great Nava Power without a bit ea-going and ocean-going fleet and suitably disnased bages. During the past year Soviet political interest in Naval forces has manifested itself in many directions. There has been opposition to American naval bases throughout the Atlantic and in such important strategical positions as Iceland, Greenland and the Azores. The uestion of the Dandanelles ias also been raised. In Northern Europe she is posing as the disinterested friend of Norviay, Denmark and Iceland, against the excebsive demands from the Western 6ani talist Dowers. She is not abandoning her own ideas upon Spitzbergen and Bear Jstond, nor should her evacuation of Bornholr be interpreted as a sign that she is abandoning her intention of dominating the Baltic. In the Mediterranean, in addition to the 'straits ihcidenti, she is trying to make herself felt through E.A.M. in Greece and by attempting to profit from the dissollution of the Italian Oolontal Empire. Her methods as regards Greece, the Dodecanese and Tripolitania have been clumsy, and she appears to have abandened her designs in both the latter cases. Only th the Adriatic Would Russla appear to be extending her interests. through her control of Jugo-Sllavia and Albania. She is now, however, supporting Bulgarian claims for an outlet upon the Aegean. In the Far East. Soviet naval policy ha not 100 yet showit i.ts hand so clearly, but apart from securing an outlet into the Pacific through the artexeho +7t KUNILES Sautturskka 9 she would Beem to be turning gradually to the long-term aim of controlling the Yellow Sea. For the moment this also is only showing itself in the consolidation of Port arthr and all Soviet rights (2) at Dairen and in Soviet support or sympathy for the Coummunists in Korea, Manchia and the Shantung Pensinsular. In the Middle East the Soviet Government is clearly trying to extend its influence throughout Persia and has inherited Czarist aims for oil and an outlet on the Gulf. 9th December, T asked the D.G. out to lunch. He told ins on request that he had been thinking a good deal about the Head of S.I.M-E. T said that there was one aspect of the problern that I had not pat to him before, because I felt that I might possibly have been mise understood, and that E did not wish him to think that either I or Kelllar was trying to force him to a decision against his will. The point waB that if Kellar waS not wanted, je would be bound to feel that after four years hard work in the Middle Eastern seotion and in building up SIE, he was not considered fit to take it over; there could not really be very mmuoh future for him in this office This might lead him to Look elsewhere. Moreover, it would have a bad effect on morale generally if when such appoint ments camne along we went outside the office to final them. felt it was only fair to let him Jmow this. I said that I was quite confident myself that Kellar could do the Job admirably and that he had very considerable administrative ability. While T realised that good administration was essential, I thought that it should spring from a knowledge of the Intelligence needs of the area; it wa.S on the basis of thatt that the organisation would have to be planned and the administration would follow in its wake. To do any thing else would be putting the cart before the horse. lol This had been, in my opinion, the trouble in the early days of the war. The office had done a terrific job of work, but this had been carried out not s0 much on account of the organisation, but in spite of it. The fact was that we had had some first class people working for us, that we have a nucleus, I think, left and have taken on some very promising others. During the war, as a result of the organisatior having been planned to some extent in vacuo, without due consider- ation being given to the Intelligence needs, had had to contend with a good many dfficulties. By slow degrees, however, we had evolved a workable system and back- pedalled a good many of the original suggest- ions. The D.G. then said that he had been turning over in his mind whether Kelllar should not have an administrator who would work with him. I said that he could take it as a certainly that if Kellar wanted an administ- rator he would not be slow in letting us know. I thought that he ought to allow Kellar to go out there and formulate his own views. I was certain that if the D.G. chose to go out two months after Kellar's arrival, he would find a very marked change in the whole organisation, He mus remember that Kellar could in no way be held responsible for the present position in S.I.M.E. Nobody was more conscious of Douglas Roberts's deficie- ies that he was. He had, in fact, said So very forcibly on his return from the Middle East some months ago. We had all known for a long time that Douglas Roberts was no good and we never, in point of fact, thought very highly of his predecessor. We had had to set up an interrogation centre and plan a general control of entry in Egypt in 1942. Before that nothing of the kind existed. The fact was that Maunsell had been extremely lucky to get away with it: had the Germans been cleverer in exploiting the deficiencies of S.I.ME. , Maunsell might have been in trouble. The D.G. said that he would speak 102 1o to Kellar and has, I think, made up his mind to appoint him as Head of S.I.M.E. We then discussed the question of finance, particularly with regard to the purchase of accommodation, cars, etc. I told him that I was allll in favour of the Treasury making a grant to the War Office, or the Office of Work, which could be drawn on on the office signature. I was, however, strongly opposed to such a sum being put on a Secret Service vote. We and S.I.S. had to be regarded as a unit in the production of Intelligence: if, therefore, the Secret Service vote was cut down in Parliament, we should both suffer and we might find our- silves in the position of having nlot of property, cars, etc. but no Intelligence. This would be disastrous, as our organis- ations would be judged by the Intelligence they produced. l1th December. The case of the two escaped German prisoners is getting rather exciting. a voice has been heard reading the newspaper in gutteral tones. Hill maintains that under the Defence Regu- lations we cannot enter private property in order to arrest an escaped prisoner. It would however, be possible to get a warrant for the arrest of Mrs. EDMONDS for harbouring him,and this woulld carry with it powers of search. Clearly, however, we ought to be pretty sure of our ground before we g0 in. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 MAR 2-O1o lob THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENTT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE FUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 MAR 2010 I talked to Mrs.. Keeneabout the difficulties of getting female staff. I had mentioned this matter at the Directors meeting, and suggested that some circular mightgoroun might go round the office so that member's could canvass their friends. It was, however, necessary to know how many people would be required wi th secretarial qualifications, and how many without, and what pay, eto. they would get. 04 I felt that there could be no harm in telling prospective candidates that they would be coming into Military Intelligence. At present we are only telling them that they are going to Join a Government Department, which must sound extremely dreary. Trevor Roper came to see me about his book on ghe "Putsch". He wants certain documents from us. As his project has been authorised by the Foreign Office, and by the Government Historial Section, I see no harm in letting him have what he wants. I asked him to write me aletter, stating his requirements. Hayter rang me up to say that Kirkpatrick's representative in the Middlle East is G/C. (?) Marsack, who belongs to an organisation called B.I.S.M.E. I am arranging for SIME to get into touch with Marsack. The D.G. went to the J.I.C. to-dayalone for the first time. T did my best to brief him, but a good deal of course comes up which is not on the Agenda. A paper by Wingate on the defence of India was discussed. The general feeling seems to have been that our sources of Intelligence from India are extrem- ely limited. This was precisely the situation one felt was bound to arise. Neither D.I.B. nor the Services can now communicate much Intelligence to this country and the Viceroy is deprived of many of his sources. There 1s a consequent dearth of Intelligence and the J.I.C. find themselves unable to Brief Chiefs of Staff. We are now asked to Btate our Intelligence sources from India. We, of course, have no Intelligence Sources: No- body seems to have thought of sugges ting that I.P;I. might be consulted. I am explaining all this to the D.G. THIS COPY 105 ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS 12th Decemeng58 MaR Dio I talked to Roger about the case of our agent, who has been asked by on the C.P, to give lectures on street fighting. It seemed to me that there might be an element of provocation in this. Roger pointed out that the request had come from and that had made 1t clear that he could not take part in any such street operations nluself, since heing an allien he would be deported, and that if turned the offer down it would only mean that somebody else woulld be given the job and we should know nothing about it. He has therefore been ins tructed to go ahead and submit his lecture to us for approval. He has been told to do nothing further until he is again approached. Personally, I think that this is quite all right. I shall, however, be informing the D.G. Bertram EDE returned to day from Spain. I told him about the position with regard to Sootland. He regretted the decision as he had made up his mind to take the job. I said that we should be trying to find some other kind of employment. Later, the D.G., grocks 9 Dick and I had a meeting and d sided to offer him D.S.O. Caribbean. For minutes of B. Meeting held to-day, see green folder. Horrocks came in while I was talking to Dick. He asked me exactly what the purport of the enquiry was with regard to the Registry. I said that i& hda been intimated to me that certain section in the office did not really understand Registry procedure, and that some of them had complaints - whether justifiable or not I do not know - and that it would be a good thing, therefore, that we should find out 106. exactly what was worrying sections. Having done so, we would then have a Round Table Conference with Potter. I had spoken about this to Horrocks on his return, and also I had discussed it with Potter, who seemed to think it was a good idea. T said that there was no reason for anybody to think that we were conducting an inquisition into the Registry. Horrocks said that he mentioned the matter because several people had spoken to him about it and intimated that they were not prepared to talk. What exactly he meant by this T do not know: personally, I regard it as somewhat sinister ane insubor. dinate. We then talked about finance. Horrocks said that he had been to a large meeting at the War Office, but had packed it up as he thought it was not getting anywhere. He felt the only thing to do was to get a. grant from the Treasury in order to finance our administration abroad. I said that I was all in favour of this, provided the money did not come. from the Secret Service vote. He said he thought I had an exaggerated idea of the whole thing. I said that I was quite clear on the point., since I was certain that sooner or later the vote would be cut, and that we should then find ourselves in the position of having large administrative commitments and no money for Intelligence purposes. I then talked to him about femalle staff. He thought it a good idea that we should tell prospective candidates that they were coming to Military Intelligence, and that we should try to make the job look as attractive as we could. He will let me have the necessary particulars. I said that not only could these be circulate within the office, but that I might give copies to the D.M.I. and D.N.I., in case any of their officers had daughters whord they wanted to place. 10) 14th December. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMVENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT LIDER SECTION 314) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 MARCH 2010 16th December. Burt came to see me. He is leaving in a few days time for South Africa. Kellar is iving him a copy of our note on 2ionist Revisionists in the Union. I asked him about the leakage at the Yard. He admitted that it was bad, but expressed the view that it Would always go on to a greater or lesser extent. He evidently did not think that it was a good idea having a Public Relations Officer like Fearnley, who was an ex-Pressman. He sadd that the Commissioner, was fully aware of the state of affairs. He himself never communi cated any information to Fearnley - occasionally he gave guarded answers to enquiries which Fearnley received from the Press. He said tha1 some time ago he had caught out two of the 198 civilian clerks in the General Registry collecting information which they were handing C out to the Press. The General Registry is, of course, a mine of informa lon and carries enough political dirt to sink most politicians, not to speak of other citizens. The D.G. has told Bertram EDE that he cannot offer him the job in Scotland, and EDE haB turned down the Caribbean job. He has now been offered B.2., which he has accepted pending Curry'e return. It is then proposed that he should go to C. Division. We have a telegram in about WINTERBORN, who has been offered a job as Head of the J.I.S. We would like to keep him, but it is difficult to make a forward commitment that we take him on to the permanent staff four years hence when he is due for his Army pension. 17th December. THISISACOPY ORIGINAL DOCUMEILT RETAINNED DEPAREMENI UNDEE SEOTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 MAR Dold T had a meeting with Harry Allen and the Railway Police. It was decided that we would revert to the pre-war system, by which the Railway authorities referred to us for vettiug in the cases of visitors whom they may have reason to suspect,and notify Us after the event of the names of all visitors. We had a meeting about WINTERBORN. Horrocke is in favour of suggesting that he should be given the alternative of resigning now from the Army continuing and joining his career the Security in the Army. Service, Dick or suggested this secondment to us, without pay and allowances, which would give him one of the permanent vacancies on the M.I.5. ceiling in SIFE. Hornocks did not, however, like this. THIS COPY 109 ORIGINAL DODUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF ThE PUBLIC RECORDS 20th December 958 MAR 2oro D.N.I. came to see the D.G. about leakage of information on our tie-up with the Americans on armaments. Hill and I explained to him the history of KUH, and I showed him a copy of The Week" of December l1th. KLOP came to see me. He said that he had a reeling that possibly we might think him om thing of an embarrassment, and that for reasons of loyalty we felt that we ought to go on retaining his services. I said that I was conscious that there was a vast field here in England which he could exploit on our behalf, but that owing to reorganisatione and general pressure of work here we had not, unfortunately, got down to thinking things out. I myself thought that we should do this as soon as he has finished his bnterrogations on the Continent. It ure moving about from one place to another got better opportunities for picking up informatio if hey are rooted to one spot, things are apt to get slow and people become less communicative. I think he was pleased to hear that we wtill wanted to retain his services. 23rd December. At the D.G's meeting to-day raised the uestion of putting forward a memorandum bout C.P. members employed in research establishments, which problem is linked with LID proposals to bring over here a number of second-grade scientists and technicians from the British Zone of Germany. Harry Allen said that he had a memobandum in the course of preparation. 30th December. Perfect came in to see me,. He had been down as far as Cape Town. He is back here for a short period before taking up his job in East Africa. He has received good chits from the Governor and the G.0.C. in Malta. 1947. lst January. At the J.I.C. to-day it was agreed that the Committee should defer putting forward their memorandum to the Chiefs of Staff, on various aspects of Russian visits to our factories, until they had our memorandum covering the whole problem of Russian penetration. On theaguestion of Irag, it was agreed that the Commit ttee should recommend that the directive of the Defence Committee Middle East to the A.0.0. shoulld be amended to confirm with the SIME charter. The present directive shows our D.S.0. as integrated with the A.0.c's staff: he should, of course, have freedom of action to go to any of the Commanders-in-Chief and to the Ambassador. Horrooks told me that the D.G. had had a successfull visit to the Treasury, who had agreed to the principle that a little sum of money should be placed on the open vote to the War Office, or some other suitable department, on which we could draw for various administrative commitments abroad. We had a meeting about India, at which Vickery, present. Bamford, It Vivian, was agreed Dick that and myself we should were have a D's.0. in India, in a separate building but under cover of the High Comissioner's office. I.P.I. would come under our control and would continue to run its ages abroad. THIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMEINT PETAINED IN DEPARIMENT 1. DER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLC BECORDS AOT 1958 MMir 2010 We shall go forward with the above views Vhen the meeting at a higher level is held. Somebody will have to visit India to fix up our liaison. I informed the D.G. of the giist of our discussions Carey Foster and Roaney Dennys came to talk about the leakage of information about Germany. I got Hi.ll down and we told them that without any. doubt the source of this leakage was Mr. Hynd, who had passed the inf mmation to Freddie KUH. The matter was already in hand and the Lord Chancellor was seeing Hynd. Curry suggested that possibly he might be usefull as a liaison officer in Australia, I said that in view of the unsatisfactory state of Australian Security, 1 rather doubted whether it was possible to make much headway until the Australian authorities had put their house in order. T ,Chowever, consider the matter. 2nd January David Stewart came to say goodbye to me. He is off to Egypt at last. II 2 WINTERBORN has decided to stay with SIFE, on the chance of being ultimately absorbed by the Security Service. Dick and Courtenay tell me that HUNT. has incurred the displeasure of a number of people in Rangoon, but that Malcom Johnston, in conversation with Sir Gilbert Laithwaite, has temporarily smoothed matters over. There is no doubt that-we shall have to change HUNT as so0n as possible. I talked to Mitchell about a request from the J.1.0. for information about Lothian aeme SCOTT, who is apparently holding some consular post in France and has written in a long report about conditions in the French Zone which has interested the Minister of Defence. Adam took it upon himself to put up the reply, which was in an unsatisfactoy form. SCOTT is a thoroughly unreliable person, who in the past has had association ith Germand ana and Fascists. He is generally considered to be unbalanced and unreliable. For minutes of B. Meeting see green folder. 3rd January. I told the D.G. that we had just had a tele- phone conversation by a man called OCKHART from MOSLEY' house, a number in baysvater, which made it clear that FLOCKHART and others are using RAVEN THOMSON'E car and are intending to pick up four prominent Jews and flog them on Friday night. We were giving information to Thompson of S.B. and the D.G. suggested that I should speak to Howe, which I accordingly did. Later we got information that FLOCKHART intended to take over RAVEN THOMPSON'S car at an address in Chelsea Park Gardens. 13 Dick, Kelllar,Clayton and I had a meeting about East Africa. It seemed that we ought to have a clearer idea as to how our D.S.0. at Nairobi was going to function. Ideally the D.8.0. should control all the 1ocall S.Bs, but this would be a heavy commitment. He should, how- ever, be the recipient of all their information. On the basis of thig information, he could then make up his mind what movements were purely indigenous and what had a wider significance. He could then concentrate on these latter movements and stimullate the Police to further action. We were al somewhat doubtful whether twe officers could really eontrol such an enormous area, but it may be better to see how things work out before suggesting that further assistance is necessary Kellar is going to try and draft some kind of instructions for the D.S.0. 4th January. T had a tallk with Harry Lee. The Police have made a bungle of the Fascist case. They picked up RAVEN THOMPSON'S car at Elstree on the Friday night and followed it through all the lanes and highways. They were, of course, detected and challenged. A complaint was made at Woodford Police Station and ater at Scotland Yard. Tommy Thompson seems rather complacent and was writing off with the idea that prevention is better than cure. It is true, of course, that nothing happened, but on the next occasion the Fascists will doubtless be more careful. The net result, from our point of view, is that our telephone checks have been blown without any compensating advantage. 6th January. KLADP came in to give us the result of his interrogation of FIDRHUO @ OSTRO in the Americar zone in Germany. His story 1s rather a sensational one. OSTRO claims three agents 14 of importance, one in Paris. who went after the German occupation, another in the Yemen who had been operating since 1936, and one in London who had been operating fre 1938 until the end of the war. The London agent is Baid to be RASCHITZKY of the Ozech Legation, who is the brother-in-law of Irene EISINGER. OSTRO was guite emphatio that Irene had nothing to do with German activities and no knowledge of them. RASCHITZKY had various contacts with the Society of British Aircraft Instructors, and with the Czech integrated Air Force through its Chief, JANUSHCEK. He claims that the information obtained was of the highest vallue to the Germans, that it was sent out to secret cover addresses abroad on the back of British propaganda posters and other material on which there was writing in secret ink. In 1944 he said that it was necessary to establish wireless communication in order that the gargets that we intended to bomb should be communicated at the earllest possiblle momen't to the Germans. In order to do this it was necessary to employ employ/spanish Spanish Rebublican wireless operator, but the Abwehr did not consider it desirable that RASCHITZKY should be placed in direet contact with this man. They therefore devised a system by which RASCHITZKY -w known as TOR or THOR - selledted half a dozen Catholio Churches. If Essen waato be bombed, he would ask the Priest to say Mass for bebrge Frederick Essenden't: if Hamm was to be bombed, he Would ask the Priest to say Mass for"George Frederick Hammondi. It is customary in these cases for notices of these events to be posted on the Chureh notice board. The wireless operator wa's therefore instructed to take note of the names of any people for whom Mass was aai sad who had the initials "George Frederdcl", He would then send over by wireless the first syllable of the name. This story, of course, immediately rang a bell, Since GARBO'S alleged wireless operator was always referred to as a Republican Spaniard. If, in fact, there was any other republican Bpaniard, it may be that OSTRO has characteristically been building him- Belf UD as a master sy. It 18 DOgaihile that 115 he may have had the idea, but that in fact nothing happened. It certainly could not have happened through GARBO'S notiona Spanish Republican as the set at all times was under our control. OSTRO alleges that LOBKOWITZ, the Czech Minister, was a cllose Collaborator of RASCHITZKY and we intend to investiage this wholle story in great detail, since in a number of respects it is ciroum- stantial and contains a large amount Df checkable detail. Phillips rang me up about the extract from "The Week" which I had send to the D.N.I. He asked whether we covered them on these matters. T said that normally we should,povided we knew exactly wha't interested them. B.1,, the Communist section, would not normally know that D.N.I. was interested in a leakage of the standard- isation of our armaments with American patterns; I, however, knew about it and happened to be reading tThe Week". T said that of course there was nothing to prevent Phillips getting lis own copy, but that such things might just as well appear in any other publication. I would, however, continue to read the "Week't as for Hollis's section. C.0. Edinburgh ooked in to see me today. T did not discuss ith him the appointment of A.L.0. Scotland as he was seeing the D.G. Watt tells me that Ewing, the D.Gs late Superintendent in Glasgow, is thoroughly disgruntled as he feells that the D.G's decision, conveyed to him by Watt, that the appointment would Tow be made from outside, is a complete aet-down. Watt is doubtful whether, If asked, the Glasgow police will put in any names at all. Edinburgh do not seem to have any candidates either. Meanwhile, of course, the D.G. is seeing Cunningham, who has told him that he thinks he ought to go ahead with his idea of getting a Bcottish policeman. Cunningham 116 of course; knows no more about what is required than any of the Chief Constablea. I am afraid that as a result of all this our stock in Scotland is at zero. I asked Hi1l about CRAUFURD. He thought CRAUFURD, quite innocently, was making use of information tha't he had obtained during his service here, in order to fight the claims of those who wanted their property released by the Custodians of Enemy Property. In this connection, apparently, Craufurd haa been representing Wolf Bros. Hinl suggested that T should have a word with Poston. 7th January. I had a meeting with Harry Allen, Horrocks, Roger, Stanley Strong and Adam about the vetting of civil servants. We decided, firstly, that the Bridges Panel should be asked to revert to the system of vetting of civil servants, temporary or permanent, who were to be employed on secret work. Secondly that we ought to vet temporary civil servants at the outBet and thereafter rely on their being brought to notice if they were to be employed on secretvwork, and thirdly, that the D.G. should bring to the notice of Bridges the question of P.As and secretaries brought in by Ministers and Parliamentary Under Seoretaries. Normally, these people were not vetted: it could, however, be taken as a certainty that they saw all the Minister'B papers. Fourthly, that the Bridges Panel should ask Departments for an assurance that their outatations new about vetting procedure for secret work. At 8th January. At the J.I.0. to-day it was agreed that the appointment of a further Soviet A.N.A. should be refused, and that our Naval Attache in Moscow should point out to his opposite 12 number that this was done on grounds of reciprocity. I suggested that an opportunity might be taken when members of the Soviet Naval Mission return to Moscow t.o refuse a replacement until the Soviet Navall Mission was reduded to normal proportions. The paper on Egypt & Near and M.E. was not entirely up to date and it was decided that the more recent developments shoulld be included in the next paper. I had a further meeting with the A.L.0 about Utilities and vulnerable points. A certain amount of progress has been made, but we have not quite neached the Btage where they can be given their orders. They will work broadly under the direction of G.2. Alan ROGER is back from Hong Kong. Everything there seems to be going extremely well: there is Still a certain amount of difficult from Colonel Stables, the G.1, who will instist on running a secret service on his own. Hunter brought HUTOHINSON to see me. Hutchie is a most remarkable Mittle man: he has been with us for seventeen years and is by far and away the best watcher! we have ever had. Unfortunately he has developed some trouble due to blood pressure and cannot any longer stand about. It is quite clear that in spite of its arduous nature he has really enjoyed is work. As a special concession we are going to put him on half pay and perhaps occasionally make use of him. He is, I think, very pleased about this. I told him that he was to keep the matter entirely to himself. 9th January. E had a talk ith Perfeet about his job. I told him that it seemed desirable that before his departure we coulld be quite clear what it was we wanted him to do and how he was to do it. It seemed to me that there were broadly two types of information we required, firstly, 1I7 that which was inter-Colonial,a1 sedondly that which had a wider interest. I told him that we were intending to call a meeting on this subject. For minutes of the B. Meeting held to-day see green folder. Colonel Shaw came to see me and Harry Allen about the circulars to ex-members of the I. Corps, in which they were asked to state whether they were intending to travel abroad. We felt that some re-wording of the circular was necessary, and it was agreed that Shaw would make a draft and then call a meeting of-ourselves, M.I.6. and M.I.1. loth January. Herbert, des Graz, Colonel Todd, Brinsley Richards, M.E., Hedger and myself discussed to-day the secret ink side of Censorship in a future war. our recommendations were accepted by Herbert; namely, that in a future war, as in the last war, Censorship would have to have their own laboratory, and that there should be a complete interchange between this and the joint S.I.S./M.I.5. laboratory. Meanwhile, Censorship should appoint a part-time uitable chemist Job in Hedger's who could laboratory do at least and a keep himself thoroughly au fait with up to date methods. In time of war this man would be thrown off to organise the Censorship laboratory. Herbert said that the present arrangement with regard to Censorship personnel, including himself, was that they entered into a yearly contract to make themselves available for the work in time of war. This contrast was, of course, renewablle but depended upon age and general service. Herbert himself. for example, could not say, except from year to year, whether he would be in a position - on grounds of health or business - to make himself 19 available for a further year. T emphasised a chemist of such an age and such circum- that if possible it would be deirable to get stances as would make it at least likely that his contract could be renewed for a period of several years, since continuity in secret ink work was highly desirable. 13th January. I talked to Hill about CRAUFURD. Horrocks ought that CRAUFURD was making use of knowledge acquired in this office in an improper manner. Hi said that he had seen CRAUFURD once or twice, and that he had told him quite frankly that he vas assisting Wolff Bros. in a matter affecting the release of some of their funds and that he had been paid E500 in El notes. Hill also had it in mind that CRAUFURD formerly had the intention of going to I.C.I. to run their intelligence for them, and that in this connection he had beoome fairly au fait with matters affecting their relations with I.G. Farben and Duponts. I said that did not see anything necessarily very sinister in this: I thought a distination should be ma de between making use of informatio regarding the machinery of Govennment and making use of information about individuals, acquired from a knowledge of our files. I oulld not regard the former as improper, bue the latter, though difficult to define, would be definitely wrong. Hill said that he had no evidence to show that CRAURURD had had anything to do with the files of the Wolff Brothers, nor had he questioned him about any individuals who had records in this office. He thought Poston might know more. I spoke to Poston on this subject. He said uI that he had not seen CRAUFURD for a month or had S0, been and that at Poston's the llast special time he request had come as here he it wanted information which CRAUFURD was in a position to give him. CRAUFURD had been quite 120 open about what he was doind and had never asked him for any information from our files. My own view is that CRAUFURD is not the kind of person who would deliberately do anything dishonourable, although he might, owing to his training here and his enthusiasm about the work he did for this office, unconsciously make use of certain facts which he had acquired while working here. At the D.G.'s meeting to-day we discussed the questions of Established Staff, Security Mrs. Service JOYCE Reports, (wife and of William the disposal JOYCE) of - For full minutes see minutes held by D.G. nSec. I saw Briages at the D.G.'E request about the proposal that we should establish a liaison office in Delhi. I showed Briages the minutes of our deliberations between S.I.S. and proposed I.P.I. therein which that he approved. we should send It was someone out to India, who would be introduced, by Smith, the present incumbent D.I.B., to Patel, and also to Smith'e successor. We would then obtain the agreement of the Indian Government to our proposal. We would take over I.P.I. and we would ask the Indian Government to appoint a liaison officer in London, who would come under the aegis of the Indian High Commissioner, or Ambassador. Our officer would come under the British High Commissioner, but should have a separate office which would give him the necessary immunity. THISIS ACOPY ORIGINAL DOOUMIENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT ONDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 MaR Qolo I tod Briages that we had budgeted with the Treasury for about E10,000 a year for I.P.I.; we had now, however, told Bamford about the cost of our office in Delhi: we thought this might come 21 to something like E5,000 a year. Bridges said that the money would have to be found. 14th January. Fawdry came to see me. I had a long talk with him about affairs in Gibraltar. He said that his personal relations all round were extremely good, and that he was getting all the co-operation from Naval and Military authorities he required. He said that in the pes, discipline was not all that it might be; this particularly applied to the Navy who were extremely rowdy when coming ashore - most of these men I think are on their way home for demobilisatior and feel that this is the last opportunity of beating up the town while they are still in uniform. The effect on the local p opulation is bad. There was a Ease not long ago of the Acting-Governors wife being assaulted by three drunken sailors in her car, which resullted in the A.D.O. getting several teeth knouked out. As regards MOLINA, there is still a strong movement to allow him back into the Rock area. MOLINA admits his association vith the Germans, which he says was due to orders from above, but that he told them virtually nothing and gave us a Lot of valluable information. Be this as it may, there is very itle doubt that he passed on to the Germans the informatior about the bogus Monty in Gibraltar. T say Air Vice Marshal Baker about allowing Shotter to wear uniform in the Middle East, and also to take promotion. He demurred at first, because he said he had just turned down somebody from DCOS, who appeared to want to wear uniform in order to get priority for travel. I explained to him tha't our reasons were really funetionsl and that we were as anxious as anybody to civilianise the whole organisation, but that we felt that we had to go Bibow as long as the area continued to be 122 primarily a military one. We had, however, made a start when we took over SIME in appointing a civilian as its Head. Baker was very sympathetic and agreed to do what we wanted. I took the yearly retention of warrants over to Maxwell. He remarked that he thought our Communists, activities were Fascists fairly and evenly Jews. distributed He kept the over list to show the Home Secretary. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMEN UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 MeR Qoo 15th Januarv. Charles Peake came to the J.I.C. to-day, when he gave a short account of affairs in Jugo- Slavia. The country was, he said, entirely in the hands of young Communists, many of whom were totally illiterate. They were imbued with an almost pathetic belief in their creed. Tito and become a figurehead like Stalin; his picture was in every home and factory. He was outwardly friendly and on occasions inclined to be helpful. His decisions were not always carried out by his subordinatesk who generally adjusted them to suit their own views. Peake thought that Tito rather liked to pose in the eyes of Moscow as one who knew better how to handle the Western Powers. He was uncertain whether Tito would sign the Trieste agreement and felt that there might be some conflict of views between Russian International Communism and Jugo-Slav Commnunism. By and large, however, there is no doubt that Tito takes his orders from Moscow. Jugo-Slavia is extremely hot on the sub feet of Carinthia, which they intend to have at any cost. They are noreeinclined to 23 wait for Trieste, which they think will inevitably fall into their basket in the long run. A certain amount of reconst- ruetion work is going on, in spite of the poor quality of the administration. Trade is poor with Europe, owing to the exchange, and with Russia as the latter has little to offer. Trevor-Roper, XICXRXKXXSXOXE., came in to tell me tha he had a letter from Ronald Seth, late of S.0.E., about his book on Hitler. Seth wanted to dome and see him. evor-Roper had an account from Seth of his various exploits, which at the time had seemed somewhat fantastic to us. T.R. felt, however, that they fitted very well into the picture and showed up Himmler as he believed him to be. He also told me of a Russian named BELOV, who was writing up for some authority or other 9 the German/Russiar relations. He thought that Belov should see Hilger's report. I said that, provided, that Belov was working for an authorised Government Department, this could probably be arranged. 17th January. Hill and I went to see the Lord Chancellor; Norman Brook and Drew were present. The Lord Chancellor was considering the report the Control Commission leakage which he had received from Hynd, and also one which he had received from Orme Sargent. He did not think that either report was onolusive, tbut that the evidence pointed to Hynd and his Public Relations Officer. This raised the wholle question of the wonk of Public Relations Officers of Press Departments. It seemed to the Lord Chancellor entirely wrong that a man like Houghton, of the Control Commission, should be on the distribution list for the Foreign Office telegrams. He wondered what the system was at the Foreign Office. I said that the 124 Foreign Office had a long established Press Department, and Norman Brook added that they appointed. ? officers with wide responsibilities as the Head of the Department The Lord Chancellor proposed, however, to see Orme Sargent on the matter. I then drew his attention to the leakage on the standardisatio of arms with the U.S.A.1 which, according to "The Week", had occurred through the Public Relations Officer, Major Le Prevost. The Lord Chancellor agreed that it did seem necessary to r eview the whole machinery of Public Rations, particularly since, it was pointed out, many of these people are Face Street officers. Did these officers receive a great deal of confidential information, and was it left purely to their discretion to disclose what they thought fit to the Press, or were they briefed? The whole thing needed looking into, and he would report the matter to the P.M. He wondered even whether Francis Williams at Downing Street should receive as much information as he did. When 3 he had seen Orme Sargent, the Lord Chancellor proposed to see Mr. Hynd and acquaint him wi th the result of his findings. We saw three candidates at the Appointments Board to-day, but none of them seemed suitable, except an old man who had adted as interpreter for the D.N.I. in Berlin and at many other conferences. He was brought up, to the age of 23, in Russia and was bi- lingual. We decided to consider his Case carefully. ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 18th Januery. THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT T958 MAR 9o1o Polish Scott is getting out a report on Right Wing are asked activities in connection here, with in case the any questions made against Cavendish-Bentinck in allegations Warsaw. f25 Cavendish-Bentinck has been cited in the proceedings against Count GRUHOLSKI, who has just been condemned to death for espionage in Warsaw. It is not, I think, denied that Cavendish-Bentinck had met BRUHOLSKI socially. 20th January. Mrs. Keene came to see me about the Registry enquiry in B. Division. She was Worried about the possibility of secretaries using th committee as a forum for Registry com- plaints, since she already had machinery for dealing with such complaints direct with the Registry sections concerned. I said that this was not really the Purpose of the point enquiry was at explained all; the to fact/ those that who this came very before the Committee before they began. All we wanted was to ascertain their difficulties and hear any possible bright suggestions. When we have done this, we propose to discuss the whole question with the Registry: T got M.E. and F.J. to come down and explain to Mrs. Keene exactly what they were doing. THIO IR AGOPY ORIGINAL DOGUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 MMAR Do10 secondly, it was the policy of the office not to intervene in matters It which was were our business primarily to the inform concern the of Navy the about Navy. any subversive organisations on shore whi.ch were attempting to undermine navall discipline, and ti warn the Naby about the possibility of strikes in the dockyard, etc. We might even eH rstesodoud oseu penn Fuans Fusnothead ou peu T I wrum o3 1D1 on 03 peten soguanbesns run SEM Stu 28313 auI 93 pauees q1 "s8utun Bupop JO M redoud put quap eBur O seuqeya fuen zepun BUTtO touuosarod eu retewa Jo sas.eo out anens ptnoo 1atq ereum umtoT ewos urg SUOTFAFa eu JO spseH ou eapa 03 SBM Bupreg Butop am OM qeug ILB Meta penauoadexe UB Iena UTAas Are onsu punous suoeTa reenB ouno SBM 1 148n017 I 28u3 pres I FaounI STu to Ftsnotos PeBuTut Mepa oh 3eun Buunsur SeM +E784 >urua 0 paueos PpeS on OTqEssod eq pinom FaomOd QF sarodet anoq8 suorsroep eeur (out SDOJIOH stesodod ou 0n uoradeoxe anes 3O03 Stu UT eu aua UO serrenaes eTeu uO eDFo eseu oteu To BESEq out eua Aq spreseut sauodou SV Teuoratep esuruou eq PURom oueud "eBt put oteur out uO Buphodo seunse.t JJ8RS eq pmnous eteuer xgs Areno ouraun pus eusu a8u8 pu OTBUBTSO pue JIBS errewor pinous TO probe Suo; EqOUORQ sueuuroddv put SJSUB.? 9ua AFAA Teap -od 88M T sotanP auasod q8u3 arppe Butsod UT PBOH squouti utodav eu JO to Tan3 suoo 9ua onou nep B anoqe SpDoJIOH UEM tan B pau T to- ur o3 an and on Sursodoad SBM I OTU to To to FUM soruqunoo Hwi's uBre.toI JO ug FaTo uortuesoudar au utu CM auom uorhsenb 843 spuamarene aun LIO nueuepe ou Plot peureuat seteey peu eettoH renH ino -rone Pus Pue young SFITOH 03 "a uegiH FM 2I9OR I pue peu eu 1oa SpBm euL pensrse BuEnsst Stsnonueuas eTeM gpofqns am used eu peu to OAA eua FHDOLTP UF eduee teeto yons puts PUT[ su JO seseo anq Our UOPOBOAUT sn Meutp perus State peu AAeN out -3ua3e he ae BUFBT TBnBu B osn OM pinoo LLB TO ns00 580s80 unt OUTtdTosep Teurenup TO aso etpuau quBTo fau? sepuersunoto Aue repun enomou "nou pinoo om MoU o3 se suosooo UO eorape AAeN ou 9At8 71 122 seemed to agree with my view. I explained to him that there was nothing personal about the matter, but that as things were at present vacancies occurred and neither he nor I, nor any of the other Directors appear to have any say in the matter at all. 21st January. I had a meeting on East Africa with Dick, Perfect, Spencer and Clayton in onder to work out some kind of char'ter for the D.S.0. We elt that to some extent this charter would have to be tentative until the ground had been fullly explored. We needed to know how far the various DiBtrict Intelligence Services were prepared to work together, and what support would be given by the Governors. We then wanted to Inow the relative efficiency of the various Forces. It 18 important that the periodical conferences between Rhodesia, South Africa and the D.8.0. should not in any way lead to Rhodesia being used as the normal channel between ourselves and South Afrida. The D.8.0. should write direct to Palmer on any natters affecting his area, sending a copy to us, and wey of course, would continue to deal direct with Pallmer here: perhaps sending a copy of oun correspondence to the D.S.0. Broadly, 1t would be the purpose of the D.8.0. to ascertain what subversive move- ents were common to more than one Colony in his area and what subversive movements had a wider significance and indicated attempts at penetration from the outside. We had a meeting with the D.G., TAR, Dickland Charles Butler on the subject of agents. TAR had been charged with looking into the whole matter and assessing what payments were being made and whether they were commensurate with the results. TAR had prepared an extremely informative paper, giving illustrations of the kind of information that waa being obtained. It was madd clear that it was difficult to 128 estimate the value of these agents at any one moment: it was necessary to have certain coverage which on occasions would not bay a divident for a year or eighteen months. There are allso the cases of agents who had to be put in at the bottorr and gradually work, their way up. A good deal of pruning has already been done and the position is considered to be generally satisfactory, al- thought, of course, it wants constant watching. Hirsch. the D.D.M.I. brought round Generall Macmillan. I had a short talk with him,when I explained the structure of the office here and in the Midane East. I then passed him to Alex Kellar. with whom he had a long talk, He was evidently extremely pleased with his visit and particularly with Alex. He said to me afterwards that he was very impressed by him, particularly the way in which he lead given him all the salient features andantidpated everything that he really wanted to know. Macmillan is a very different type from Barker and has an extremely pleasant personality. Kimgave a large fareweil party, which consisted mostly of representatiges of our office, S.I.S. and the AmericanB. He is off to Turkey next week. 29 22nd January. At the J.L.C. to-day Mr. Roberts, the Counsellor at our Embassy in Moscow, gave a short talk on Russia. He said that when he returned there in the Auturnn, a certain atmosphere of gloom was discernable. ThiB was due firstly to the partial failure of the wheat crop, and secondly to lack of progress in reconstruction both of houses and factories. The result of thi had been that to some extent Russia was turning her eyes more inwards than outwards. C.I.G.S's visit had on the whole been a success. it was unlikely He had that come Russia to the woulld conelusion be ready that to engage in a major war for at least ten years, and that she Would not be prepared to face an Anglo-Amnerican combination. This did rIot mwan, however, that she might not engage in minor wars, or that subversive activities WD.. puld not continue and, indeed, be as profitable - or even more profitable, than a successful campaign. Mr. Robebts was convinced that the Russian rulers felt that time was on their side, and that ultimately nothing could stand up against the dootrine of Cornmunism. They had, however, a lurking fear that they might be presented with a war of intervention before they were in a position to deal with it effectively. It appears that Stalin made a definite offer to the C.I.G.S. of a military alliance. This was hot unfavourably received, although it was pointed ou't that an alliance wiith regard to Germany did already exist. It is proposed, I gather, at some future date, to go back to the Russians on this point and ask them exactly what they mean by a military alliance. It is thought that there may be some element of bluff in this, and that if it fails the RuBsians will be in a position to emphasise their recent contention that Mr. Bevin is not sincere in his a fifty year pact with Soviet Ruasia. All the talk about Stalin't health is thought to be nonsense. He appears to be in exee: llent form and thoroughly well in the saddle. 130 The question of his suecessor, when the time comes, is still in doubt. When pictures are displayed, Stalin is at the top and Molotox underneath; underneath Molotov comes Zhdanov, Molenkov and Beria, with the remaining members of the Politbureau spread out on either side. Molotov is, of course, most in the new and Zhdanov, Molenkov and Beria are played up more or less in rotation. This is thought to be part of Stalin'e game of not allowing any of them to become too popular, Faying one off against the other. From a propaganda point of view, the questi of the Straits is 8ti1l very much to the fond, Pudobkin proudced a film or this subject in January, Which was turned down because it did not conform to the Party line. It depicted Admiral Nahimov, a prominent figure in the Crimean War, but did not show the Russian troops in a Bufficiently favourable l1ght, and did not indicate in a sufficiently sinister way the role of the British. In the final version, British Navad officers were shown in secret session with the Turks, and, at Stalin's special request, the Brigade of Guards is routed by the Russian troops. The moral of the film is that the Turks should not intrigue With the British, but should rely on Russia. A stony silence has been maintained in Moseow about events in Persia. There is considerable hostility to the Jews but Party leaders have emphasised the danger of racil discrimination which if fundamentally very few jews left in normall administrativ are opposed to Communiat doctrine. There jobs; they are confined mostly to artistic eiroles and to the films. "The British Ally", the paper publishiing Britishl news in Russia, has a circulation Df about 50,000, but is said to reach a far greater number of people, as it is handed on from one to another. It tis uncensored, but cannot contain anything at all controversial. It confines itself largely to public statements by British Ministers, to scientific and indust- rial achievements, and to sport - which is I 31 extremely popular. I asked what evidence there was to show that it reached the public. Roberts said there waa no doubt that it did; was to be found in all reading rooms all oer Russia, and people were to be seen reading it in public places and in the trains. The normal price of it was two roubles, but when something ensational was published the price went up on the Bllacl Market to anything from 60 to 100 roubles. Its continued existence is perhaps somewhat precarious, but the Soviet ealise that if they abolish it we may crack awn on "Soviet War Newe" in this country. The Russians were disturbed when they found that "Soviet War Neus" was no longer being supplied to the Air Force, but had no real answer when they were told that British aimen could buy it if they wanted to, and that the only change vas that it was no longer supplied by the British Government free gratis and for nothing. Roberts said that there was Just the slightest indication that Party activities were not as popular as they were. There had been a great drive on the Korsomol organisation, which was described as having fallen short in many respects. A significant incident was when only two out of thirty of the beat student at some institution volunteered for work in the Konsomol. Roberts discussed the forced labour camps with many Russiana. When he puts the figure at 10,000,000, nobody demurs. If he puts it at 20,000000, they shake their heads. If he sayd 15,000,000, they are inclined to say: "well, perhaps". He thinks, therefore, that pbobably something around 12,000,000 WD uld not be an exaggerated estimate. Harry Allen, Hnl and F.J. discussed with me the agenda for a meeting of the Inter-Depart- mental Committee on Security, who. had been asked a number to make of leakages recommendations which seemed With to regard have to occurred mainly in the Service Ministries. 32 It seemed to us that they were due partly to a lack of security within Ministries, and partly to bad briefing of Public Relations Officers. It seemed guestionable whether the matter of Public Relations Officers should be handled by that Committee, since the Lord Chancellor was already ooking into it. 23rd Januarv. T had a short talk with Magan, who has come back to discuss his proposals about civilian ising our organisation in the Middle East. told him that while Iawas generally in agreement that this vas/desirable bjective, I thought that probably we ought to go a bit slow, since it was not without some difficulty that we had got S.I.M.E'B charter through the J.I.C. The Ds. of I. had felt a little that something in the Intelligence world was being taken away from them. If we came out too quickly as a full brown civilian body under Ministry of Defence cover, we might frighten them a nd lose their co-operation. Magan's point was that in Palestine we were 8o mixed up in the military hierarchy as to be more or less indistinguishable. The result was that we were rather pushed around by the lesser Staff Officers, who called upon UB to carry out all sorts of jobs which were not strictly speaking our function. This is, I think, a real point. We have, however, made a start by Bending Alec out as a civilian, and think the rest will follow before long. 21th January. We discussed Magan's problem with the D.Gr ithen it was agreed to proceed as at present wi situation th an eye would to civilianising allow. We disoussed as soon as the the case of STANBURY. The D.G. was quite adamantthat aa he had resigned his resignation should be accepted and no attempt should be made to retair his services. 133 General Hollis callled on the D.G., who took him and me to unch. We discussed generally the work of the Department and in particular queation of getting Defence Committee paper. He thought that our needs would be met if he made arrangements Gleadell for us to see the agenda: we could then say what papers we thought had a bearing on our work. He would speak to Gleadell when he got back to his Office. He seemed to have a very hazy on about our place in the hierarchy and our pneral functions: he did not even know we were under the P.M. When he came back the office he had a short word with Roger Hollis. I spent an evening with Alec Kellar, who is leaving to-mornow to take up hs appointment in the Middle East. 27th Januany. Curry came to see me and told me that he had been recomended by his doctor to wait another two or three months, and that the D.G. had suggested that it might hardly be worth his while to come back for a further six or eight months in order to finish out his time. Curry seemed to agreer but thaught that he would like to +hink it over. 28th January. E held the first weekly meeting with D.B., D.C. and their Senior Officers. This 18, I think, a useful piece of machinery, as not only can we settle a number of points at issue between the Divisions but there can be a general exchange of views and a closer liaison between the Intelligence and the Security side of the office. 29th January. At the J.I.C. to-day D.M.I. mentioned "Exercise Spearheadt, in particular relation to certain 34 Indians who might be attending. The 0.1.0.8 said that he would only accept two Indian Dffic- ers of the rank of Mador-General or upwards The Indians had pleaded that this would exxlude certain officera they had intended to send of a lower rank. The C.I.G.S. had, however, remained adamant. It is, of course possible that the Indian Government will now promote two of their Brigadiers in order that they can attend the course. Ir they do this, certain top secret documents regarding the exercise will be witheld from them. Personally., I have no idea what this exero. is - I believe it is centred on Camberley. There was a further discussion,of the record, about Staff Courses. There 1s no doubt that allll three Services are nov in line about the necessity for having separate courses for our own officers and officers from foreign countries This is already done by the Air Ministry, al- though for financial reasons there has been a move to cut this course out. The three Ds. of I. are now going to approach the Chilef's of Staff on the matter. Meanwhile, the ID.O. course 19447-48 has got to stand with its Indian students, two of who,, I think, are from civillan department. 'o' is going to get round the difficulty in his lecture on SIGINT by talking to the Instructors, who will only pass the information on to selected Britisr and possibly American,students. 1 said th we should prefer to adopt this method as We T suggested that if we could have the names 9 of the Indian students, it might be as well for us to get I.P.I. to vet them. This was agreed. Leabked Harry Alllen to ask @eadell to let him have the names. D.N.I. stated that, with the knovedge of their Governments, he had been holding unofficial talks with the Swedes and Danes, who were anxious for some common policy with regard to defence against Russia. The Norwegians refused to be a party to these talk, partly, it was felt, owing to their age-long dislike of the Swedes, and partly because they do not allto- betheb brust the Swedes vis a vis Russia. 35 There was a certain amount of discussion as to how far it was really wise to encourage the Scandinavian countries to form a bloc. Sweden would be the dominating partner and would perhaps be likely at the critical moment to succumb to Russian pressure, dragging with her the other members of the bloc. I saw the D.P.P. I explained to him the position about his son in Malta and a general directive which we were issuing to D.S.0s, owing the line of demarcation between ourselves and the Navy. The job that it was proposed to assign him to was really a matter for the Navy, and in any case it was a stupid thingfor the D.S.0. to have picked on him, since clearly it was open to the criticism that the D.P.P. hirnself was concern- ing himself with discipline in the Navy. The line between oursellves and the Navy is that we undertook to inform them about any outside subversive influence being brought to bear on Naval ratings when they are ashore. We can also advise them tactfully about their own problems; we could not. however, interfere in any way in matters of discipline with the crews of H.M. Ships. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUELIC RECORDS ACT 1958 MAr 2ol 136 30th January. I spoke to the D.G. about a who is a Communist and said to be working in th private office at the Home Office. The D.G. went over and saw Maxwell, who was much per- turbed and undertook to look into the mat'ter immediately. The danger from our point of view was that might be seeing all our .O.Ws. I saw Hill and asked him whether he would tale on certain aspects of the Air Ministny leakage case.. A number of Intelligence Summaries had been found to be missing: they are all of a top secret level. The matter has been gone into in some details by Boddington but no solution has been found. Hill said he thought he would be ablle to carry this. work in addition to what he is already doing; if he found himself overburdened he would let me know. The Home Office are proposing to abolish Regulation 18, which gives power to prohibit exit from this country. We are quite prepared to see this Regulation go from the Security point of view. If the Government feel, from the political angle, that they cannot allow people like MOSLEY to travel abroad; that must be a question for them to decide - it does not particularly worry us. EF Hollis came to tellme about one, of T.R.E., who came up to London yesterday and met STEMASHOV the Assistant Soviet Military Attache on the Air side, and also a Naval man interested nrwirelless calllled BUNDOVRIAK. had previously made a rencezoue wi th STEMASHOV at the Strand Palace. The two met in the lounge, had a talk, and then went on to the Cumberland, where they were joined by BUNDOVRIAK and had a further conversation. We are proposing to get into touch with Richards. Head of T.R.E. 137 We have sent a full-dress letter to the F.B.I. asking them to interrogate RASCHITZKY. 31st January. I talked to the D.G. about the Appointments Board. and explained to him in some detail my point of view. He said that he had passed my note to Horrocks and asked him to state exactly what the present procedure was. The D.G. saw Bridges to-day. He discussed Ith him the question of P.As to Ministers. While Bridges saw the danger of Ministers and Permanent Under Secretaries bringing in P.As who were onstensibly concerned only with their Parliamentary duties, he did not feel that at the moment we could do anything about having them vetted. In the case of Miss KLASCHKA. a Czech employed by the Minister for War, he thought that we shoulld have to accept Speed's answer that she was only employed on the Minister's Parliament ary business, although he agreed that this woulld really give her access to almost anything which went into the Minister's room. The D.G. 8lso discussed with Briages our draft letter to the P.M. about our charter and the division of duties between ourselves and S.I.S. He said that as soon as we got a reply from the oreign office about SIME, he would assist us in putting the case to the P.M. Prima facie he thought our case was a good one. At the Appointments Board to-day we saw de WESSELOW and Peter HAMMOND. de WESSELOW seemed to us to be a strong eandidate: he had a pleasant personality and an extremely distinguished academic record. Peter HAMMOND iad no academic record, but extremely good chits that he from had the done Admiralty in Germany. for the We security thought work we might fit both into the organisation. HUNT has been sending almost daily reports from Burma, in which he emphasises the seriousness 132 of the situation is Aung SAN's demands are not satisfied in London. There have already been one or two unplea'sant incidents, including the invasion of the Secretariat by a mob, which had to be dispersed with various fire applicances. lst February. There has been some unwelcome publicity for the D.G. in the "Daily Mail" He is shown as the custodian of all secrets in connection with atomic energy, 8ince mention is made of the appointment to M.I.5. of policemen in this connection, I think that the leakage was probably started in Glasgow. D.M.I. rang me up about this. He said that he had nstructed the Public Relations Officer to deny any knowledge of it. Dick Watt came to talk to me about the appoint- ment of MANN as A.L.O.s Sootland. He said that he thought MANN would be loyal to us, but that it might be a good thing for jmea to have a heart to heart talk with as soon as he came into the office. I should have to explain to him that there were categories of formation in this affice which were not available to everyone who worked here. and that he could only comunicate to the Pollice what section here wanted him to communicate. since he wal must know that once a thing is on record on the Police files, it was open to the whole Force. ORIGINAL DUOUIVIENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMEN UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 MAR 2010 In the evening I met Scott, a grandson of C.P. Scott of the Marrchester Guardian, and Guy Burgess, who is now P.A. to MacNeil - not, I venture to think. a very suitable appointment Scott is in the News Department of the Foreign Office. They both appeared to have seen F.O. 13 telegrams his support indicating to the Egyiptian that Mootov case going had given to U.N.O., in the belief that he would thereby hasten the complete withdrawal of British troops from Egypt. It was only later that MOLOTOV discovered that the real bone of contention was the Sudan, and that the Soviet would look rather foolish if they used their influence on U.N.O. to support the Egyptian plea that the Sudan should come under Egyptian suzerainty, rather than be given complete freedom to decide its own destiny. Molotov had thereupon withdrawn his support, leaving e Egyptians in the cart: the latter were now running round trying to find a way out. 3rd Februarv. At the D.G's meeting to-day, the question of some officer going to Germany to look into public safety was considered. It transpired later, however, that the Home Office wanted the D.G. to go as, owing to heavy expenditure, a proposal had been made to cut down the number of Police officers who had been given contracts by the Control Commission on the advice of the Home Office. The Home Office view was that the cuts should take place in other quarters, since they were worried about having to pay compensation and also about the difficulties of fitting these policemen these policemen back into their various Forces. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 MAR 90o 140 I met the A.L.Os to-day. I told them about 'Operation SANDSTONE' in case it came their way. This I8 a joint survey by ourselves and the Americans of our beaches, in case this country is overrun and the Americans have to recapture it. I discussed a reorganisation of the zones with the A.L.Os. It seemed to me that Airey's zone, from Land's End to the Wash, was a large area to cover. Egually, Callaghan's, which included Wales and the Midlands was widespread. Would it not perhaps be better to draw a line down the centre of England and to run these two sones from that London? Neither of them seemed to think were fairly this was well really place necessary, with regard since to they the more important parts of their areas. Against the complaint that they did not Visit all C.Cs often enough, they felt a certain diffi- culty in calling on C.Cs when they really had nothing to say It might be, however, that the new duties in relation to vulnerable points would make their approach easier. I saw Air Vice Marshal Elmhirst,and Pendred, the new A.C.A.S.I., in relation to a proposal that a Bcientific Advisory Panel should be set up for consultation by the Services as and BLACKETT should be on this Panel. when necessary. It had been suggested that disclosed to me that he was a brother Elmhirst of the ELmhiirst who runs Dartington Hall. was one of the most patriotic people in the His brother country, but nevertheless had been prosecuted (persecuted) by M.I.5. at the beginning of the war. His brother knew Blackett, and when Elmhirst took over A.C.A.S.I. had offered to effect an introduction, as he was convinced Moreover, Sir Henry Tizard had expressed a about Blackett's patriotism and immensibility. similar view about Blackett. regards Dartington Hall, it would I never said that be as it: possible to prevent people from writing in about every sort of allegation had been made, and 141 the Police, in the kind of a tmosphere that prevailed in 1940, doubtless felt that they were bound to investigate, I thought, how- ever, that the ghost Df Dartington Hall had finally been laid. As regards Tizard's view, I was somewhat sceptical about the advice given by one scientist on another. We had been badly let down in the case Df Allan Nunn MAY: When we consulted Cockeraft and Akers, they both said that of all the people whom they had sent to Canada on atomic research, they MAY would at the as top regards of the integrity list. have then placed gave Im the information that we had about Blackett. I Said that it was capable of two interpre- tations: that on discovery that information given to the Comunist Party had gone, through SPRINGHALL, to the Soviet Military Attache, he was doubly shocked, or that he was merely frightened as to the consequences should he continue to give important informatior to the Party. as he undoubtedly had been doing. While I did not wish to express a positive opinion either way, it seemed evident that Blackett waa B dangerous character, with an international outlook both as regards acience and politics. I had thought it right that Elmhirst should have this informatio before he as a committee member of himself the Advisory to recommending Panel. He Blackett thanked me for the information. The interview waB quite friendly, although I think he was uclined to take a too liberall view of the whole position. I want on to see Hayter, who took a much graver view. He felt that even though BLACKETT might be in the middle of atomic research, that did not constitute a reason for giving him a wider field. He was Clearly opposed to the proposal. We got on to the question of our charter. I said that the D.G. was very anxipus to get the Foreign Office reply to our proposals for the Middle East. He said that this had not yet received its final touches, but that we could 142 expect it in the course of a day or so. He was afraid that. we should feel that the F.0. were not prepared to agree to our pro- posals, or to go further than they had already gone. I Baid that I regretted this, as my D.G. felt very strory about the matter. He then said that he had received a letter from the Minister in Washington, who approved the appointment of our repe resentative there for the purpose of liaison with the F.B.1. In talking about our charter, I said that in my view, the arguments about ourselves and S.I.S. not being able to work togetther on foreign territory were to a large extent imaginany. In the field both parties saw the usefulness to each other of such an arrangement, and difficulties had not arisen. It was only when the matter was referred back to London that the trouble started. our functions were different to those of S.I.S. and our approach was also different: we both preferred to handle our own business through DuP own channels. Ellis rang up to ask whether Dwver could inform the F.B.I. about our representation in Washington. I said that for the moment I would prefer that he did not, since the D.G. would now have to write to Mr. Hoover to confirm that the arrangement was acceptable to him. The D.G., Dick and myself had a discussion about Bertram EDE'S future. We could find no immediate solution. th February. TAR and I attended the 'W Board. In addition to the three Ds. Df I., Drew and L.c.s. Bridges waB present, It was agreed that the 1w't Board should be responsible for policy both wiith regard to deception and to certain matters afreoting doublle agents. Formerly L.C.S. had been inclined to look to the plannere as the most appropriate department under the 143 Chief's of Staff, from which they could receive advice. It is now the business of the 'w' Board to consult the Planners as and when necessary. Certain measures were agreed about exploiting two potential double agents who were paaying to the Russians in the British Zone. I had a word with the D.M.I. about BLACKETT. He agreed that our view that BLAOKETT should not be employed on the new Scientific Advisory Panel. I also showed the information to 'c', concurred. At my weekly meeting to-day, we discussed the new Bub-Committee of the Committee of Defence which studying subversive movements. Roger wa's not clear as to just how far he should go. r said that I thought he should be rather tentative at the outset. The Committee ia to discuss Communist control of Trade Unions and Communists in the Civil Service. Ve had a meeting at the India Office, under Air iayter, Paul Vickery Patrick. and Bamford. Present were The tor, proposals Viv, made it our preliminary meeting were discussed. It vas agreed that these proposals should be sent >ut through the Viceroy's bag to Shone, the high Commissioner, and that he should be asked to give his concurrence. The question of gherters arose, since at the moment and later on we might e infringing ours. I said that I shoulld like to know whether when the Viceroy retired re should be asked to withdraw: if this were 0, my D.G. would be reluctant to go forward ith the present proposals, since he did not ee how he could obtain the services of a suitable officer on a temporary basis. I could get this point ayter eventually spoke up and said that he ould like to discuss this matter at some uture date. He obviously felt that it as bound up with the principles that we had aised in our letter to the Foreign Office 44 about our future charter in the Midaae EastOPY The report on the proceedings DisGito 80 OENT RETAINED Bridges. IN DEPARTMENTUNDER SECTION PUBLIC RECORDS The D.G. has seen Gilmour Jenkins g9f the MaR 010 Control Commission, and has also consuted Bridges,abou his conducting an enquiry into public safety in Germany. Bridges takes the view that it is not the D.G's job to conduct enquiries of this kind, SD the proposal is off. Harry, Roger, Jo Archer,FJ. and I had a meeting on our J.I.0. paper re the C.P. and Russian penetration. We have suggested a number of amendments to the J.I.C. draft. I have read an interesting report on our relations with L.S.I.C. written by Martin. The liaison is clearly as good as it can be: it does, T think, reveal that certain services performed by R.S.S.; particularly general search, are weak in the new organisation and that there is a fall in the number of messages intercepted on other known services, due, to a large extent, to inexperienced Army monitors, particularly those in North Germany. It further trans- pires that we have 75% of L.S.I.C. material and are the second biggest users. This makes it all the more remarkable that we have no place on the SIGINT Board: the disadvantage is that if we have a complaint to make we must always be regarded as outsiders who have got to know too much. This may have a diverse effect uporr our liaison. 5th February. There is to be a redraft of our paper to the J.I.C. on penetration of secret armaments factories and research establishments by the Russians on the one hand, and members of the Communist Party on the other. The Norwegians have refused an air survey of their country. The successful survey of Siam, Java and Sumatra is being done in co-operation with the local authorities, who will have the benefit of it. 145 It is thought that something on the same lines might be proposed to the Turks. Kenneth Strong has just come back from the Far East, where he visited both Australlia and New Zealand. J.I.B. Melbourne to be a going concern by July; six New Zealanders are tD be taken in, but are not to be given appointment as Directors - this caused a certain amount of il1-feeling. New zealland may have a J.1.0. - if not, Internal Affairs in New Zealand will control British interests in J.I.0. Melbourne. The Australians are sending a liaison officert London, Singapore and Washington Australdan JI.B. are to take on the Antarctio and China, Our information about China Will go to Melbourne via Singapore. The Australians have a few representatives in China, but they are not much good. The J.I.B. representative in Singapore is in the Secretariat of the Defence Council. Later on, Melbourne J.I.B. may take on Ceylon, Burma and India. Efforts will have to be made to get Aterican co-operation in regard to China and Japan. At the moment the Americans are refusing to give informatid on their aerial survey of China, on the grounds that they have a private and exxolusive arrangement with the Chinese in this matter. The present Head of the J.I.0. in Australia is Brigadier Chilton - he and his organisatior are considered to be good. Sheddon is the really strong man in ustralia and, in fact, ontrols the ChiefB of Staff: this leads to a certain amount of friction, particularly with External Affairs The case of BLAOKETT was discussed, but after a Speech by Elmhirst on his behaf, who said that it had the support of Tedder it was decided to recommend against his appointment to the Advisory Panel on scientific matters. Hayter undertook to inform Tizard. Murnie called and was seen by myself, Brigadier Allen, Holllis and Dick White. The organisation and functions of the office were explained to him. In addition to taking on Creedy's job. he will retain his other 46 positions, in particular that of one of the Secretanies of the Defence Committee: in that capacity he will Look out for documents which he thinlcs are likely to be of interest to ourselves. Carey Foster came to discuss the sending of Post Office experts to Moscow, who are to test out the budlaing allotted to the British Delegatinn attending the Conference in Moscow in March. One of the people Selected was a man who had done Jobs for us here, and it seemedudesirable to us that he should go to Moscow, where his identity might be disclosed and also the nature of his business. We had managed to arrange that omeone else should go. Carey Foster, who had just been to Moscow himself, said that Security in the Embassy was deplorable: he is doing what he can to tighten things up. TUFNELL-BARRETI came to see me about his future. He does not want to go back to the Army. He asked me if I could help him to get some job as an A.D.C. to a Governor. T said that I would do what I could. 6th February. HIMSWORTH came to see me about his future. He wondered whether I could help him in any way with S.1.8. He has been told that he cannot be taken on tD the permanent staff. I said that I would do what I could. I went to see the D.M.I. about SIME and the Foreign Office attitude. I gave him our draft letter to the P.M. to read - he was extremely sympathetic. He thought the matter of considerable importance and said that h was convinced that the Middle East could omuy be considered as a unit. He thought that if necessary he could swing the C.I.G.S. on this matter. He realised the importance of having a professiona] (?) Security Service in the Middle East in case of trouble. 147 Klop came to see me about his further interro- gation of FIDRMUC. He had got a good deal of additional information, which i-s to be the subject of a further report. He cannot say positively that LOBKOWIZ or JANUSCHEK were conscious agents - we can only learn this from RASCHITSKY. ALEXANDER has made a full confession. I went with Roger to see Sir Archibald Rowlands at the Ministry of Supply. I told him the S; ry of CARTER of T.R.E. He immediate ealised the importance of the case and said that he would arrange or Richards, the Head of T.R.E. to come and see us. 7th Februany. Richards of T.R.E. came to discuss the case of CARTER with Hollis and myself. He seemed worried and took the matter very seriously. He agreed that it was important not to disturb the ground, but to endeavour to clear the matter up one way or another. He said that CARTER' conduct in meeting the Russians without reporting the fact was grossly im- proper, to say the least. I had a talk with Thistle about Palestine. There is no doubt that while there he did an excellent job. He started right away to reorganise the Registry on a practical basis, His first consideration was what, in fact, D.S.O.'8 office was trying to do on the basis of the P.M.'E directive. He then broke this down into subjects and then considered the perr sonal files. This is, of course, the way that a Registry should be built. The Intelligence needs should be the first consideration, and the technical side entirely subordinate. It was a pity that our own Registry was not set up on similar lines. Thistle and Ffoulkes did much to restore the morale and efficiency of the office, the repubation o.f which locally is not very high, but I think we can rely oh 42 Magan to put this right. T had dinner with Magan, and a long talk with him about the general principles of Intelligence work. T am certain that he is a first glass officer and would run anything well from a section to a fairly large organisation. l0th February. Win Scott brought Penrose and Rositzky of the C.I.G. to see me: they hav ve been touring round Europe. Rositzky is clearly the brighter of the two,and I should think a fairly slick operator. We merely discussed generalities. Gleadell. W/Cdr. Lamb, and Captain Thorolld came to see me. I described to them more or less the basic functions of the DIfice and they subsequently had talks with Harry Allen, Jo Archer, Hollis and Dick, THISIS'ACOPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED l1th February. DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS I went to see Newsam about Aree8checks MAR2oIo on Civil Servants.- I asked him to make Special arrangements to see that the warrants were. not handled by the staff as and had both been in the Home Office. The Americans came again and saw the D.G. and members of the staff. TAR and I went to see 'o' about the "w" Board affairs and position. 12th February. There was nothing of real importance at the J.I.C. to-day. 149 I lunched W ith Win Scott and the O.I.G. representatives from America. conversation wras general and friendly. S.I.S. were there as well. I talked to Strong about his vetting, and subsequently spoke to Drew and exxplained to him the difficultiee we were having with Johnson, the Establishment Officen, who refused to make contact with anybody and pass on names oe people in J.I.B. who were having access to top secret material. Drew said he Would le the matter up. Furnival Jones has completed his report on the Registry which is a valuablle bjective piece of world. I am passing it to Horrocks and Potter for their comments. The important issue of sectionalisation has raised ahornetis nest. 13th February. I gave Cimperman a letter, showing the general layout of the office. He has been bothered for this by the F.B.I. for some time. llth February. I saw TUFNELL-BARRETT again and told him that I would try to see what could be done out getting him a job as a Colonial A.D.C. I sent to the J.I.C. Sub-Committee, when Hayter gave a brief resume of world affairs, which is given weekly to the Joint Planners. The French Treaty seemed to be going well; the Russians had been asked to state precisely the points which worried them about our existing alli- ance; it was probable that the Austrian Treaty would be signed in Moscow, but there were doubts about the German Treaty. The Egyptians were having difficulty in the presentation of their case to U.N.O. The outcome of the decision to submit the Palestine case to U.N.I. was very problematical: the Russians would probably go I5D for quadripartite trusteeship - this would suit the Allies, who wanted Palestine to be made an independent state. The U.N.0. Commission to Greece is likely to decide in favour of the Greeks,wit the Russians and Italians in the minority. The Greek case had been well presented, while the cases of the Jugo-Slavs, Albandans and Bulgarians were clearly phoney and irritated the Commission. An urgent telegram has been sent to General Marshall for financial add for Greece and Turkey. Greece, which is in desperate straits, needs seventy or eighty million pounds. We have contributed fourty millions and cannot do more. The Russians are moving V.2. equipment from Peenemunde. A Russian pilot anded recently at Habaniyeh and asked for a route map to the Persian Gullf: when this was refused, he produced a perfectly good map of his own. The Air Ministry report the continuance of an air build-up by the Russians in Bulgaria. The War Office knew of no increase for the land forces. A large quantity of documents have been captured in Irag, as a result of a round up of 4400 Communists: the documents show that Communism in Irag has been run from Syria and that Syria is receiving its instructions from Paris. Lastly, there is to be a round-up of Nazi organisations in Germany on Sunday morning. 15th February - THISN A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 MAR 2010 Ma jor Battye telephoned to me about the arms traffic. I am arranging for TAR to see him. 1 51 17th February I saw Herlihy, Sir Robert Knox's assistant, on the question of foreign decorations. de BONA has been given an 0.B.E.A : this upsets the apple cart because "Tricycle" has only got the M.B.E. I am arranging to get "Tricycle" stepped up to the O.B.E. 19th February. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC BECORDS ACT 1958 MA2 2010 I dined with Dicho and Padgham. The idea is to get the latter into the German Foreign Office or Consular Service, as aoon as it is establi- shed. The Russians are going to raise this matter in Moscow and have NADOLNY as their candidate. Padgham thinks it best to accept their candidate and to 80 in as No.2., 9 if this can be arranged. He has the backing of the Americans. I have already approached Hayter on this ubject. Padgham's deseription of the British Zone was pretty depressing. He has visited his brother (52 in the Russian Zone, where conditions are as bad, if not worse, but at least omething is moving. His brother is swimming vith the tide, has joined the Communist Party with his tongue in his cheek, and lives on the Black Market. His sister, on the other hand, is trying to cultivate a miserable 50 hectares in order to earn a living, which is almost impossible. A1l the land has been split up and the peasants who were formely in the employ of the Putlitz family, when they meet their former landlord say: "Here you see id the free peasant, but he has not got a rake a plough, or anything else - can't you take him back?!. 20th February. I went and saw Bridges about India. His draft letter to the P.MT contained a para. which seemed to cut aorose our major proposal about the allteration of our charter. He saw the point and asked me to try and work ou't a formula with Hayter. He said he had the greatest sympathy with our casel, which he though't was fundamentallly sound. He asked me how things were going, and I said T thought they were going quite well. He then said he felt there was more cohesion. 2st February. I attended a meeting of J.Io. Deputiea: Liaison with the Americans, Dutch and French Military Missions with the C.I.S. at Singapore was considered. We said that whille we would prefer to see these Missions depart, we had no objection to their remaining if the Services thought. that they were likely to get a quid pro quo elsewhere, suchas Indo- China, N.E.I.. etc. At the same time we thought it ought to be understood that they aid not engage in any offensive activities in the area. In this connection, the Dutch Mission was in fact running agents. We did not mind if they continued, provided. we knew exactly 53 what they were doing and who their agents were. It wa's thought that this was a matter which the Head of SIHE should arrange locally. The Services clearly wanted the Missions to remain on account of the reciprocal aavantages We also diseussed the proposal that the report on deception in the Far Eaat should be given a limited circulation. It was agreed that it woulld be better if the knowledge contained in this document was confined to members of the .0.S. M.1.5. and M.I.6. and disseminated o Staff's only in the form of a ecture to be given at the Imperial Defence College. In this may, budding Staff officer would become indoctrinated, which waa necessary as they were the people who might in the future have to implement the policy of the 1L.0.S. Furnival Jones told me that there is a proposal to sell Meteor engines to the Rusaians. Jo Archer will be attending a meeting at the Air Ministry on this subject today. Horrocks came to talk to me about the Scientific Section. He is considering certain adjustmenta in the rate of pay. He doesn think that, as recommended by Briscoe, Hedger should be paid on a basis equivalent to that of a Sendor Officer. L am inclined to agree. He ds proposing to accept Peter HAMMOND as an Assistant.t to start with, to Malcolm Gumming. vice Clayton who 18 going to East Africa. 22nd February. The D.0. returned from Scotlland and I told him about my interview with Bridges and with Hayter. Marriott and Miss Bagat told me that 8x German Communiata have been granted visas to attend the Communist Conference nere, and 154 that, according to the P.C.B., this has the sanction of the Prime Minister. T can only imagine that the Prime Minister wishes to have some makeweight against the visit of SCHUMACHER, which caused a protest from the Russians. I do not think that these Gormans will do any harm, bu't it Beers rather outrageoud that trouble makers of this kind from an enemy country should be permitted to visit us at a time like this. I talked to TAR about the presen't procedure of granting export licences for arms. It seerns that all surplus arms are turned over to the Ministry of Supply. and that a11 export licences for these arme are submitted to the Service Departments and to the Foreign Office. It has now been arranged with the War Office that we sha1l vet the consignors and consignees and supply any other information which may be in our possession. here is, however, apparently, no check upon the salle of arms to licensed deallers in this country. This we are going into. Abroad, there are surplus dumps in Belgium, France, Cairo, Algiers and Rome, which are under the control of the Ministry of Supply. It i8 understood that they are only released on the authority of the G.0.0. and that considerable quantities are being destroyed. this action needs looking into. particularly in the Middle East. Are the arms in fact being destroyed, and to what parties are they being Bold locally? I have Buggested to TAR that, in 80 far as Cairo is concerned, thia 1s a matter for the Head of SIME to look into. When we have fully explored the ground, we should put up a paper to the J.I.C., explaining the exact DoBition. 24th February. At the D.6'B meeting we discussed the question of travel control in Eire. The Home office want to remove controls from the Western ports which they say necessitate the retention of roughly 40 Immigration Officers. They Suggest 55 as an alternative that a Regulation under the Aliens Order should be framed, insisting on registration for anyone coming from Eire within Eourty-eight hours.. with serious penalties and immediate deportation for failure to comply. We do not think that this will be satisfactory in practice, since, for political reasons, if anyone is caught, which is doubtful, it will generally be noint considered out that inexpedient Foynes is to now prosecute. a kind of We Lapham Junction for air travell, and that anyone who is refused a visa to Copenhagen, stockholm, or elsewhere, can be in Foynes in a couple of hours with free entry to this country. We propose, therefore, to insist on controls being maintained. I have drafted a reply to Sir Orme Sargent on the subject of our charter in the Middle East. We are pointing out that we feel boud to take the matter to high authogiry, since his decision virtually means the disintegration of SIME, which not only con- tributes good Security throughout the Empire, for which we have a responsibility, but also forms part of the defence organisatior set up with the approval of the Chiefs of Staff. Meanwhile, we are agreeing to his proposals ithout rejudice to any future alteration, nd have asked him to issue the necessary instructions to the Embassy in Cairo about giving cover to Jenkins. The D.M.I. rang me up to say that he had had a letter from the D.M.I. in Melbourne about leakage of information from the Foreign Relations Committee to the Russians. He has named the individual and has asked Templler whether he can confirm. This creates some thing of an embarrassment, but I have promise to have a L.U., which I am fairly confident will be negative. 56 Page rang me up about a report which I sent D.M.I., saying that S.S.U. in Italy had three times warned A.F.H.Q. about the woman PASQUINELLI, who murdered Brigadier de WIN.J in Pola. For some reason or other no action was taken. Page wants to send this out to Italy. I said that I would try and S0OPY get clearance from Win Scott. ORIGINAL DOWUMENT RETAINED 25th February DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION OF The PUBLIC RECORDS We decorated the "Three ChaT1ess MAR a czech, and a Spamrard. The Three Charlies" got the B.E.M.& and the K.M.S. Afterward Tommy Harris, TAR and T took to lunch. Everyone, I think, was pleased. One of the Charlies made a long, but completely incoherent speech! At my weekly meeting to-day ve discussed Displaced Persons. We came to the conclusion that there was no form of vetting which we could carry out which would be of any value, and that the matter must be left to the Control Commission - even they could not-0 do much. We are considering the possibility of the introduction of Jewish Terrorists and I asked Dick to discuss this with B.3.a. I mentioned a proposal made by the Home Office about travel from Eire. It was agreed that we should stand firm on insisting that documents of identity should be carried. Jo Archer said that he had attended a meeting at the Air Ministry about the sale of Meteors to the Russians. There S eemed to be agreement by the Board of Trade that small sales of two or three were of no vallue and should be discouraged, and the Air Ministry appear to be thoroughly firm about the undesirabillity of building up Russian knowledge. I asked Jo to find out whethee there was any high duty alloys contract which went with Meteors. He did not think s0.but in any case there is no question at 157 the momen't of the sale of manufacturing rights. If the Russians made a demand for large quantities of Meteors, there might be some difficulty in refusing owing to the financial advantages, and because we should be descriminating against Russia. We are already selling a certain number Meteors to other Bovers, i.e. the Dutch. Adam reported that, in 80 far as J.I.B. vetting was concerned, a contact had now been made with the subordinate of the Administ- ration Officer. Horrocks complained that ne could not get any answer from SIME. BI pointed out that SIME were denuded of their personnel and that one must exxpect a certain disllocation until Kelllar had got well into his stride. I agreed that a tellegram should be sent asking for replies. Jenkins has asked for three watchmen for his office at E8 El week - this seems a ot and is to be gone into. Arthur Thurston and Win Scott came to see me. We had a general converation. Arthur is going back to Washington. Geoffrey Wethered came to see me about a proposal that he should be transferred to Security in the Foreign Office. He i8 evidently keen te take the job. I said that f Carey Foster would get Harold Caccia to speak to me, I would certainly recommend him. There is some difficulty over establishment. I had a word with Iris Marsden, who is leaving us and apparently wants to be a shop assistant oP drive a milk van, but we all thought she would probably like to come back to 1B in a year or S0 if we have a vacancy. 158 26th February. Carey Foater spoke to me about two F.O. vetting cases. He did not quite know how to interpret our letters. said that I would look into it and that,if necessary, he could come over and see the file. I spoke to him about Wethered. He 16 doing all he can to get him. Sir Henry Tizard came to the J.I.0. to-day He tried four times to light his pipe witi a apill of hia own manufacture, but was completely defeated by this somewhat simple scientific problem:! Eventually Someone came to the rescue with a lighter, which he blew out! He was discussing the organisatior of Scientific Intellligence and particularly stressed the importance of economic Intelli- gence in this connection. with regard to the papers an Russia. prepared recently by the J.I.c., he said that in the present state of our economy it would be extremely difficult for her to maintain a war, and that this could not improve for a good many years. He pointed out that, according to Russian figures. Soviet coal production was only 148,000,000 tons a year, and that we with 200, 000,000 were sitting with the l1ghts out and the fires turned off! I ha a long conversation with Horrocks about the Appointments Board. He read me minutes and wanted to get an agreed Bobution before going to the D.G. I gave way on a number of minor points, but agreed to differ on the ques'tion of the promotion of female staff I was not satisfied that the present selection by himself, Miss DiIcker and Mrs. Keene should go on. 1 thought, however that it was necessary to have some place where the Directors of Divisions coulld state their views when any member of their own staff whom they thought showed promise or needed recognition. 59 In the past the Directors had felt out of order in putting forward names and, in fact, when they had done so had rarely received an answer. Their candidates had not been promoted and they had never been told the reason why. This had crested rather a bad impression both on the Directors and on the female staff working under them, who did not feel that their interests were being represented. I agreed vith him about hisproposals in onnection with the grading of thescientific taff, but made it very cllear that it was important that Briscoe should maintain a controlling interest, as he was the only unifying factor as between ourselves and .I.S.8 t if he were dropped. We had always carried out offensive research in order to keep abreast with the subject.and work out the necessary reagents. Horrocks seemed to agree about this. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT LAVAER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 MAR Qolo 1G0 D.M.I. telephoned about the Indians attending the I.D.C. T told him that we had given them a vet, which SO far as I knew was negative I thought perhaps we might be able to find out something about them from I.P.I. 27th February. We have had a frightful blow today. Telegram from Singapore states that Malcom JOHNSTON was on the Dakota which ieft singapore on the 26th and has been missing for twenty-four hours. According to "The Times", there were six passengers and four crew. Search is being made by Sunderlands. Kenneth Page came over about his lecture on Security, which he is to give to the Staff College. I gave him a talk on the general principles, and we are supplying him with the documents. He also spoke about the armB traffic. I explained to him what ve were doing and the reasons, which he fullly indersteod He thought it might be a good thing if TAR and Wakefielld, who is going to handle arms traffic under Hi1l, had a talk with Clayton, who is trying to co-ordinate this matter in the War Office. Briscoe came to talk to me about the gradir of the scientific staff. 16 THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 MAR 2010 I talked to Dick and Courtenay about SIFE. ne thought of Magan as successor to Johnston, but came to the conclusion that as he had been moved once from Palestine, it would be impossib to move him again, Bourne is out as he is in hospital with Malaria and is not likely to be fit enough to carny on. IT seemed to us that Courtenay should at any rate come out with me on Tuesday and, possibly, stay in Singa- pore until we can find sucgessor to Malcom. I got this approved by the D.G. and we have got Courtenay on the plane for Tuesday. $8L7 162 28th February. There seems to be a faint hope about Malcom Johnston, as it is reported that Wirelless signals from a dinghy have been picked up and that a fast minesweeper has been sent out. On the other hand, we hav no confirmation of this from Singapore or from the Air Ministry. T had a talk with Dixon about various matters with regard to SIFE. He himself. kindny Volunteered to go back if he was of any use. I said that it was very kind of him to make the offer, but that it had not really entered my head that ve could very well ask him to do such a thing. In the meanwhile, I had succeeded in getting Courtenay on to the 'plane. in case his services were needed and in order that he might assist me. At the Appointments Board to-day, we tried to sort out affairs in the Far East. It was agreed that I should go earlier to India and try and recruit some D.I.B. officers. I discussed with Horrocks and Charles the pay of the Scientific Section and we con- sidered the appointment of a DII.B. officer callle RAE, whose services we thought we could accept on the excellent chits that he had got from India. We propose to send him as an assistant to Morton in Irag. Dick, Vickery, Bamford and I discussed my brief for Patel. This is, I think, fairly straightforward Vle also arranged that D.I.B. should be informed about my desire to cecrui't and shoulld be asked to give suggested namesand asked to warn certain officers of the Provinces that 163 they might be asked to. come up to Delhi. Both Vickery and Bamford thought JENKIN might be a suitable suecessor to Malcom Johnston if necessary: another alternative might be HAMILTON -- the latter is efficient. and likeable, but is considered to be a bit rough. 1st March. I had a talk with F/Lt. LOW. who was recommended by Sir Norman Kendal. He is an Austrian of Jewish origin; a decent fellow, but not suitable for employment here. 3rd March. THISK A COPY ORIGINAL DUOUENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 MAA 0010 We had a further meeting about India with Vickery, Dick and Horrocks. A letter is to be written to Smith, asking him to collect a few officers for me to see on arrival in Delhi on March 24th. Win Scott has given us an extract from the write-up by John Waldron on the work of the X-2 Section. Waldron's praise of our organisation is overwhelming. "It would be difficult to exaggerate the open-handed generosity of the British security services in their readiness to share the fulness of their intelligence, methods, and experience with their American colleagues at all levels. Certainly, nothing like it had occurred in intelligence history before. The X-2 arrangemente with those services, M.I.-6 V and, later, M.I.5., left X-2 a full independence. The relationship was 16 4- "not then that of a joint operation, but it was one that in the uncalculatingly full embhtn exchange of facilities made in the working for an extraordinary unity of effort to th immense advantage of the junior American agency. Cordiar relations tions based on mutual benefit. will often obtain between such organisations, butwill in almost all cases be limited to an exchange, more or less full, of pertinent intelligence items: the sources, methods, policies, personnel are uncovered only as slightly as possible. For even an Ally to be admitted to a full access to most secret files and to a knowledge of their sources;; to information on most secret methods and procedures; and to a knowledge of the personnel and the system of organisation and of its operations in short, to the inner- most arcana of perhaps the world's most experienced and efficient, and therefore most carefully safeguarded security system, was beyond precedent or any expectation. Yet the British did it. That they did do it is one of the incontestable, diamond-hard faots of the Anglo-American alliance. The value to the future of U.S. security in trained and experienced personnel and in the enormous registry of counter-espionage intelligence thus rapidly accumulated by this liaison is almost literally beyond recloning. IT is worth posing this amazing fact once more before we leave it: the British saw fte to give another ajor power, not the body, but the living principle of a security organisation The implications of that fact are staggering. and completely inexplicable in terms of any merely calculated exchange of mutual advantages. The advantages were enormously heavily on the American side litTf veual j, Hd TET3E