A The National Archives (c) crown copyright Catalogue Reference:kv/4/467 Image Reference:1 POLF 53.-24-90 FAV14 LIDDEIL DIARIES rILL chir CLOSED 03 s Form 924 SEE ALSO LIST INSIDE COVER Sit Sonal No. Str Sim Dnte Serial No. Die Swinl N: Doninnation DNOniton Denianuilon Dnt OCT1978 OCT 1978 S N &sgt S For6o POL F 53-24-90 fact 1I 19th November 1945 to 25th Soptember 1946. i Z7T 181 1I 11 THISISACOP) THISIS COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINE DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIO November 19th OF THE PUBLIC RECORD ACT 1958 DEc 20091 fi The Press today reports a rising in Persian Azerbaijan with all the appearance of full Russian backing. This has been anticipated sefor Some time and is of course the clearest ad possible case of aggression. DU T had a long talk with Dick about the are organisation of B.Division. Howe rang me up to say that according to an 39 intormant of thars, a Czech called JANSEN who was acting as a courier was taking out a quantity o1 notes contain- ed in one of 8 bags. Travelling with him was HAVLICEK, former Czech Ambassador in Tokio, who knew about these notes and strong- ly disapproved. Howe wanted to know ir there was any thing we could do. The courier was >ito. have gone on Saturday but was delayed L owing to bad weather.. It Seemed liely however that he would Leave by the early plane today. Noble spore to Bromley and told him that in our view nothing could be done unless the FO were prepared to have a show-dow. This would mean having the bags sent back and opened in the FO in front of Representative of the Vzech Minister. Werstold Bromley that we could not vouch for the information 100% as it came 1rom the Yard. We had every reason however to think that it was accurate. November 20th Poston is taking over the lesser banking eriries from Withrington who is leaving at the end of this month. who is ASst.PCO in Holtanu came to see me. He had hoped to be promoted on the departure his boss but he understand from that he is as yet too young tor the job. He would I think return to us if we had a post for him. SID do not appear to have any further work for him ao. He wondered if he could obtain employment with us. He is quite a pleasant chap but I have no idea about his capabilities. He is a barrister py profas- sion but doubts whetherhe will have much prospect if he goes back now. Clayton talked to me about TILTON who if he does not get he appointment with us in the Far East wishes to take up his case with the Air Ministry in order to clear his name I told Clayton to give his report to Dic. who could discuss the matter with Dixon. If necessary he could see Tilton before he went out. Harker tells me that BOLSOM has been caugh bribing a policeman with 2100. BOLSOM was apparently extremely worried about the various enquiries which were going on ale wanted to get information. The evidence of bribery can constitute a separate charge or be used as evidence in part o1 a general charge in connection with the case of fraudulent evasion OI service. Marriott has shown me a memo from Washingt dated 14th November and subsequent telegram from Security o-Ordination. he CORBY case has been discussed by Attlee,Mckenzie King and Truman. In principe they are in agreement that action should take place 3 here, in Canada and in USA. There is however likely to be a delay until early next month pending the completion of enquiries by the FBI into the information supplied by Elizabeth Terril BENTLEY. This woman has been working For some years with World Tourist Inc. New Yorr, a travel agency operated by Jacob GOLOS until his death in 1943. During the war GOLOS organised a S.Service and Shipping Corporation which ser food parcels to Russia. Both these firms were used as a cover for an espionage organisation which atter the death Of GOLOS came aireetly under hovdat Control. IE prevously worked unaer the Communis Party and had always retained strong purty connections. BENTLEY acted as a courier between variousagents ana sup-agents. The network follows the usual pattern o1 Soviet Intelligence and extensive penetratior of American Govt.Services has been brought td light. There is reason to believe that the espionage riing was controlled by the NKVD. About 30 agents have been identified but the ramifications of the case have not yet been fully explored. Reference has been made to Cedric BELERAGE. this man is said to h ve handed over a long report on training of agents by Scotland Yard. Mention has also been made of Peter RHODES, described as a newspaper man whose mother was a British Inteiligence agent in the last war. RHODES had been covering the war in the UK and in Africa but the NKVD had lost touch with him. They were attempting to renew contact. RHODES is believed to be Peter Christopher RHODES, born December 30 1911 in Manilla. Father of German origin, mother nee Abrahams born in Jamaica. RHODES attendeu Oxiord University 1934-36 and them was employea by United Press in London,raris,Moscow and Stockholm. In 1941 RHODES was connected with Lt U.S.Federal Communications Commission in London. Later he went to N.Africa. Towards the end of 1944 he was with OWI in London. November 21st The D.G. held a meeting on civilianisetion of the office. A lew exceptions were made where the officer was operating in a military zone or was closely associatedwith miditan affairs in this country. It was agreed get the remainder into civilian clothes as soon as possible but to ask the W.0. grant us facilities in exceptional cases Lo wear uniform when proceeding ona misaton Lo the military area. Ned Reid came in this evening with a curious story. A woman named Anita ae POMBO @ ana Caller ae CAPURRO, a Uruguyan, arrived hera with a certain Joan CAMPBELL, said to be a connection of pir ronald Campbell, formerly our Ambassador in Paris. they have apparent ly got wiith them three pictures, a Reubera, A Goya and a Reynolds, which were got into the country by "moyen souterrainst as thay said. They were expecting a Velasquez to arrive by similar means. They were orl their way to Uruguay. On arrival here however de POMBO went straight to Armin SCHMIDT with whom she is ap arently now living. is anxious to go with him to Panama but Joan Campbell wants to prevent this and wants her to go with her to Uruguay. Meanwhile M/S learned Irom an entirely dirted -ent quarter that ArminA SCHMIDT has mde contact with MATHIESSEN, the art dealer in Bond St. and Or the security of some drawing has received a loan of $300. According to Mathiessen the drawings are not worth 2300 and the loan was made on a haru-luck story pu S put up by SCHMIDT who gave him hair-raising accounts about his experiences when working in the British Secret Service. Mathiessen is now expecting a call from SCHMIDT and POMB which may well develop into a proposal to see the 5 pictures. It is not unlikely that these pictures were loot purchased by SCHMIDT in Paris from the Germans and that de POMBO was commissioned to bring them over This however is pure surmise at the moment. dined with Archie Doyle and Darton and discussed the SOE Mission in Moscow. (See note in front of diary). November 22nd Curry talked to mne about the redrait of his office organisation plan, with which I am brsadly in agreement. I had a long talk with Vivian about the possibility of Ede running security for the. FO and SIM. I tola him that I spoke to C. only with reg ard to the FO appointment but that on learning of the fact that SIP wanted someone to look after their own security it had occurred to me that Ede might well carry both appointments. November 23rd I discussed with John Noble his rather succ- essful visit to GC & CS where he had seen Hastings and Catty. GC &c CS wera very forth- coming and introduced him to all their various departments. He then asked to state exactly what our requirements were. This is being done. We are also to be given a weekly summary which will show us what material is being dealt with. 6 I had a discussion with Vesey and Payne tod They told me that the HO are inclined to admit the British-born wives o1 Germans and Austrians automatically, and then ask us to sort them out after they have arrived. This seems to me an unsatisfactory arrange- ment. Most of these women are coming here purely because they think that conditions in Germany and Hustria are bad. Personally I think that if any of these women have actively worked for the Germans during the war and their husbands are still ali they should not be admitted. In Cases where the husband and wife have been anti-Nazi or where the husband has been killed and the wife wishes to re-establish her British nationality, permission to return tothis country could be given. I have asked them to prepare a note on the various cases after which we will take the matter up with the H.0. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DEC 90oa Eire is apparently contemplating the develop ment of atomic energy on a fairly high level Prof Prof.E.T.Walton E. of Trinity and rof.O'Reilly of Cork University are working on it. Incide tally old SCHRODINGER, the atomic physicist 7 may well be taking a hand. They will all probably blow themselves up before long. G-P rang me up about the Polish wireless. He had gathered from C. that there were certain things I was not satisiied with and about which I wanted information I tola hin that I was by o means eear who was res- ponsible for Poliah illicit wireless communi cations from this country. It seemed to me that as the Securit Service we must know about all illicit transmissions as soon as they are detected, otherwise we should be making enquiries in other direetiols to no pur ose. I understaad that there were centainwir wrireless sets active in this country but I had only learned this unoflicis ally. In a similar manner I had heard that the vans had gone out. 6-P said that he had thought we were kept informed of these matters and that the vans could not go out without our being informed. I said that as far as I could gather his people at Barnet did not seen to think that Polish wireless was really our concern. Personally I thought that if there was any question of going in on a station we should really have the last word, and presumably it was for us to tare up the running wiith whatever Govt. Dept. was concerned. G-P seemed to agree rather vaguely but said that he had always understood that we were Kept informed about these matters. He would however send up Maltby to see me. I then ashed him about the units which were designated for Palestine. He said that these were mobile units who were under training for that purpose. He had been cut short in NAfrica and did not wish the same thing to (G happen again. These units would not however Leave without prior consultation with our- selves, and the W.0. The idea was that they would assist in picking up any wireless sets behind our lines. I tola G-P that i1 such units were going to operate it was highly important that our DSO should be inlormeu, otherwise the units might do a good real of damage. He said that he thoroughly unuer- stood this and that there would be no questio o1 their moving a 1oot without prior consultation. November 26th I have araited a note for the JIC meeting on Wednesday on the question OI signals Security. the W/T Security Comittee is coming to an end and is suggesting that its duties shoulld be handed over to the BJCB/WT Committee. In the note we have made it clear what our interests are in signals Security and asked that we should be repre- sented on any new comittee to which the task of looking after signals security is given. Burt and Cussen have returned from Madrid. where they have beer looking into the question of AMERYI alleged Spanish nationality. It transpired that Ronnie Campbell of the FO had written a personal note to Victor Malet, the Ambassadorintro ducing Julian AMERY,Johr S brother, to the various depts of the Government. This was of course quite right and proper but the Spanish Govt.seem to have taen it as an indication that the British Govt. wanted to let AMERY out. There is no doubt that the documents relating to AMERY' nationality were signed quite recently and not in 1939. The Spaniards refused inspection of their register but Burt managed to get hola of it and get it photographed. It diilers in one dossier or two showsquite important clearly particuars what has and happened. the It is possible that the Ppanish Govt. may now wright a letter stating that none ol the documents SO far produced entitles AMERY to Spanish nationality. There is going to be a consultation with AMERYS Counsel and it seems likely that he may now itharaw the previous exhibits. After cosultation with various Docies in SIS Dick has drawn up a rough iramework for CICB which we are going to try and get agreed before he goes out. I have asked Dinclair to cald a meeting on Thursuay next. I have had two long letters from Han Roger in Hong-Kong. On the whole he seems to be doing fairly welll in spite of the many difficulties and confusion. There are vari lous points which he raises which will have to be settled by Dick when he goes out I saw Horace Seymour at the club last night He has just returned from Chungking. He is quite intrigued about what the Russians are loing both in Azarbaijan ana Manchuria. Their policy in the latter country does not seem yet to be quite clear. He said that he would rather welcome the job o1 poviet Ambassador. It is So easy. It any question arises for discussion,al. you have to say is that you will reler it to Moscow and let your colleague know in due course. If ashed for your personal views, you say you haver't got any. 1o November Harker is having anothar try to get promotion for Burtyopooner and Skardon. I had a talk with Harry about a recent propor sal which has come before the JIC for the Dominions to appoint Service Attaches to ior- eign missions abroad. DNI welcomed the pro- posal.a and would be glaa to reeeive any inpoe mation they could obtain. He understood that they coula not pass on any technical information to foreign powers without our approval. I pointed out to Harry that this raised a rather important security issue. If there is to be a general exchange between JIC London and JICS in tawa,Canberra etc. it would be like/ thet copiesresumes or extracts of London's reports would be passed on to Dominions Attaches as general bachgrounal If this information was sent by telegrum, were Dominion cyphers secure. Equaliy were their offices abroad secure? A new surface of Leakage was clearly being opened up and I thought that the matter Shouia be brought to the attention Of the JIC-Harry is going to put in a memo. I saw the DMI and told him about the ELLI case. He sent for the current liles ol telegrams between the British Military Mis. nl in Moscow and Loncon which only covered a period of 3 months. All back files are sent to the Record Office at Droitwilch. He is sending for those covering the years 1942-45 so that we can go through them. There was othing in the current files to show that the Mission were running an agent. DMI also sent for a list of officers who had serve ol the Mission during the relevant period, He found a Capt.CHAPMAN who he is going to See. He will merely ask him whether at any time the tt Mission had mun agents and if SO whether he recolleets any request From London Tor the identity of such an agent. This seems to be as far as we can go at the moment. November 28th I discussed with Vesey the cases of British- born women married to Germans and Austrians who are applying to come to this country he HO seem to tae a rather light-hearted iew ana we are asking them to aetine their policy. In our view British born woman married to Germans or ustrians should have their cases cleared abroad beore being granted admission. Those who have assisted the enemy Or whose husbands have done So and are still alive, should notbeallowed to come merely because they think conditions nere are more Tavourahe than on the continent. DMI rang up to say that he would be having a talk with CHAPMAN and would iet me know the result I spoke to Archie Boyle and told him that I had seen DMI to whom I had spoken about HILL. DMI was considerably worried and was anxious to know who had backed HILL in WO. rchie said that HILLIS lile which would be ith the Military secretarywould give the answer. Archie saw no objection to my dis- cussing the whole matter O1 HILL with the FO. I saw John Cinperman. He told me that the FBI are pulling out o1 .America after the end of this year. He thought it likely that they would also give up their European stations, although it was still possible that they would continue to have a representative in London. I asked him who would be taking over in S.America. He Said tha as from next year the War Dept. would be responsible and he thought that the personnel employed would probably be S.S.U., namely that pant o1 OSS Wirich had in fact come under the War Dept. He unuertook to keep me inlormeu of any other developments. Maltby came to see me on instructions from G-P about Polish W/T. He said that he had made enquiries and had ascertained that wi kept fully informed when illicit wireless sets were detected and when the mopile un. were sent out I told him quite definitely that this was not the case,and I as aske ed Sclater to come in to give him the facts. Sclater explained that he haa not been told officially about either and indeed that there seemed to be a kind of impression that the wh whole business was an F.O.matter, anu To concern of ours. Maltby was full of apologies and expressed his intention O raising cain with his own people for not carrying out the regulations. It was of course an understooa thing that we should be informed about all in -icit transmissions and certainly whenever they reached a stage where it was considered proiitable to send out the mobile units. Such searches should oe under our direction. In this particular case he tola me that of units were operating in Rutland and that woas quite clear that the signals were tho. of military personnel playing about with their sets. What grounds he had 1or saying this I do not know. The sets apparemly only come up for very short periods. He ther tola me about the set in Italy which was apparently broaacasting blind to Polanu. There had bean a complaint apout this set to 6he Fo. by the Russians. It was said that rpaganda was going out from this country and waS being communicated from stations L 3 abroad with a view to Stirring up trouble in Poland. There haa apparently been a meeting at the F.O. at which Maltby had been present,wh the whole matter had been dis- cusseu. Maltuy had, on what evidence I do not know, tola them thet the propaganua material was going out to the continent through the Polish bag. I explained to Malt- by that if his information was correct it yes a matter of some concern to us since we re responsible for the activities of Poles in this country. He said that he was under the impression that a matter of this sort woulld reach us through the F.0. Ii however any ything of the hind came to his notice in future he would tip us off. I then raised the point of responsibility. I said that if any diplomatic action was to be taken against the Poles I thought we were the dept. responsible for making represen- tations to the F.0. Maltby seemed to agree about this but said that in the case of military units who are misbehaving themselves on lines somewhat similar to radio amateurs, it might perhaps be simpler il RSS passed the facts on to M.I.8 in the WO who were responsible For the Polish armies. I saw objection to this provided we were kept Informed, and provided the activities of Polish army pereonnel did not EO beyond ham- chat. If however they were running a clan- destine service it would undoubtealy be better for us to tare it up. Capt.Kahn came to sae me on instructions of de Wavrin @ Passy. He is pparently in charge of DGER records and is anious to have our filing system and also to discuss the holorith. This all arose from a discussion I had with Passy when he was here last. I have arranged with Horrocks for Kahn to visit the registry. iu Burt came to teil me that Slaue, Ol being confronted with the acts which had been obtained from Maaria on the question of Amery's nationality, had decided that his client should plead guilty. Slade and John Foster were apparent.ly extremely annoyed at having been mislead by Julian Amery. In addition to the evidence obtained by Burt, the Ppanish Uovit. have written a lette Saying that Amery had no clainwhatsoeve to Dpanish nationality. Amery according- ly pleaded guilty and was condemned to death. November Dick and I weiit to ai conference at Broadway attended by Sinclair,Vivian, to discuss the future or CICB. We agreed a frame work involving the housing of SIS and ourselves in the same building, a common index, an inter- change of files, a common policy baseu on the calateu records and possibly ar equalit of allowances anu leave. This is ertainly an advance and may I hope prove to be a pattern For somewhat similar collaboration here and in Mid East. rang up to say tnu U arrargement had now been made to get Arnim SOHMIDT anu Anita de POMBO away to S.America orl Dec.lst November 30 th Peter Hope came tosee me. I told him to wr out a full account ol his uealings with Arnim SCHMIDT and de POMBO. I also advised him to extricate himself as 5oor as possib.l from any dealings on Dehat OP these partie DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT CT1958 1958 DEC 2o0o 16 Bagge came to sae me. He has got a G02 JOD on the British Military Mis ion in in Bulk garia. I especially wamnea him about mikes. Dick, urry and I had a further discus ion on Office organisation We agree that it was propauiy better to eliminate assistant directors as an unnecessary wheel in the coach. If it were subsequently found that they were required, the matter could be reconsidered. Perceval rang me to ash whether E whuld sent a copy of a report on the J-I.s. to Gen. Penney. This I have arranged. I had a tali with Dica and Houiis or the formation o1 a Russian seetion. Roger is now convinced o1 the necessity ol this Sup- Ject to DGS approval, a nucleus W1hl be John Marriott and Serpell. I have in mina also Hill of B.lc anu Siaraon but their parti- cipation is proplematica. for a variety of reasons. Serpeil talked to me about his uture. He ha haa been given to undarstand by Harker that he would ao well to take a Job Olrereu to him by the Conservative Central Ollice at 21,000 a year He uid not particulanis want this job and would pre er to remain in the dept. IA however the kept. did not want him he would O1 course accept the new offer. I saic that the ept world want him even though they couid Lot made a definite offer at the moment. He seemed re-assured by this and will I think turn down the Older of the Central Office. December Ist. Ledward of LRO came in to say gooube. 16 December And I had a talk with Noakes. Things Seem to be going fairly well in the British zone and everybody agrees that Mil.Gov. have in the circumstances done a fairly good Job. I aske ed Noakes whether Brian Melland had been able to see Fobbi Mendelssohn. He said he had Lot heard. Melland had been down to the French zone but had come back and was returning shortly. Russian behaviour is say the Least peculiar. The whole of their zone is being stripped ol machinery The impre-sion is that they intera to create a belt of Germany which will be devoid ol any war potential. This in adcitiol to Poland will act as a protective Darrier between Russia and the Geruans. The policy is being carried out in the most ruthless mamer. S/Lar.Co came to see me. He is the becurit, Officer lor Transport Command. I talked to him generally about our work and problems. I also mentioned to him that Fish,who was formerly here, was nTOW going security work at BOA C and might prove a useful contact. Cox mertlored that recently ore 01 the ARA planes hau come dovn in the Russian 2one, in Germany. The crew had beenclosery interrogated and had even beer! asked whe they were reaaers o1 the Daily Worker and whether they were satisfied with their pay conditions. Burt told me that he thought it wouilu be a good thing il T had a word with Howe and put him au fait with the Russian case, T-R tells me that Hitlerts will has been discovered and that frominternal eviuenee it is most urdoubtediy genuine. Skarcon has 17 submitted the signature to very careful examination and thinks it autheutic. The document deals with both political an per- sonal matters. Hitler appoints oenitz his successor and dismisses both Goering ana Hdmmler. It seems that he was dissatisiied both with the army and with the direction of the Luftwaffe, hence he chose a naval man. Goebbels was to becom. Rechschancellor but there is a P.S. by Goebbels himself in which he says that while he fully realises somebody has gotto camry on and pick up the pieces he thinks that this can be done by others. He thinks that he would be doing a greater service to his country by lollow- ing in the Fuhrer's footsteps and as an example to posterity in that he is prepared to die lor his country. Hitler states thet he actually married Eva Braun. He leaves his persona L efrecta to members o1 his family ana sufficient lunds to maintain tnem in their particular station in life. We have also received a report on the interrd -gation 01 5 of Hitlepts doctor, one of r.Erwin GIESING, one ou V.OTL HASSELBACH and one oi Dr-Karl BRANDT. The have all attended Hitier a goou man-y eares Giesing having examined him after the pomb-outrage, All the reports which are in very consicer- able detailyindicatt that Hitieris health and physical condition were by and Large extremely good. any after the bomb outrage did he show a slight tremor inthe let hand and it is clear that he went through a severe mental crisis in the last days before he made up his mind that the end had come. Once he had done that he was again normal. All 3 doctors agree that Hitleris orlenta- tion was excellent his merory for things (0 both near and remote good, his juugmert goou and although somewhat restless his powers of concentration always met the neeus O1 the moment. His reaction to his environment was normal, his flow of words was coherent and speech relevant No phias or obsess- ions were noted by the 5 physicians. Hitler was emotionally labile. Von HASSELBACH observes that Hitler coulldhate ueeply in some fields while forgiving almost anyth to those he loved. GIESING notes that Hitler believed he was chosen by late to be the Leader of the Gernan people and that H he felt his ideas must be carried out, even if Germany and her people were des- troyed ir the process. GIESING believes this may have indicated meglamania. Von HASSEL- BACH attributes nysterical significance to Hitler's epigastric pains, one of the few troubles that he had. Von HASSELBACH obser- ves that Hitert mental endurance was aston- ishing and that he loved to De merry anu gay: He generally appeared to be calm ard deliberate but on occasion he reacteu with a vehement attack of anger which subsided and disappeared quite rapidly. He complained of 1ack of sleep but was not inclined to sleep long hours. A telegram has been receiveu From MCDon. and also one from Bill Stephenson,s tating that MaKenzie King only wants to have those interrogateu who were employed in Lovt. offices,ir the hopes that this wili avoid publicity. The Sayitel Ambassador has asked to see him tomorrow/whic he proposes to make a statement about the whole affair and ask for the recall of the Military Attache. RCMP reaetionsare infavourable. We have drafted a telegram expressing our disapproval of the line adopted and making it clear that THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED 19 IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION we carnot possipivopotarpepinureurosi-th thout publicity. ACT 1958 DEc D0 December 4th A telegram has now come in from Canada stating that McKenzie Kingis icea has been cancelled. He low intenas to wait until the Americans are ready. The whole questio] is really a political one. Canada evidentl do not wish to have a show down unless the Americans are in it too. The Ambassador called,bu the visit was purely a formal oni before he went back to Moscow. Adam talked to me apout the situation at th ports. We are arranging to have a corifer- ence with SCOs in order to find out exactly what the lay-out is at sea and air ports. The object is to arrive at some obstructive plan by which suspects car be successfuily examined and Signailed on without their know ing that they are the objects of suspidon. The present set-up makes it very di ificult to operate anything in the nature o1 a Black List, effectively. James Robertson Came to talk to me about an iniormant OI his name ilegar Immigration to Palestine Irom Polanu anu other European countries. There is an element OI provocu- tion about this and the DG I think feels that we should not embark Ol1 a project which may ultimately Lead to bLooashed. The only trouble is that and illegal immigration is perhaps the most important aspect o1 the Palestine problem at the moment. We are going to consider the matter when Kellar returns. L Decemper 5th I talked to Burt about the possibility of getting Siardon. He tola me that both Skardon ard Spooner were anxious to join the Control Commission when they have finished their present job. He thought however that Sardon's services to us might be very valuable and if we could give him Satisiactory terms he might be pleased to consider an offer. Burt himself would like to stay wi us until and unless he is appointed to S.B. Victor,Harr and I had a conversation about Security of atomic research and other matters. Victor nowthinks that representation on the JSIC is probably unnecessary and that a better way of effecting the problem would be for him to have his own personal high-up scientific contacts. This would however need the blessing of some high authority. He is going to prepare a memo on this matter ana also had what he thinks Should be done with reard to atomicresearch. He sugesteu the possibility af maxing contact with Certain Suitable people who would give us some idea about such as the May. political This could leanings only of be scientists discovered by an informant who was worring in the lab new the Students intimately. We ha've now received photographs and a full report on the 26 mixes discovered on the premises of the Military Mission in Moscow. They the bathrooms appear to have and lavatories. Deen in every There room were except 3 in the cypher room. They were discovered by attaching a buzzer to the main lead. This caused all 26 mikes to buzz till they were finally unearthed. When the floor-boards were removed to discover the wiring, the covers of two cigarette boxes were found, one dated 2 1938 and the other 1940. The Czechs were originally in the building in 1938. In 1939 they were replaced by the Jugoslavs and we took over ir 1941. There was an interval between the time the Jugoslavs were in occu- pation and the time we took over. The probability seems to be that the mikes wera put in when the Czechs went out and they were re-examined after the eparture of the Jugoslavs. December 6th John Cimperman came and told me that the FBI statdons abroad were to continue. He show- ed me the two telegrams which Hoover had sent out, the first one instructed his representa tives to wind up their affairs as there would be no further appropriations after the 3st December, and they were so to inform the Ambassador. The second telegram indicated that by a Presidential decree all the officas were to continue. This means that the FBI will maintain stations in Lonuon, Paris, Lisbon, Madrid and Rome. The D.G. saw Hollis and myself about the formation within F Division of a section to deal with Russdan espionage. John Marriott and Serpell Will form the nucleus or thiis seetion. This has of course been the posi- tion ever since the Corby case started. I suggested to the D.G. that we might obr tain the services of Hiill OI 0/B.l.C. This depends rather on the state of Hillis pri- vate business. He might be open to an offer if his firm, whi.ch is a one-man show, aid not show signs of getting on its feet. I asked Burt about the possibility of gett- ing the services of Skardon on a permanent basis. He thought that Skardon might De open to an offer if we could get over the 22 difficulty of his police pension. At the moment both he and Spooner were anxious to join the Control Commission when they had finished their job on renegades. I had a meeting with Vickery, Bamford, Grogan and Vivian.ol thesuggested abolition of cen sorship in the Far East. We all thought that if external censorship could be main- tained in Burma and Malaya for the time be- ing, there might be considerable advanta I said that this was really a matter 1o7 SEAC and indirectly lor CICB. It was a greed to send a wire to Dixon drawing his attention to the various telegrams received and suggesting that he might wish to recon- sider the position. Inuia are apparently in favour of maintaining censorship ii this is politically possible. Lunched with William Charles Crocker: on the whole the atmosphere was frdenaly. He gave me a long account of hi's visit to Cairo when he recovered diamonds, emeralds and rubies at the spot where a BOAC plane had crashed. He had been sent out by Lloyas to investigate the loss of diamonas being cut by Antwerp dealers in Palestine and floor to this country. December Zth 12 otc meeting. Had a meeting with Harry Allen, Tar, Jo Archer and Lee on the ques tion of German scientists. It was agreed that a paper should be put up and submitted to Creedyt committee on Inter-Departmental Security, the obJect being to See that we were fully informed about the arrival of these people and a measure oi control exer- cised over them by the responsible depart- ments. 23 December 8th came to see me. He has just returned from a visit to Athens and Vienna. He gives a terrible picture of Vienna but from the C-E point of view he saus that there is really a golden opportunity as it is poss- ble to buy up almost anybody with a packet of cigarettes Or a hunk of break. THISISACOP) COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Dec 009 Archer came to see me about Lackmann. MAP are anxious to allow him to Work for Handley Page because they feel that there is no evi- dence that he has ever acted as a spy. Archer has written a very good letter to Meitao. A.M. Security, pointing out that this is not the real issue. What we want to prevent is the incorporation of aliens into key positions in our armament industry where they have access to every rything and where the Security authorities can exercise no control He suggested to Meinur that the A.M. should represent this view to MAP on a high level. December lOth Ronnie Reed came to see me. He is a little worried about his future as the W.O., seeing that he cannot be demobilised for another year, have suggested that he go to SEAC. He would prefer to remain with the Control Com- mission and I gather that Ronnie Haylor is anxious to keep him. Ultimately he would like to remain in M.I.5. I told him that if our charter allowed, we should be very pleased to retain his services. Theresa Clay tells me that the bank have 2 agreed to allow JACK to remain on in our service for another year, and to retain his status and pension rights. I have just read a highly irteresting paper sent over to us py NID. It is a translatio] of a locument produced by the Naval War Sta. of the Srd German Division which was in command in the South of Franee at the time the landings on 15th August 1944. The enqu: ry is directed towards the value of RSHA in formation supplied about enemy landing -tentions, with reference to their suita- bility for use in appreciations of the situation. The sources available to the Germans were (1) reports of enemy naval for and enemy merchant shipping seen passing Gibraltar; (2) air reconnaissance in the Mediterranean; (3) appreciations by Foreig Armies West mainly derived from radio intel. gence; (4) appreciations by Foreign Air For West, mainly derived from radio intelligenc (5) RSHA reports. No information of any importance was obtained apparently Dy Naval radio intelligence owing to the security of our naval signals. From a careful examina- tion of the information obtained through 501 rces 1-4 during the period May-August, the Germans came to a fairly firm conclusion by the last week in July or first week ir August as to the approximate locality ane time o1 the invasion. In evaluating the Te ports of the RSHA after the evanu their analysis shows that out of 190 reports only 15 were correct whi.le 32 were approxima or partially correct. The nfererce to be drawn from this is that they might well hav dispensed with the RSHA reports which only tended to confuse their minds but that in al case such reports should not be accepted un less checkable by visual recce. I discussed this matter with John Booth who before the invasion of Normandy was working 25 at the Photographic Unit at Meddenham. He said that there were many Cases where they carried out photographic reconnaissance on the basis of CX reports with very valluable results. Photographs would probably not have been taken had it not been for the reports. He did not know of course where the inrormar tion same from; he referred to these re- ports as "ground reports but he would not of course have known whether they were from agents or from sources Incidentally, he told me about the practice ground for the invasion at Brankaster in Norfolk. Photo- graphs were taken of this area which showed abnormal aativity Brankaster had been chosen because the sub-soii and other con- ditions were almost identical with the Nor- mandy beaches. He thinks that if the Germans had done a recce over Brankaster and had known nything about the geological con- ditions they could not fail to come to the conclusion that the landings were to take place between Is'signy and the area of Caen. As a method of deeeption he would have Te- commended the making of tracks on other part: of the coast. The Germans did not get on to this of course as haraly a single pllane suceeeded in getting across the Channel for some weeks or even months prior to the In- vasion. The Research Seetion of the War Room have produced a final report on Economic Espion age, In conclusion they state (1) Economio intelligence obtained through economic channels. This is a normal activity which any large firm uses in peace time. It oper- ated independently of the GIS and must be regarded as an inherent feature o1 economic lire, the results of which would naturally be made available to the State as soon as war broke out. (2) Economic intelligence obtained through non-economic channeis,aeat zb Abwehr or S.D. As has been seen, the Ab- wehr and S.D. had few, if any, genuine clan- destine sources on Allied enonomic activities They relied chlefly on American technical journals for information on American pror duction and had no source of information on British production, (3) Non-economie intell igence through economic channels. This was developed late in the war, and there is no evidence that it yielded any concrete re sults. SCHELLENBERGIS collaboration with I.G. FARBEN is, however, a good example the sort of use which a future GIS might make of the legitimate economic informats service of a great combine. December l1th NOCK came to see me. He is leaving. His successor is Landrieux, not a very attractive personality with a shifty look. Bertram Ede talked to me about our statdon in East Africa. I thought on the whole it would be better to leave ths until Dickis return. Gerald Glover is returning to his business. Jopson called about staff For operating tae- phone checks in the Slav languages. He what our requirements are and willl keep eye open. He suggested that I might get of a list of the personnel in censorship who were in the uncommon languages section. He would then be able to say which of them he thought might be suitable. Miss Wadeson wants to take up a civilian job: I put to her all the pros and cons but she seemed quite adamant about making a change. I said that we should always be pleased to see her back if there was a vacancy. 27 December 12th I lunched with Howe today and gave him the latest dope on the CORBY case and told him that it was now in the realm of high poli- tics and there was no chance o1 nything being done until the Americans were ready. I asked him about Burt and he said that Canning was allmost certain to go O his own accord but that il he dic not, gentle pressure might be exerted in the spring. Dacerlber 13t1 J.0. nante in. he asleed thetur hie could have tao corias of his report. I said that this WES of couG tiighly irerular and WG he in fact made LU great Suss shout $21 Hocaumenite relating to this 1OX Comiite aua WV Bo02 and thaib if by duly chance he were main over by bus and the copies of his root weate found in his safe by lis executons and sent to the 0.0. Or the W.0. for Uisoosl-afte being read by anyone intorested-the D.0. SyouD. obvious be dn serious trouble. I thought therefore that he woul have to asle e D.G15 permission. T am convinced that whatever Ve say or ao, T.C. vi2l have a copy of llis roport and vill not destroy his original mS. II Lunched with B-W and of S.1.5. is talcing over the job of F. Ueat who will be Leaving h.im in ORIGINAL DOCUMMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE' PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DEC o Ede came to ta3.k to me about comontmication with the I,D.I. from Famaica in viicy of the witnndrawall of TB.i. officers Trou thc Caribpean. E suggested tha we should ocsult Cierman and place the onus On the FIB.I. If tiney did not wish to commmicate through B.S.O. ve should have to think some other aranger ment. I saw Colonel Valter who lis the new D.I.I. in Canada. he wanted tO mow how Tmuich 1.1.5. work: hiis organisa- 2. tion thouad do. I said that in my view the only bod wlio coulla really CANE out the world would be the R.C.I.P. although D.I.I. would have to be kept informed. It seemed to me that go much aevended in Caada on Local lmowledge and experienced in interr- oga.bing eto. and that unless he contempilated having large staff situnted all over the country he could not reall/ comete. He seemed to agree with this view. I told him, hovever, that in n view the 3.C.H..P. Intelligence Banch viented a7l the support they could get. They had an excellent head in the reason of Rivett-Carnac but they needed encourage- ment and the necessary staff to carry out their duties. They had been seriously denuded both before and during the war. More important still was that they should get the bacling of the Se?vice Depart- ments and External Affairs As they ware very much in the public eye they were invariably beaten UD if anything vren't wrong. Consequently they were some- what reluotant to take action where matter's of exctermal or internal politics nere concerned. I thought that this position would be rectified if A JIC vere established in Canada on the Tondon model namely, the inclusion of Ecternall Affairs and the R.C.M.P. The latter would then feel that they had the necessany baaking and they could air their pro- blems and difficulties in symmatietic circihes. Colonel Walter seemed to bbe entirely in agreement with these views, and he is a pleasant personality. he spolte in the highest possible terms of the world of Tomry and Brunnarius, during the operations in Normandy. They had done a first-class job and earned the praise of alll with whom they had come into contact. December 12th Colonel Sewaind, Assistant Comissioner of the Southern Fhoedian Poli.ce callled. T discussed with hin the suggestion that it might be a good thing for us to have a DSO somewhere on the Aprican conm tinent and that Nairobi appears to be the most apropriate spot. He is inclined to agree tha't it would be useful. He said that reports were so often mislending and that a real picture could only 29 be gained by constan't visits. conmunication with Nadrobi was fairly casy. TE aalced him about the nenetration of Onsewa. Brandwag. He said that on the moment it did not really present mah of na problem. There were certain comnities which were Buovm but they were not taken very serioualy. I eolained to ha.m all the difficulties which we have nad with the Union. These he fully under- stood; he said, hovever, that Bara, the new Comissdorer and also Goldby, tie head of the CID ware both 1u0, people with Whot we could safely have E Liaison. Tho Deputy Cotrmissionez, arak, was an Afriicaan, but B0 fa as he lmew, fadrily a11 right. He-menbioned tha't he midin't nt times be able to get things out of South Africans which we should have difficulty in getting. This s a point which is worth bearing in mind. Dnsor Dcom came ito tell mne bourt EL daltte of S Whtols had gone wrong. He had taken an agent who had subsequertay had misgivings and gone round to 8.B. Thhisis n thing which is bound to happen fyroma-it n-time to tame although this is the first DEsB which we have had. Curmmning and Fmnival-Jones came to dalllc about the not office microphone experts tho are visiting Noscow and the Hallkans also Germany, Austaia arid Hungary. They thought that they needed some sort of Rbacking Prom the J.10. in getting authority to examine not only Thuitary Miasion and Fnbassy preniiges but also private dwellings of mesubera of the s'tadf. The suggestion has been put forwa to the J.T.C. E spoke to 8.0.E. and to S.01.S. and asked them whe'ther they you 1ie to avail themselves of the services of these men. S.0.. have no missi.onsy except in Germany and Austia where they beat of the wtary Mssions: Vivian, however, is sending wires to anl his Te- presentatives instructing them to get into touch with the G.P:0. experts. Lee, Hazny Allen, FJ and T d5scussed the quesbior of German sclentiste which is to Come LED before 30 before the Imuperial Defence Committee on Secuit ty net wveelc. We shall make it clear tha't we wan'b to be notified of aarivals and their destinations; that we wish to Iov the name of the officer in each case who is going to be in charge and that we shall wan't to be kept informed about the associa'tio and visits of al Gerian scientists and teolnicians. Fenguson same to see Te. He wanted to Imow ir there WaS any chance of his comiing beck to I1.5. T said that we could do no moe at present than to put bit on the linti Neanwhide he is applying for a Jo7 with ha-Gov. tin the British Zone. Alley came to talle to Ine alout the destruction of L.R.C. uncarded files. Horpocles las made the suggest tion that they shoud be buunt as a category without exnmination. Bo'th AlDey and T agreed that this would be undeslrable. Some of them miht be burnt but only after a review by responsible officer. 15th December Itold But that; lis promotion to Lte-Col. and the promotions of Spooner and Skardon to Major had been proved Dy the miltary Secretary. He is ver3 pleased about this: Reviewing the positton of Rupsia, the Chincse 125 tany Attache in NOnCOV draws EtLention to the e3cheb to which she has taicen advantage of her Bituaiti to obtain by diplomsti.d mncana areas of atrategiy importance adjoining hrer frontiers- In the east anO has the Kurile Islands Whicll afford areot egress into the Pacific. Port Arthur, Dairen and plighits over the South Mandlaian railway: these facilitate the absorption of Nanchuiria and other the policy of deep penetration in'to Chiina. Outer Hfongolia 1.s being Supported in her aemands for independence. She is also trying to get a Him hour on mnep Nongo- lia. here is nov umrest among the so-alled Ihasak tribes and ib is thougirt that this may lead to 611 attempt for vuluntary inclusion in the U.S.S.R. For years past Hussin hae been paying special atbe- ntion to the Pandir plateuu, the tactical value of which is exctrenjely great. E they gain control of the area north or the Indus over and defiles there they would be able southwand to emLarzaas and westwrard fghanistan. In Pesda, Tatais is area of the treesit taetioad Importance Lo Tssin. From there she cun directly disturb Fersia and Irag OT by penetrating deeply into Turlcey from the Wost. What is mond she sevo land corunicattions be- teen ElOpe and Ania. The present taotics are to foster among the Locall population revolubionary disorders coupled WEn-A demand for inclusion ij the Soviet Republic of Artaeni.a. The Russo-munidsh frontier 1s veny motartainous. Mhe Iar's defile affords tho only 09S. The three distariots Kors, Andanan and Artvin amee accordingly of the very gresbest inortance. Holding these Fussin could bring pressure to beazy in various directions. An examination of the situation shows Cent there is not a single one of the Sovietis neighbouving statos Which aoen not outwardly exolesa Frienaship for her while inwardly barboting resertment. There is covent plotting everywhere. In the whol.e strot- oh across the continents of Europe and Asis from the See of Japan bo the Beitic and northarn Norway there is 10 spot where SL direct conflict of power may not arise be'tween the Soviets on the one hand and Britain and the US on the other. To seek co- operation between Conmrtni.sm and Capitallism yrinl, the BLA. means, be like climbing a tree to chtch a fishi Reviewing the situation in Persia from the Btand- point of Soviet strategy, shouct she in future suffer any threa't from the Middle East, her best course yould be to eliminate Beiiti.sh and Ameriean influence in the Fersian Gulf. But there is a succession of mountain systeins south of Tehezcan witi.ch pun east and west athart the country and rendar difficult repia access to the sea coaSt. If, however, the Soviats control Pernlan Arerbadjan north of IL line Mahabad to Reaht and then promote popular movementis of independence in Northeim Irag and Eastear Turicey: ane will then be able to 3V com'tro. the British 01 retrion in the Erag (1onul). Soviet forces could there mtoave sotithweani to Bagind and therce directly or to Base while to the wes't they could traverse Syria and move direotly OMT the Mediterranean. Hans ULrich van CHAFPUES, incdidentally a brother-in- Lav of Berkeley Gage at the F.O., has been interror gated. He VELB at oLe tiine On the btaif of Fosenberg and was arrested by the Russiians and submitted to a very lengthy interrogation after wiioh he VaS handed over to the ritish. He visited this country fr often to stay wiitih his sister and to report gene -aly on politicall conditions. This he dia fair objectivey, occasion he was to1d to get into touch wath Bosley about whom he EAVO the following information. Nosey had requested financial ELSsit- tance as he was laolcing funis to organise the B,U. on a larger scale. He had made the suggestion tha't it would be possbile to buy UD a majority in shaves af British Gaumon't Picture Corporation, London, which firm wAS, according to Nosley, in grave financial difficulties. W.E.D. ALAN and Gordon CAIINING were said to have brought docuontary proof of this to Berlin. It was of course suggested that by his means the Bitish filin industry and thereby the Britr ish film-going Dttbliic could bo influenced. CHAFPUIS states that he did aotusilly see the docurnenbs doal- ing with this projeot, TE was, according to him a fantastic plan involving vast SLs. Nothing came of it. It cvas turned down both by Bosenberg'a offi and Von Shirach. Nosley is sarid to have thon applied to aussolni therearter Tor Pinencial as tance Which of cotrae we lmew he got. December IZ th Desmond Orr came to see me on the loth. He told me that he had heard on good authority that a policeman in the U.K. had been appointed as the nev D.G. He asked me not to question him. He wonuered when the Security Service was going to be allowed as a body to say who they wanted to run the 33 office. He then asea if I thought there was anything he could do, as he wouild be quite prepared to go anu see the P.M. I said that he might possibly be mistaken as many eople were interviewed. He indicated that he was quite sure of his round. I said that if that was the decision I did not think there was anything to be one. I went aow and saw Charles immediately ard repeated to him what Desmond Orr had told me. He asked me to wait in his room while he saw the DG. He then returned and tola me that Shillito,c.c.Kent, had been appointed and tha the D.G. had instructed him to let me know. No oneelse however was to be told. At the D-uns request I went to see him. I conlined myself to saying that 11 that was the decision I had nothing further to Say. The DG made some remank about the Committee possibly having thought that it might be better that I Should have my hands free to deal with the Intelligence side of things He said that Shillito was a very goou man and he thought I should like him. Apart from a certain feeling of disappointment, the appointment seems to me to be a bad one for the following reasons: (1) it is a mis- tare to appoint a pollicenan since the work of this office is entirely ditlerent From police work. (2) It puts the stamp of the Gestapo on the office. (31 It creates a false inpression in the minds of police forces gereraliy anu ol the Services that MI5 is a kind of police dept. (4) It general- ly down-grades the Ofrice.(5) the choice I understand lay between myself and Shilli to. It would seem either that somebody was required who had an intimate knowledge of the WOrK afd was persona grata in Intelli- gence circles or that a man of considerable veight and standing was necessary in order to carry relations on the highest level. 9u The appointment o1 Shillito would not appear to meet either needg however good a chap he may be. (6) Lastly it is I think extremely discouraging for the younger members of the office and for others coming in, DO feel that the head of the OIiice is Liely to be appointed from outside. The D.G. showea me today a Letter he had haa from Briages who haa just returned, romn Washington been appointed and ana stating that that he wa Shilito to intor hac me. I asked him whether he was going to tell the office. - He said no, he thought it would be better if it leared out gradualy I asked if he had any objeetion to my tell- ing a few senior members working under me. To this he rather reluctantly assented. Pereonally I cannot See the point of not informing the Office, who have got to KTIOW sooner or later and may well teel somewhat insulted. DG I gather had said that he would not stay later thar the loth March but at Shillit ts request he is now staying on untill April. This is unfortunate since for 5 months he will be filling Shilito up with all the wrong ideas. T have informed only TAR,Roger,curry anlu kelar. December 27th I saw Nove today', who is bacis rom the British Zone on leave He was formerly at the LRO and is TIOW working in the Russian section, control Commission. He will not be demobiliseo until towards the end of next years He is very anxxious to Join the office. He is a pleasant fellow and I gather has done very good work. He is clearly intelligent. The only thing against him is his appearance. 35 TAR and Sclater came to tell me about a number of leakages or losses o1 coues and cyphers, the property of the Admiralty. In particuarly one at Malta, where a safe had obviously been broken into. Sclater is going into these cases with Wood o1 N.ID. The first thing to lind out is the damage caused. Wiil lethese losses enable the enemy break our past cyphers and has everybody been wamned about the use of these coues or cyphers in the future? Lastly what are the security precautions with regard to documents of this kind? Are they kept in safes? Have the safes got combination locks? If not, how many people have had access to the key during the last 6 years. Joe Stephenson looked in today. He is just back from the British Lone am. 1t joining the ontrol Molsission in Garmaly as 2 osol after a certain amount of leave. Corin and Alley came in to tell me that Col.Eindhoven wanted to send 4 or 5 of his officers for attachment here for a longish period. We all agreed that it would be Capobsible to have them actually in the pfice and that the most that we could do would be to give them a course of tectures. December 28th I saw Curry this morning. He ased me about his future. I told him frankby that if I became DDG I thought that Dick ought to become DB. He seemed deeply hurt by this. I told him that I thought there were many things which Dick could do which neither I nor he could do, that he had carried a big job during the war and had established confidence with all outside depts. I mention 36 to Curry that Charles Buuler hau toiu ine th if I had become -DG he would have beer quite prepared to see Dick appointed DDU and wou not have been in the least Of1anued. Curry seened to think that it was quite impossibl for him to work unuer Dick. I then asreu him 1o O.Division woulu appeal to him. He said TIOV The only possible job that I could see is director of organisation the registry if Horroeas goes. Mealwhi. he is putting in for a job as librarian at the FO which has been aavertised in the Times. FieldRobinson came to see meana said that he was packing up at SOE He said tnal il we had any thing Tor him to to, not necessar ily in an exaltea capacity, he would he quite prepared to tare Signs A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 DEC )oo9 who 11e had been separated for 42 years. Hhe was interned by the Germans in Paris. I told him that I would put his name down ana let him know if anything suitable turned I saw who told me that it is impossible for him to get a job as long as he is still in the Polish Army.. He is leaving us at the end OI the year anu will then have only E12.10.0 a month from the Poles. He is persona non grata with them who regard him as a British spy. He has two children and a motherto look alter. T told him T would see what I could to to help him. I saw JO. He toLu me that the DG had allowe him to have a copy of his report on DAs ana 37 he took away with hir copy No.3. He also has his original MS. While T feel that this is most irregular and have tola the DG so, T realise that there is nothing to pre vent JC from re eproducing his M& and that being a determined person he will somehow have a copy whatever we ao or say: I have therefore confined myself to getting him to institute all possible safeguaras. The copy and the MS will be sepu in his sale at Christchurch anawill be in sealed envelopes with instructions that if any thing shoula happ en to him they should be returned unopened to me personally c/o room 055. JC told me that he had heard from Caccia that Sillitoe had been appointeu. He haa to. told Cacca very frankiy that he thought this was a disaster and that I ought to have had the job. He hau sporren to Find- later before the selection Board met and haa strongly aavancea my claims. He had thought that Finalater was more or less persuaded that II was the right person, Find- later did however Say that he wondered whether I was quite the right persor to put a boint ofview across to the Cabinet in a crisis. JO said that he thought that 10 minutes conversation with me woud ppobably 0 be a great deal more profitable than the remarks of someone thumping the table who did not really know any ything about the job. There was one other rather significant re mark. Findlater Said that he wishea Petrie was 1o yeans younger when he could have stave ed on another 2 years to gee the organ- isutior on to its peace-time looting ane then hand over. It is possible therefore that this is what the Selection Boaru had in mina by appointilg Silito who is 58 ana would normaniyretire at the aga of 60. 38 T told JC that it would make some dilterence to me if L knew whether this was or was not So, since ir thete was any other job that I could do I Should mot mind a change. My only doubt was whatihor I Was littec for any other sort of wori. JO. said that the r re was nothing he would not do which was within his power to help me in ny way he -sibny could. He thought however that it would be better Lor nim to wait until the appoin was mone or less public. He would then go and have a talk with rindater. Anthony tells me that the Control Commission have done nothing about Padgham although they had a letter which I sent out to Dick for the DGS signature when he was in Germany, advancing Padgham's claim for some form o1 employment in military governme The letter apparently was never signed. Equally nothing has been one about Robbi Mendelssohn although Melland has rOW beer given further instructions. Anthony has brou back on behalf of the King some veny valuabl miniatures and other antiques worth about 2100,000 but it has been made quite clear that these ane only on Loan from the Duke of Brunswi.ck There are many other thing including gold plate and a com lete set Of silver plate for 240 people whis interesting are all about o1 all George is an L period. MS O1 the Most Four Gospels,illuminated, dateu about 160,which Delonged to Henry the Lion, the founder oi the House of Brunswick. This document is quite unique and almost the aarliest know of its kind. Bingham came to tell me that there was still difficulty about BAUDISCHIS sister, I am taking the matter up with the H.0. 39 December 29th Anthony rang up about Orange who it is now suggested should be posted to Washingt Anthony is anxious to KOW whether there has been any reply from Clifford Norton. Of course there has not. Anthony will be seeing Bromley and will ask him yo send a wire. December 51st I saw Prestige about BAUDISCHIS sister. He dictatea a Letter granting a visa which was sent to Jeffes. THISIS A COPY 3(4) IN ORIGINAL DEPARTMENT OF THE DOCUMENT PUBLIC UNDER RECORDS RETAINED SECTION ACT 1958 DEC Poo% 50 I asked O. what he thought about the new DG. He said he was extremely sorry that I h had not got the job and he agreed that the appointment constituted a down-grading OI MI5 and was undesirable in that it gave it a police stamp. He said that he himself had been asked to go on the Selection Board but had refused as he knew SO many of the candidates personally and thought it undes- irable that in a matter of this kind he should have a voice. I imagine that he had been consulted by Cadogan but I doubt whether he knew who the candidates were He said that very New people realised how mu much dependeu upon long experience and how difficult it was to put across the right point of view it you had not the necessary background and knew the answer to the suplllementary question. In his own organisation he saiu that the only people he really relied on were those who had been with him for 20 years. Although I lid not say So I felt that he would have often done much better ii he relied upon himself anu stuCk to his own point of view instead of allowing himself to be influenced by many of those who surrounued him aaring the war. He emphasised the necessity of good rela- tions with other intelligence depts. and 41 he felt that this wa2 perhage more important than anything else. It was in 1aot aue to his personal association with biAisne, the head o1 the French 2eme Bureau that before the wan Dunaerdale anu Gouerroi hau gone to Warsaw anu had actually sean the cypher machine on which Dess were based. This had given him Just the scart he needed. Jaruary lst 1946. Miss Chennalls talked to me about to WITT who is now in the British zone under detention. TI told her to send the Tull report and to suggest tha t the Control Cominission might either re-interrogate Kraemer or tallk 6O somebouy in the Gestapo who had Deen in Copanhagen or Stockholm. I still thought that WITT had ait one time hadsome connection with the Gescapo although they may not have sent him here oIlicially. Bingham brought me a report to the efleot that a German member of the Gestapo named WOLFF had been seen in Paris after the operation. He was then in American uni- form and going user the name O1 Capuain Douglas BADGER. He was FIOW beliieveu Lo be in the American Forces in this country I have passed an the report to 055. Herbert came to see me. He ew of course about the new DG. He said that although a pleasant individual and ole wno would probably De pre are to isten, he was o1 somewhat shy and retiring uisposition and not likely to put up much oi a fight. He felt that the appointment was a delinlite mistake and that it constituted a down- grading O1 the ollice as a whole in addition to giving it the police stamp,which was le2 undesirable. other candidutes apout whom 1 had not hearu before were Hordern, pud up by the H.0., Daviason,-uce DMI, and two airmen calheu Dust. and Goduapu. Newsam had backed ole o1 the airmen. I do not know to what extent Maxeweil prassou the case OI Sillitoe Beyond the tuet that he urged him to accept the appointment if it were offered to him. The worst Feature is that perore the comittee met they hau cinculateu to them the DGS memo or the Ollice where h laid it down that the future DG should be either a service man or a pouiceman Wuudl colonial experience In So War as bacicing my case therefore, if he ever intended to do so, he must have started oi the wrong foot. 1 asked Harker about the possibility o1 a decoration for Burt. He told me that all the particulars had gone forward but he did not know what the police had one. Thorntonsiormerly LRE, came to see me on his return from Scandinavia where he haa been to try and ramestablish his wool export business. He told me that this country had Lost about 6 million pounds 17 contracts Had he been there 6 weeks ago this count might well have got the business. He E however sueceeueu in re-estabiishing hi position for next year. Meanwhile the S.Americans are holding the field. Sweden hau verything in the way of 1ooa and oth-ar goods that a man Could wanit.. They were trying to Forget apout the part they had played ir the Wale Norway was extremely well-disposea towards us. IM 1act Thorton hau,withour making any overturesy beer summoned to see the Kins anu the Crown Trinc and the interview was out coruialo 43 January 2nd I atbendeu the JIC when a Variety oi subje were discussed. DMI was inthe chair and I thought hanutea the meeting very sensiol The paper came up suggesting that the defence of all our bases throughout the world shoud be carefully workeu out. The DMI felt that this was largely a waste of time. The first thing to cio Was to mate up our mirus about our potential enemies and about the possibilities of mouern technical weapons. AS lar as he could see the only possiole enemy was Russia. It Wo th erefore be better for the moment to Limi the problem to deience of bases which the Russians might possibly attack. For this purpose it would be necessary in the first instance for an up to date memo on every- thing that was known about Russian future intentions and about the internal state of the country, which woula reflect on its war potential, to be prepared. We also took the paper about the publica- tion of information relating to SOE. The Deputy hieis OI Staff hau ravenseu the decision 01 the JIC alu hau ordered that a revised version 61 the SOE mamo should D given to the press. They thought that i1 some official publication went out it woul damp down unauthorised publications. I confined myself to saying that it would be almost impossible to us to prosecute under the Official Secrets Act if an official rellease was made, and I suggeste that when maing the handout something might perhaps be said to the press to the affect that the Official release did not authorise them to publish all sorts of stories that they might have already got written up intheir lockers. w THIS IS ACOPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DEc 2009n I had a word with de Guingand about the HLEIY case. He told me that Chapman had not been able to get any futehr. I asked whether he thought we should now do a general vetting job on JIC,JIS and anyone he who had been concerned with the Military Mission in Moscow. He said that in his view this was essential and he undertook to give us facilities. Vesey brought me the case 01 DEAR who turned up here in the guise of a British subject. He is really a Roumanian. He was sent back to us from Moscow. His story is extremely dubious. He may well have been both a German and a Russiaragent. He has now suoceeded in getting enlisted and is bei.e considered for employment with SOE. In lact he ought I think to be locked up or deported. The H.0. who were approached some time ago have given ts no replly. I have told Vesey to supply me with up to date particulars and I propose to write to H.0. came to talk to me about the VERMEHRENS. He said that all sorts of Catholic dignatories had been writing in to the H.0. but that the latter had So lar befessem TO 3a191uop our raaurro pro run uT Z16[400 ST aun WOuI uTeudroue JOI yooq aud GuBu on qnoue uetotTaUE oem nq aud/o Mau B on Ieno 09 0n OOM suoezo aua ar6Tades UI -meod B MOIE ureyen SEM Rex seudto eua pure pimno SBM Hutaeudfoue JTOT pasn soon aud retatssod peorup u epew safessem uennTm ATteoTouepr JO uoTadao manu am MTM gtoTe saTnpas IO sawoneq eseul ngixraneuo To IRd amrs aun TIT auto some TI YOHVINT petty SEA ansseu used saued ElOU TO OT OnT pepTAtn seumaeuog aaeM Uortia afessam but AuBu engTsue felt pesTApe ATood Let RTauesedde paweouop avam Saeudro SE JIBT SE a.teM supezo eLT aspounaur DmAtet-odfa Iteand Lo MoMeU qtefe UTR out yeeng on yonaA haerey IOT eTatssod SRM 4142 auns ST M/d eueum 8sea LTto eua ST STUL uopUOT ug aamesow epueasesey upeza aun JO rapeat auq n TO tohportumtop ssateuti TO Audeoenur run Aa penepuoe Amaueuedde seM ssapons asanbes aud HOITeJg sseretm IO uotadeo -uantr aua gnoqe STTeap Hutasauenut saAt 9t6T Fem UAST to sueuH penadeo TUO/ANM oue DV/MNO TO OIDDGIW TOOrI La qoda V p.IC Aarnuef eu etgerepisiop auos JOI enpu Are e fsn goeIte TISSeOU you paeu SPUL ramanI S TupmeD 0 paegau Ut ueyen ea on esunoo 1un Due STUA TOT 9uret?e eg OTROM put san?tnut TeoTattod TO s40S ITE UT peAToaup 109 og ad.g aun ate faua a un and Ao Emnpes 0n asueut 18 nannatositoo feun uemot run ge pun teer tou DI am Daue0uos auem OM SE BI SR spun pyes I Monmnpes ITeun IO deaxdn Jpaun JOT euare eTqESuOdse.I ag Jeuot OU SIS anua SRMA nurod STH 04 eem SNOYHSWHEA eun 1944 Due punoa reu pre sh were nearly always concerned wi th the olitiical situatior and activities 01 the Czech Resistence Movement. This type of information was So important that For a long time the wireless traiic was allowed to continue unhindered. similar suceasses were achieved in the case of the PoLes. The Germans were able to listen in to the internal wireless tratiic of agents operation in Poland through the Warsaw rising of 1944 From this the dispositions of the Pouisr liberation troops as wel.i as frictiou between them and the Russians could be stablished. It was possible moreover to get all wi reless traitiic which the Polish Govt. in London carried on with their organisations in Poland. The mathous by which these transmissions were compromised were known to P/W. A further success against the cypher systems of the Polish Govtein exile was achieved over the link LO don-Ankara. P/W does Hot Kow if this System was solved by Vauck ot by the Polish Section o1 OKW/Chi. Results in this field were amo.t suecesstul when just Detore the allied invasion O1 France a ban on all W/T transmission From Eng ganu Was irstitutec which incluued even diplomatie channels. The wireless traffic of Polish agents to England however continued to operate. I attended the stail meeting anu intormeud those present that accopaing to a Letter that I had had Irom Dick, 6 or 8 Officers and 11 secretaries would be required for the Far East. Some of the secretaries were of course aready there and some of those formerly in SOE might be kept on I also spoke about Miss Glass and explained her position. Charles seemed to think that work might be found for her il she decided to stay on in the office. ub were nearly always concerned with the olitical situation and activities o1 the Ozech Resistence Movement. This t/pe of information was so important that for a long time the wireless trafic was allowed to continue unhindered. Similar successes were achleved in the case of the Poles. The Germans were able to listen in to the internal wireless traffic of gerts-operatin in Poland through the Warsaw rising o1 1944 From this the dispositions o1 the Polisr liberatior troops: as well as frietion between them and the Russians could be established. It was possible moreover LO get all wi reless traffic which the Polish Govt. in London carried on with their organisations in Poland. The methods by which these transmissions were compromised were down to P/W. A further success against the cypher sustems of the Polish Govtin exile was achieved over the lirk LO don-Ankara. P/W does not KTOW ir this system was solveur by Vauck or by the Polish Section oi OKW/Chi. Results in this field were almo.t succesatul when Just belore the awlliea invasion of France a ban on all W/T transmissions from England was instituted which ineluued ever diplomatic channels. the wireless traitic of Polish agents to England however continued to operate. I attended the start meating and informed those present that according to a letter that I had had From Dick, 6 or 8 oflicers and 11 secretaries would be required for the Far East. Some of the secretaries were of course allreaay there and some of those formerly in SOE might be kept on. I also spoke about Miss Glass and explained her position. Charles seemed to think that work might be found for her i1 she deeided to stay on in the office. 17 Michael Ryde came to tell me that ZIGZAG was publishing his Lile story in the Etoile. It contains almoot every detadi of his career with us. Alter talking to Cussen we came to the concusion that we should attempt to obtain the necessary evidence in France with the assistance of the French authorities. We should then consider whether it was desirable or not to prosecute. There are many arguments both for and against. The prosecution would have a salutary effect possibly on whoever else is intending to publish a book, such as Treasure who is intending to publish a book on her experiences. on the other hand the public might get the impression that all MI5 agents were crooks. Unless the proceedings were given a certain amount of publicity they would have no deterrent effect and such publicity might get rather out of hand. Hester came to tell me about the proposed initiation of Army "ym into OATS. A telegram had been sent out to the Mid East without any prior conshrtation with ourselves in spite of Hesterts warning to Maltby. The result had been that Paget had put his foot dow and that we had won the first round. Maltby as usual had taker the view that it wasan order ana nothing to do with us. I had a talk with Tommy Harris and Richard Butler about Armas GARCIA, who is being questioned by the Income Tax Authorities about the transfer of funds which was carried out on behalf of Garbo. The matter originate through EggS who Learned from MUNOZ, the Spanish MA, that Armas, a fruit merchant, wished to get funds From this country to Spain. It hau originally been 45 suggested that Munoz lor a consideration should take the money in a diplomatic bag. We saw in this all opportunity for getting funds to Garbor and put up Cyril Miles under a cover name as an intermediary. The money was pain by Armas to Dick Butlert firm who held the stakes untill the Abwehr passed the money over in Maarid to Armasis father. Armas has shown this transaction, which was carried out under cover of a sale of cochineal, in his books. Thes have been examined by the income tax authorities ana so the trouble. Armas of course has no idea that the transaction was really an Abwehr one He merely wished to evade the currency regulations,which we Indirectly and for our own pur oses assis- ted him in doing. It has been arranged that Charles and DickButler should see Fineh O1 the Inland Revenue, who is accustomed to peculiar transactions of this kind, andwill probably know what touo. Janvary 4th I saw Miss Shaw. Pheis s-anxiou to get the services of B.5. in the evert any sabot- age activities by the Germans Wilhellms- haven. There are certain ships there w! h will shortly have to be handeu over LO the Russians. It is thought possible L the Germans may attempt to sapotage them, since there is already a report that they put sand in the wheeis oi the Prinee Eugen before she was taken over by the Americans. Both Newis and Haylor are very anxdous that we should assist il possible. After speaking to Burt, it seemed that Spooner and SKardon woula propably be able to handle any case if it arose. 49 I saw the D.M.I. about the ELLI case. He S sent for Jimmy Way to whom we outlined the problem. Jimmy Way will see Roger Hollis and arrange to get the names of all people who handle JIC ad JIS as well as Military Mission documents, at the material time. These names will then be passed over our records. I asked the DMI about his visit to Ireland and told him that he had been uesoribed to us as the "head of the positive side of our firmm. He did not tell me what he had been doing but we spoke about McKenna the Chief of Staif, whom we both agreed Wad a good fellow. I saw Hunter and told him that I had got 4 candidates names from for Control B.6. Commission These men willi of possible report at 055 on demopirisation. I had a long talk with Ffoulkes who is home on leave. He is eviuertly working under very great difficulties and has no really experienced Scalt. His Office is used as a sort ol training ground lor raw recruits in Intelligence. He would like to be considered for a Job in this office but is not likely to be demobilised before the summer. He has no ommitments. January 5th Ede came to See me about Tufnell-Barrett going over to Caracas to make contact with Garbo. ted that I Garbo spoke should to Tommy either Harris communicate who sugges- direct with him or be given an address for DSO Trinidad in case he found himself in any difficulties. 5 0 Bill Lukets protege's are causing a certain amount of trouble. He wants to get Freak employed by UNO. I am Seeing what car be done. January 7th Hester spore to me on the telephone about the small intercept unit at Portsmouth and also about accommodation at barnet asked him to talk the matter over with Sclater and then told him to speak to Ie again. I said that we wished to keep som sort of finger on the pulse of the ether otherwise we should have no idea as to what was the extent OI leakage. This applied more particularly to civilian wir less and experimental work done by Ministi o1 Supply,MA and others. A long list has been received of all the employees o1 AlSt Paris. This list inclu the name of HANLET, a Belgian who passed through the LRC, was regarded as suspect anu sent on to the Belgians with a warnin His story was regaraed as thoroughly ursatisiactory but noevidence could be obtained on which a 12(5)a order could be based. While there is no reason to think that he became active there is no doubt that hewas a German agent. When we have all the information we shall consider what action is possible and necessary. HANLET is at present worning di a factory Nigel Watson has been Offered a two years contract by the FO as Charge daffaires in Luxembourg. TEIE COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDERHeCHON O1 course do a veny galflfantejdldugrte ACT 1958 Dec 2009 51 war, and was parachuted into Yugoslavia as Liaison Officer with titols forces and he subsequently did well for IPI on cases of Indian renegades. On return here he was put into F.Division and evidently felt the work was not surriciently important. Hill spoke to me about Courtney being made a Lt.Col. He is putting the case forward on the grounds that Bourtney is Dixon's deputy and in his absence has to control tl the DSOS who are all ut.Cols. January 8th Keith of PWE sent over Major Hope about a PID employee named PRINGSHEIM, who is apparently making complaints to unauthorise people outside the office about certain PID compilations on the morale of the popullatior in Germany during the war. PRINGSHEIM alleges that any documents indicating the resistance of the German population are being excluded. It is I am told quite untrue. The question is what can be done about PRINGSHEIM. I saw al Air Ministry film yesterday on the activities of SOE. The film itself was extremely good and it is diificult to take exception to any details. I pointed out that a film which had the Govt.stamp on it was always valuable to foreign intelligence services. Moreover it would encourage anauthorised persons to give publicity to their Various stories. It was decided that if the Cabinet were in favour OI releasing the SOE story 67 to the Press the film shourg be inciudea. ORIGINAL DOCLMIENT RETAINE IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIO 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORD ACT 1958 DD 2008 I discussed with Vesey and the question of vetting of American visa applications. The whole thing is getting into a serious muddle due to the interve tion of OSS who have constitutes them- selves the vetting authorities,wit the apparently agreement OI the Embassy. The proper people of course to do this Wo are the FBI who will have to handle the various characters if and when they arriv in the USA. My irclination is to discuss the whole problem with Cimperman. John Mair came ir. He is just back From Vienna. He says conditions there for the population are really terriole, particula. in the Russian 2one. There is still a 60 ueal of looting and rape. The other day a woman got on a tram in her underclothe She apologised by saying that the Russian! had removed her jur coat ana her coat and Siirt and she had to get home. A certain number of the Russians are going southea John saw a train piled up with every SO sort of equipment and trailers with antiq furniture and Russians sitting round a table drinking wine as the train rumbled through the city. This is rather typical of what has been happening. John Seems to like his work and feels that he has quite a chance of getting into the FO through the back door. Geofirey Wethered rang up from Berlin to know whether there was any chance of his being taken on here. Otherwise he contem- plates returning to the Bar. 53 O THE ORIGINK OOUMENT RETAINED UNDER THE PUBLIC SECTION IN DPARTMENT RECORDS 3(4) OF ACT 1958.DEC DEC 2c0f S THISIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DEC 2009 the German radio. January lOth Vesey came to tell me that he had seen Krymer who is apparently prepared to retur to Frarce He has two houses there and hi rootS ane really in that courtry. Vesey will see what he can do to get him oven. KOHOUT and MARITA have peen given their Kriegeveraienstkreuze and appear to be extremely gratified. MARITA is going to kride hers in the stuiling of her armchair. The DG has decided to let Cussen go to Paris to investigate the leakase of information by ZIGZAG to the Etoile. January llth Rhodes rang from the Hague. we was rath -er worried about our turning down Gen. nEindhoven's request to send some of his officers here for a course. I explain that at the moment it was almost impossible to receive them but that we would do what wecould for them at the earliest possible moment. This would be in the form of a course rather than a period of attachment. 55 THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT BETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DEC 200 At the 12 12.oclock fclock meeting touay Hughes drew attention to the fact that there were now 5 transmitters running. One was the transmitter which was known an had been under observation for some time. There were however two others operating from the Embassy. RSS had not been able to pick them up from any OI their stations They had been heard only by a van in close proximity. This is one more illustration of the weakness of RSS in So far as pickin up illicit transmissions from this country are concerned. Hanslope I an told has gon over entirely to SIS business and RSS is shortly to be handed over to Army "Y", und Walter Scott. IT is a curious thing that all this could happen without any official notification to ourselves and more than ever emphasises the necessity of our havin a representative on the Sigint Board. 5 I heard a good Winston story the other day. At the end of a long anu somewhat tedious conference at Athens when the Greek crisis was on, Winston summer up by saying "Well, gentlemen, it seems that we shall have to put our trust in General Plaster Ass (Plastiras) and hope that his feet are not made of clay'. A number o1 documents nave Tow been captured which are the property OI 3F O1 the Abwehrstelle Netherlanus. They are dateu Mareh 194 alu relate to the penetration o1 SOE. A list i5 given of 60 captured persons who have been sent for trial, giving their descriptions and a number ot details of their espionage activities. The inaciers were the brother MENTEN from Warmond and the tague respec- tively. They had regularly place Large sums at the disposal of the organisation, roughly 5,400 Ilorins a quarter, and a total oi sume 43,000. It is stated that the Dutch section of SOE was in the charge of Major BLunt in 1942 ara Major Bingham in 1943. The formation OI some 20 sabotage groups each from 80-100 strong, was planned. Likewise modern weapons and sabotage material were to be supplied by air. by the end of 1942, 46 droppings had taken place, 38 parachuted agents had been cap- tured, and all the material dropped had beer secur ed for German use. By the end of 1943 the total of 90 aroppings had been made 53 parachuted agents including a woman,an 900,000 kilos OI weapons and sabotage material wene captired. When the operation was at its height, 13 wireless stations were working and the Gormans Were pretenuing to run 40 agents and their sabotage groups. The weapors captured inciuueam 800 sub- THISIS A COPY $7 ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED machine guns, 60 FRAHT machine SECTION 2,000 pistols and revoivera, 8,000 hand grenades 50,000 rounds BL ammmnition anu 52 pac age of explosives. In about Marah 1945 the controlling station in London asneu the na of the leaders O1 the organisation and their deputies in Belgium with their adure A ses and spheres oI work. This request ol course gave the Germuns a wonuertul opportunity Prior to the rounu-up about 300 o1 the members of the onganisation wer reported by name. The final rounu-up in Belgium Seems to have taken place about ov.194d when the leaders 01 other resistance groups who,wit the Corps Frare were trying to amalgamat wanted to make a discussion with a repre - sentative O1 the British Govt. und the English Group in belgium a conditio: of their acceptance. There had been signs that the leaders O1 tnase new groups were in W/T contact with Lonuon ama that Lonuon had expressed suspicion. meeting which took place in a house rerueu by Ast Belgiu was therefore arranged. The folowing wer present: ol.Diron as represertative o1 th Corps Franc, Col.Bastin as representative the Radio Belgie, Col.haam as representati of the Army of Liberation, ol.var Nooten as representative of the "holding-down" group of the Corps Franc, and, principle liaison officer wi.th the Front de LtInde pendance. Here the first rouna-up took pllace. Force had to be used and Adam was fatally and Siron and Bastin slightly injured. Thereupon the breaiing-uown of the whole organisation was begun. House searches brought to light a large quantit of material,particularl articularly resuraing espiona work, and many leuders. At the end of November 1143 arrests had been made and another 100 were contemplated. Another document relating LO DA work in Holland states that from Feb.1942 to 30.6.43 172 operations had been controlled and included 86 parachute droppings consisting of 515 containers with sabotage material and weapons, 52 containers with ammunitA about 5,000 Kilos of munitions and 77,000 Kilos of material and weapons. 48 agent W/T sets, 9 ultra Short wave sets,58 agents, 7 delivery aircraft shot down or crashed and 4 further probables. By April 1943 43 out of a total 49 agents captured had been persuaded to work for the Germans anu 450 agents' helpers had beer arrested. came to tell me that he was going to tour the Miu East, Italy Cairo Athens and returning via Switzerland. His purpose was to see what could be one about XXX which the FO wisheu continued. I am notiiying >ouglas noberts. A Major Brede in reporting On I but, reports on Ostro. He says he provided veny extensive and detailed reports about Eng land with special relere ce to British aircraft production and allied subjects. He was said to have agents in London who had access to documents about British aircraft production. One of his most important chamels For passing information from England to Lisbon is said to have veen Dutch pilots of BOAC. Information was also sant by letters in secret ink. ostro obtained reports from the USA about American Air Force and laval building programmes. He wa considered the most important source of information oi Ampt 57 Ausland. Hiis reports about English aireract production in the period March 1941 to Jun. 1945 were believe to be correct,wi with reservations. His reports generally were considered reliable because the information in them nearlly always tallied wiith that obtained From /W ane from evaluations of the press.( our analsis o1 these reports showed that the majority were inaccurate and we came positively to the conclusion that they were fabricated) Ostro was run by IH.OSt,Berlin, even When he vent to Poritugal his case being Lr. charge of Col. Scholtz. under Scholt2l supervision Capt. Kniebis and Dr.Beck acituaily aid the Work The latter vas the owner oi a chemical factory in Berlin which made synthetic resins and varishes. I but employed an agent called Ivor Lissner in Hsinking. He was reterreu UO in trallic as Ivar ana is Delieveu to be an author Journaist He was in the Far East verore Maron 1941 and frequentiiy visited Toryo. te TEII a network of agents who proviueu reports on the order o battle o1 russian uroops in Siberia. He also Sert in poulticai reports on Japan which were received by teleprint. He is believed to have been arrasteu by the Japanese shortly before OF soon arter Jan.19453. another agent was Kraemer, Asst. Press Attache in Stockholm who used the cover name o1 Siegfried, anu also Josephine His intormaton on British air power was sai to be derived from a member of the Swedish egation in London who pasaad it to a member of the Swedish FO in Stockholm. Kraemer said that he obtuined the informa- tion from this FO member in return fora fairly considerable sum o1 money paia monthly. In Switzerand the Asst.Ail Attael Major Prinz Auerspeng had a contact with the publisher of Interavia, and with a former French diplomat. Interavia was also useu Dy the head of IT/LW. "Pashatl reports from aakana were uenivea aost entirely from the press. Reichert the DNB was comeeted with the organisation which was believed to have been a Greek-Jewi -Armenian concern in the near and middle East oI which very Tittle was ever kTowII anu which sold its reports for a Tiarly high monthly sum to intermeularies of Reichert. Headquarters im Berlin assume that the greater part o1 the information derived from this organisation Was False. Nevertheless the reports Wanre accepted because it was believed that they wene party correct anu Decause there were TIU other re liable sources ol inormation in the near and middle East. Speaking o1 the Sofia Melaekopf Brede said that this was in the hanus ol Richard Kander @ KLutb. the organisation Max was aimea at fussia. Karer workeu in Sotia wirth a russnan emigre who nau ormeriy lived in Czechoslovakia ana who Claimed to have been a Cossack Older. This mar hao a passport ii the Hame OF IIJa Lange The Max organisatior in Russia was said to consist of a net 0I W/T agents amorig Fussian headquarters who were members o1 lamiiies which had been anti- bovieb. (Sae Jaruary 14th Joe Archer asked me about the future or the Control Commission in Germanywherher it was to continue to be an integrated Show or was to have regular Service sections. The Air Ministry feel to some extent tha t they are Left out in the cold. Moreover theyuo not 6( appear to have a very satisfactory liaison. T think these views are expressed by Plant who probably has been Somewhat siae-trackea owing to his gererat lack ol knowledge about O.I. matters. I cold Joe that there were no prejudices against the Air force with regard to their taring an active part in e.l. Doth in Mid EastyFa East and on the Control Commissions. The trouble wars that their candidates were nather pad staruers as they had never hau an I.B. staif in the siir Force. I suggested to Joe that he should take the matter further with vick on his return as I was not reay clear aout the future status of CIB. We have now been asked to write up the question of CI records in the fiellu. Gwyer is going to do this. I had a meeting with the DG,Rothschild and Allen about Victoris future. It was agreed that Letters would be wriitterr to Sir John Anderson and Edwand Bridges with the suggestion that they should be visited by the D.6. and Victor. This shouu give him the necessary credentials and backing for any enquiries he wants to carry out. He has already gathered that the re is some further development with regard to uranium which is known to Lora Cherwelll, but which he wil not at the moment aivulge. T saw Marriott who is at present employed in CICI. He is the son o1 tha Dean o1 Westminster He Seems intedligent ana has a very detailed grasp of politics ana person- alities in the Mid East. He wounu like to join the office and is quite reaay to serve in Mid East it requireu. uoThTSOd B UT aou SBM wpenTIg MOTTOI pTnom acodelutg DuR ISTN aun dens ASI11 se teTS IO BuHosopu yoraa BpeAUT ATgegod DTNOM under (z) suueuep.omed enod pue RmIy nt puaren asnt ana JBH euq on neeT ntes ot pTnOD UERITIg Jefuer ut sm asodeauto uanoute (T) 1OM quaunoop aun ut sutod at uRdaf OSURRe suotRedo UgTM utrean UTreen-06TH(rang DIO prou eutgeo USTATIH 8ua TO Butaeau n to semnutut eun ZAex uRuaen run mOAT DeatebeJ peu utTueg TIU -VAN der aug 4219 pennns SEM nt UOtu. HT 0V6T Jaqmapea for on UITeH WOIT VNE B on OMSUR run ag em STUL Stsoinb os eodeuts pemnadea aneu 01 IInOlTp Lea ueeg oru pmnoM saueumoop esoy mnouTa pres upeadeo ou asmndey run put seem JO eoutid ata IO PUTyts aua ut oapI nuenodut he SBA seanssau ssesetm THAu UsTTug 88.I on MttTqe uenbesuoo ou pue sepoo TeAeN USTIH run TO uotseesod aut ATHurpoppr uoTseAut Teua pewuerd put BABTey UE Jemod USTAEH IO eapatmouy goBxe parmhoe snun OUM sder eua on eAo pepury exam squetmoop esett sanoo TEABU USTOTH au (a) suet -apsouTer Why O sanbea nuetn he SuTew Bil DuB BAeTETr DUR aodesuts UT seuetd UsTTIg TTe IO suoTaTsodsip eun SUEAta TATHUOPUOT 0n BfTm 3 ITOruRudod--yoog aeqoH To moIJ node e (B\ punot 1TRO S UTeIdo aun Up DTB 0 dtus an pepinoa suEmTAD aut -uao RTpUI run tUp dtus odsun.n USTTg a us autemans treuaane 'IEM run neranne ueden auoren Amadous seansotostp BUTMOTTor eun amem neaTi waunos yonrdead IS.0 eu TO TOOTTO Tens e ueUm TrusPY dtusent aun LO JaruiD B pepuanaB eu (611100 UT get shes TyesouTUS BleTeW setitataoe esrnotdse OIM nente010o auto auo SEM OUM TyesouTuS IO uotasouuenut aun LIO pesed SI I adodruts MOII panteoeu yoTum atode.t aun anoqe atqoN uuor 0n exods I 19 63 to resort to war in the event of an attack on French Indo-China or Siam. (3) Hongkong would be abandoned Dut would continue to resist as long as possibie. (4) II the operations asainst the Italians in the Med. should proceed rapidly anu suecessrully it would be pos3lbhe to sent sencatheet theet to the F-E. (5) Operations must be Econaucted Jointly with N.E.I. (6/ Since Lt waS probable that the Japs would occupy puva lhithe Fiji Is. as a base, one brigaue musit be sent there from N.Z. I saw roger Fleetwood-hesketh at the club touay.l He tis writing a memo ont reception during the battle of Normandy based on the translations of the intelliberce reports o1 the OKH and OKW and Ol Joule papers and Jodli interrogatior by Cutnbert Fieetwood Hesketh. While his enguiries are by no means complete they are already providing evirencel to show that the Germans conducted the battle of Normandy on the basis of the report of Garbo ana Brutus. It is significant tha there is no mention at all of the use of Y.material. Ineidentaliy it is connirmed Iro other xeuurces, which indicate that monitor- ing was in a state of complete coniusion at the time. Jodl realised that something had gone wrong and that the staff had made a miscalculation about the possibility of attack in the Pas de Calais. He said however that the Germans regarded the presence of So many units which they berleved bOrwe Pattons Army in the B.E. of England as an almost certain indication that the briage- head was only a blind. Asked when he Linst came to the conelusion that an attack in the Pas de Calais had peer awanuoned he said that it was when units of Fattants Army began to appear in the briigeheaa. at that stage he urged strongly that the 15th Corps L should be brought uowa 1romn the north to the bridgehead. A long struggle ensued lasting more than a fortnignt with Hitier over this point. As usual Hitler won and no effective move was made until 4-5 weens after the abtaek on Normandy had starbeu January 1th I had a talk with Kirby green who is leav neuv in about 2 weais time Tor the Caribbeam. I gave him as good a picture as I couiu OI the various inteltiga nce bouies in the USA cllu in particular the FBI. Whie he shoutu carvaimiy see Peter Dwyor and Dtephen- son if he is sUl there, he shoud avoid if possible going to tha IBI unuer thein auspices, as t is would rormediy ao him IIO good. Dick has telegrapheu sugoes ting thut the transfer of SIME should he postpone 1or 6 months owing to the difficulties of getting militar personnel to fill the gaps. DG was inelined te agree with this We pointed out however that this was a situation which we had always envisased. We never thought ot providing SIME with mone than 5 6 officers one of whom would be the head. For the rest we shoulu have DO rely on military personnel. It seemed therelore that there was ho object in postponing the diseussions. After some difficulty we got the DG to agree to our drafting a telegram on these lines. T talked to TAR about the possibility of his going to D-Division and taking the wireless outiit with him. He Seemed quite reaay to do a job with U.. but Was litte doubtful about taking the wireless teain,which he felt was more Suitable in D.Division. 6S I pointed out TO him that the mechanics was really a security matter whereas the Y.prouu of RSS were a B.division matter. It seemed me therefore that he coulu quite logically t. B.JE with him. Curry is rearing the completion of his work. The sections of the office have given him million words which he has reuucea roughly 120,000. I impressed upor him that it was importan that he hour have this document ready for the new DG which was the only one on the office which he oughe to read. The DGS OWM memo should be burned, Hankey' report is quite useless and Find- later Stewart in So far as the work of the office is concerned, giyes a TspmpwhatOPY inadequate picture. ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED DEPARTMENIT UNDER SECTION January othOF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 C Of Allen brought down whohas tue beer demobilised from the Mid East. He was Secretary to the Kellar tells me that he is a bit of a snake. He was at one time a stooge of R.J.s but has since turned aganst him. Te is however intellligent. I asked him Dout the transfer O1 SIME to ourselves. He seemed to think that it was quite logical and sensible and he was quite sure that as long as Paget was there air would be well. Douglas Roberts was apparertiy persora gratissima with the GOC. Douglas is a, parent ly trying to avoid being a member of the JIC on the grounds that the JICare not initiated into OATS and that this frequently puts him in an awkwand position. I Said that in this I thought Douglas was deiiniteiy wrong. He certainly should be a member ol the JIC and it he saw them going wrong From lack 01 knowledge he shoula get the position rectilie through the G.0.C. .who could quite easily say that there wene certain matters on which he was not authorised to Speak. GOC I gather rather regarus SIME as his special pensonal Gestapo This Causes light irri- tation among the two other C in Cs. Kellar tells me however that they nave not been put into the full picture. the AOC is Charles Meuhurst. There is no acupt that the Air Ministry consiuer that they have a 3370 sha in SIME and that they are only waiting for certain areas in the Mid East to go over to the Air Force Command to claim the organis -tion or pants of it as their own. This seems to me to De the wrong conception. SIME should be a totally integrated body. If the. Air Force can produce better intelli- gence officers there is no reason why it Should not provide up to 90)o. the fact is that whenever they have been asked in the past to supplly an officer they have always regretted that they were not in a position to do so. This is mainly aue to the fact that they have never had an I.B staff and tha their personnel are therefore ungualilied. January 17th Peter Hope came to talk to me about KRAUS, who is wanted by the French authorities. I said that ultimately it is a matter Ior the Control Commission. II however he wrote us a letter I would pass it on to Tonnie Haylor He told me ircidentally that Raymond Lee has FoW desertea Mrs.Lee and is Going round eithe with KRAUSIS wife or another daughter Of Mrs. Reginald Felllowes. All 3 daughters of the latter are now in troublle with the French authorities For coraooration. At the staff meeting today I said that I felt (7 it was important that the stafling 01 one division should not be considered except in its relation to the whole Office. I had a List of a Considerable number oi candidates, some of whom had been empioyeu by us throughout- the war who were arious to return, and could taire a Jco in an division. It would be a pity the vIlice gou Tilleu up with naw people ana-the the others missbeu their chance. I gave the neting an esti- Thate O1 probable rayuirenents in the F.E. I talked to Cussen about the case of ZIGZAU. There is apparertiy an MS of a book HIOW in possession ol Victor Gowlancz which has been referred to Bellinger M.P. and Aneurin Bevan. Cussen will take steps to lind out the position and 1f possible to stop publication. Haylor spoke LO me about COLUMBINE. He woulld I think mane alother effort LO get C.into the police if the PID you in the Miu EasE IS longer open. John Irvine is comiiig home OIT teave arra is anxious to see me. Ronnie would like some female staf1 irom the War Hoom ii there are any availabie.. Halor mentioned alse that e had spoken to Malcolm Cumming about the C.1.1ab. Haylor thinks that the work could be done by reference home and that thare is no longer any Justification for a Lab.in Germany', Malcom I gather Ieeis that i1 a search is corruueted it is necessary to have someone on the spot Wao imnows what he is looking 1o1. T spoke apout Robbi Mendeussohn ana his mother. Ronnie will give Briat Metane another dig and il I let him have particulars about the mother he WiIl see what can be one. 6 I had H talk with TAR,Sclater and Hughes about the future of RSS. We agreed thut it would be a goou thing to have a discussion vith Walter scout anu made clear DO nim exactly what our requirements are. It is a remark- able thing that 5o many changes in regard to RSS have been going on and that C. has hever said a word about it to the DG.who is after all a co-partner in the organisation. This orly shows how necessary it is lor LO have a representative on the Sigint Board. Cecil and I dined with MeKanna ana a man called Kerr who is in the Contracts Branch of the Ministry Ol Deferee. The evening was extremely pleasant and frank. Both are over here at the moment in connection vith the purchase OI ships lor the Eire Navy which will consist o1 a couple of o1a corvettes and a few motor-boats. They are also looking for an -Lt.Commander who has had a ship during the war who will become the Aamiral of the lrish fleet: It is essential however that he should be at least of rish extraction if not am mine resident. McKenna is also working on getting permission for the representatives of the wire Army to attend staff courses over hereand in general to get the whole Eire Armed forces equipment and training on the same basis aS our own. He envisages that in the ong run a settlement wil be reached and he thinks that il hecould lay the foundations DOW Eire will ve able to dovetail into our operational machine. He is uesperately ankious that the liaison with ourseves shall continue indet- initelly on the present friendly anu Coropera- tive basis.. Pensoradiy I think that he is entinedy genuine. We said that 11 there was anything we could do to neip him by putting in a word we would certainly No So. 67 January l8th Burt came in to talk to me alout the amnounce- ment in the press today of the secret appoint- ment o1 Air Percu wimhitoer to work under the Chiels of Staii. He prasumeu that this meant that he was going to be our naw heau. I tour h him hatthis was SO. He said Hot he was disappointed that it was not to be me. Harker asked me to put up a note LO the DG about the distribution of JoIs report. I said that I thought it only ought to 80 to ot 5 people at the outside and that they shoula return their copies when read. Otherwise we might be in Serious trouoe with C. whose sources might be compromised. Kellar has been offered permanent employment here. He wili T think tay although he might make more money elsewhere. Alley,R Rhodes anu Corin came to talk to me about mindhoven. The real trouute is that inchoven has promised his P.M. to built a C.I. onganisation. I1 therefore he does not ae on with the trainig of his men he wili be in trouble and force UO apply to 055. He would much prefer LO send his mer here. We sketched out a programme which I think should Keep them occupied 1or 2-3 Weeks. The DG aslsed mne to consider the future of fussian espionage. He is apparently relugtant te Lirk up r and 5 Division. I Sand that I thought it WIIS uiiticult to sevarace ussian espionage from the UPGB be that would gi a the matter further thought and iet him have a note. T0 Januany 190n The Control Commission have at Last tound a Jot for Padgham. I or nope the we shati not have the same iasco as witn Columbine. I have wriitten to Fornie saying thut they really ousht UO Give C.. a Co with the police without his being Toreed to go. through the rankes. Cecdil and I dined again last nicht with MCKena and Kerr. McKenna was particurariy forthcoming and we talked a Lotri ab ut the value of our personal relations how lor example the question of the wireless set in the Legation had been stated aiter Mckennat, conversation with Cecil in Dublin. lcrerna nad gore the following morning to Dev and had succeeded in persuauing him of the urgen- cy and importance of the whoe matter. oKenna said that although Dev deviated from Right to Left in coming up to: the point, once he had made up his mind he Stick to It. This of course had both advantages and disadvane tages. McKerna Iirmiy believed bit Dev had kept his work when ne said he woulit not let Iretind become a base tor operations against England. He liad in fact been constan 1y nagging at the Ministry O beserice on this very point in order LO be quite Sure that every thing was being one to sareguara the position Mckerna then gaid that there wene or course many people both in ovtcireies and outside them Who ii they mew that we were discussing maseens so Iralkly andreely in his room at the wumberland Hopell, woulld murk h him down as a traitor to the Pish cause. It was an untortunate thing that Dev aid not come down more firmly on peop.le of this sort. McKenna beieved that iu was now Devis ofTiciall policy to co-operate wit th this countr. aru to get Elrel dererices forces on a common basis 71 with ours. He was quite Certatir: that i the partition i5sue co be sG1veu was would be prepared to enter into derensivel alliance giving Ls in the event WaTY Inee ac0ess He the Irish ports and ailriielus. The ailiculty here OI course is that we should never HTOW Fire weula see ejet ee with LS about going to anparticuariy i1 She was not even wlthiin the British Commonwealth On hationa. Mckenna Iudy realises the dorence- Or Eire was bound up with that of this country alu that ha we Not hau the north during the war we should have been suTLi, He argues however that it woud have been much inetter if there had been ne partition issue when not oriy woullut we have had the north but the ports in the south as well. This would L firly believe be all right in MCKere had been at the head Oi the State but who is to know wh t Deviis suecessor might do. MCKenma was very insistelt about the maintenance o1 an unoilicial liaison between ourselves and the Ministry OL Deence. He said that at all costs it IuSst continue on the present lntimate and personari basis. He himsali might not be in position very much onger as he was due retire,but hae ciu not see why this should prejudiee our good reabiors. He said that i1 ad any time vecill ana I ware in Ireland and WOullu hike te have r of the recond meeting along with Dev he would be very preased to arrange it. Januany 21st I talked to Allley and Corin about Einchover oIfcers! visit to which the DG has now green Dick arrived bacit yesterday alter a successful tour. He is iuli o1 inormatior about near and far east but veny despondant about the new DO which he feels is a real disaster. 12 Jaruary 22nu The 1.0. have asneu us For motes on various Polish organisations here and in Italy. This is or account OI the arrest ol a number or people in Poand whose thiai may resuit ir accusations being made against this country and possibly against S I.S. or 8.0.E. There may be suggestions that we have beer fostening activities against the Polish Govt. We hav said that ir ana when such accusations are made we may be are to give urther particu- Tarse This is exactly what I expected would happen and Oniy shows how necessary it is to be in a position to give the Facts resaruine either pro- or anti-Lublin Poles. Cimperman came to talk LO me at my request about the vetting O1 immigrants to the USA. He said that he hau been approached by the Embassy some time aso to arrange the necessary Clearance here. He had turned tais owI Es he was only concerned with visas gruted in spite OI an aavense record. This sometimes happeneu when people iie PLearor nooseveit weighed ir He woud be grateril therefore il we could iet him have a copy 01 any adverse pepont. He would then checii the matter up with the Visa Dept. anu in nacessary notil the FBI. Burt came to talk to me about the late of his officer. said that I was not sure whether or their ceasing to hola commissions they were not eligible Tor 56 das leave with full pay. This would act as a kinu of bonus il they returned immediately to the Laru ana would undouptealy be very acceptable. Burt Left that al1 his officers whether in uniform or not ought to get similar treatment. I have spoken to Charles about this. He is going into the 73 matter ana realises the importance o1 going Burt's people well. Teresa tells me that one of the people in the Jack case wants to muruer his old mother agea 83 who is taking exception to Fascist meetings in her house. He realises that she could get him and his brother in law into serious toouble. The Dept. took the view tht they did not believe in murder since it old undoubtedly react unravourably on the organisatior as a whole. This seems to me to be the right attitude and I doubt whether anything further need be done. I tola Teresa however to have a work with Burt. I saw Russell who is just back from Ceylon. I told him that SIFE was now on its 1egsy that the DSO points at Singapore,Burm and Hong Kong had been set up, ald that I Felt it was a pity that therewas not some link with Ceylon. He seemed a little astonished that SIFE had really come into being and blamed the position in Ceyton on the Governor. Personally I think that he rather encouraged the Governor to haui down the Iag, although there is no doubt that the latter was an extremely timid person, terrified OI having thing to do with Intelligence. I explained Russell that it might weil De necessary for us to know something of what is going on in Ceylon just as much as we may have to have some link with Malta even when the countr obtained its independance. It will not of course be possible to have a full-blown DSO but there are many other covers in which we can have representation. Though Russell is intelligent I do not think that he has much imagination. ORIGINALILL LULCLMENT RETAINED IN DEPABTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 DGC0 7u came bo see me. He warted to keep Klop until the ena of the first week in Feb. KLop has apparently been doing extremely useful work. I asked il he had seen the recent report on the PIAT and PESCATORI interrogations which give in considerable detail the low-down on the British,anerican,l'rench,polish,Dutch,lussia Ozech,German,Italiar and Swiss Secret Services, during the war. One would hava thought that being or leave this would be the one report that Section V would have wished to uiscuss with him. Nobody had even mentionea it. I tola him that we were parti ularly interested in the activities of the Russian S.S. which ware related to the Rote- kapelle orgaisation and also to the CORBY case in Caraua. I arrange with him to have a talk to Gwyer, who is writing up the whole OI the Roterapelle. This 01 course should really be a Job 1or SIS but I have never beer able to discover that anyone is taring an interest ir following up anl the various Lear which started from the KOPKOW case. January 2rd I had a talk with Hollis ana Burt about possible action against MAY. Byrnes and Be talked over the matter wi.th the Canadians here and the finall decision ITOW rests with McKenzie King. The proposal is to set up a Royal Commission in Canada which alter exam- ining CORBY, will detain and interrogate all others, including CP. members OI Parlia- ment. We discussed whether it would be betti to interrogate MAY before the public announce ment of the Royal Commission or alterwarus. I said that I thought it woulu be preferaple to do so after the public amouncement as the circumstances o1 our approach woul then appear more natural. Burt would assume that 75 MAY was a loyal citizen anxious to assist us in any way in the enquiry. Briscoe and Cumming brought Besley of the Lab.in the British zone to see me The decision is that Ro nie Haylor thinks that there is no onger any necessity to have a Lab in Germany. He reasons that as the underground movement never got going and So fan has shown no signs of doing it is a waste of money to keep the Lab.in being. Besley thinks on the other hand that here ht might be a considerable amount of work Lor the Lad in examining false passports etc. and personal es ects, but that in Tact these articles never come his way. Haylor thinks that such matters could be aaquately dealt with by sending them home. I got Diek in to give h S views. He Said that he thought we should have to accept Haylorte view that from the point 01 view ol the BAOR thare was really no Justilieation for tho continuation of the Lab. on the other hana From an MIS point o1 view we were andous to get right up to date o any S/W or other uevices use by the Germanse There were eeariy a1 number of technicians in this line UL Dusinebs who hau never been interrogatea. This Should be done by Besley oP some other suitable person oing out From this country as a represen- tative O1 MI5. such an ollicer would carry more weight and be more likely to get the required information. We discussed the future oi RSS (Selater,Walt Scott,TAR,Dich,Hughes and myseli). scott said that RSS from the engineering ana Y. point of view would be coming under the Sigint Board. He would ony be concerned to some extent with i.ts activities abroad. He suggested therefore as a result of a talk that he had had with Travis that we Should vb get into direct touch with Travise I explain- ed to Scott exactly what our requirements were. He was a little incuineu at First to thir that representation on the Sigint Board would not do uS ouch good, but he rather revised his view Later in the discussion, although he thought that clearly we should be a lle to get all we wantea if we had direct liaison with Travis. I salu that it was just the difference of getting a thing by kindness and getting it as a right. We had suffered so much in the past from Ii relying on rindness that I felt in a way that it was preferable to get the constitutional position properly established. If we were not members of the Sigint Board we could have no authoritative say in the allocation of Sigint resources.. We haa very aefirite requirements anu there must be some machinery in future thererone through which we could state our claims. rang me up later in the evening. He haa evidently heara from Travis that Walter Seott was coming to see me. He said that he rather oubted whether I was talking to the right person. I said that I had realised this from the diseussion and that I was intending to get into direct touch with Travis. C. entirely agreeu with this course. I took the op ortunity o1 explaining to him once more what our requirements were He Seemed to agree that they were legitimate requirements ana shoula be met. The Finclater Stewart report suggeste that we should be represented on the Sigint Board. C.while not demurring personaiy,saia that he would have to refer the matter to the Board. He still left that it we had the opportunity o1 presenting our case it should be suIlicient Tor our requirements. I doubt therefore whether he will put our case very strongy to the Board. He said that he had previously put up Cavendish-Bentinck to 77 represent the F.0. but that the Board as a whole had turneu this down. I think however that we differ from the FO in that we are not solely concerned with Y products but with the general set-up It is difricult of course to say what we should get out of the membership of the Sigint Board without knowing more about Sigintis work and the kind of problems which e brought before it. Wibroe has returned from Denmark and is being demobilised. He is rather worried about the situ tion there. He says that the higher collaborators seem to be getting away with it and returning to their big business activities unmolested whereas a certain number of the junior collaborators are being prosecutea. The young resistance workers are antagonistic to the present Govt. and favour Collaboration with Britain. The present Govt. however is somewhat subservierit to Russia. It is stiill expeetau that the Rusians will go out of Bornholm when the British leave Dermark, but this is hy ANOOPY means certain. ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAIN IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIO Januar 240h1 OF THE PUBLIC RECORD ACT 1958 DEc 2009 Horrods, dam, Byrde, ane F discussed the vetiting OI American immigration. I toid them about my conversation wit Cimper- man. Horrocks said that as long as we made a proviso that if the numbers increased greatly the Americans would have to diserim- inate, he could tackile the problem. He was at the moment bang up to date on his carding. He did not of course mention the fact that a great deall of cardirg that he had undertaken on behalf o1 the War Room had never been done'. It was therefone arranged that cortacit should De mad with Win Sosltt wino Woliie dauul with Ali immigraciga visa tuestinli witi vivisi As regards any othap mactert he wouia real with Vesey. I have circulateu a rote to this effect to all corcernau. I saw ol.Bourne. He was formerly heaa oi the ohanghai Police, but would himself in Canada on leave at the outprear O1 war. Having his leave pay orly he decided to join up and got posted to Security Co-Oruination where he did a JoD for Cornop Guthriels section in Washington. Evertulid he o0t ser to Indin by SOE whene he helped tham to wOIS up some sort of organisation in China to onerate ain3t the Jaos. TI. hin owr wore II dont know whether I did much good but I think I probably saved them From spenuing a lot of money. He said that generally speaking D.I.B. were so much concerned with the ongress Party and internal politics that they gave little thought to the activit: of the Chinese. He spore to DIB apout the Chinese gambling houses. DIB took the view that all Chinese gambled anu that there was nothing UO be done. Bourne pointed out however that this was exactly how banuit armies were starteu. They began by having guarus to LOOK after gambling houses and then some potartial Warloru gOu control oi all these guards ana started to run various raCaets. Ultimately hepecame extreme rich and a great power in the and. Bourne had seen this happen in -hanghai over ana over again. In his view the only thing to ac was to nip it in the bud. To do So DIB needed Chinese inlormants. The Fact is that Civil Servants in India are So uishearteneu by the general trend of things that they are not bothering very much, alt though if DIB are to survive they could seil themselves much better to any Indian Govt. if they had 79 knowledge of attempts at pene tration Dy the Chinesethan ii their knowleuge was merely coniinea to Thula organisations. I thought that Bourne misht be extremaiy valuable to 1s as a Chinese aaviser ad SIFE. He wants to WoK For another 2-5 years amu though ha would pe prepareu to go to inga- pore he would prefer to be in the uollar area as he has his boys at school in Canada and will be keeping them ther'e until thay have complete their education. Harker told me that he haa discovered that the recent release in the press about Hhillito had been put out by the Miniisory of Intorma- tion, on whose instructions he did not know Januany 25th I had a long talk with Curry about reorgan- isation and the suggestion that T might possibly be DDG. I Said that normally I felt that such an appointment was unrecessary, but in view O1 the present circumstances it might be thought that T could be ol moreuse if I had some jurisaiction over other vivis: ions. I asked Curry if he would define the charter of DDG Since my view was that it was important that ii the appointment existed it shoud not be a backwater. II it were ofrereu to me I should neluse it unless I had very positive terms of Teierence. Dick,Hollis anu I had a talk about reorgan- isation and personnel. We began by trying to reach some estimate o1 tha number of vacaneies which existed. When we have Iinaliy established this point we shat consider the names that we have Or our index. Sdoana going back to rague and he thinks 6o that the communists wil not obtain more than 20% of the votes in the coming election anu that as a result many CP members at present im Govt.Depts. wibt lose they JoDs. The warmth af Feeling for Aussia has cooled very considerably and there is a toruancy again to ook towarus- the west. The present head of the Seconu Dept. is a ol.Hanus. He was in the Resistanc during use waTe He is a nice mar but rather weak in character. In London bloane said that 9ol Foot or Sol.Krcek would Look after our needs. These people were under the Ministry of the Interior and were attached to the Empassy. They vereaccoraing to bloane, chieily concerned with representation guestions anu their work would be something in the nature O1 Passport Control. SLoane did not say SO but undoubtedly they will also continue Some of their activities in connection with the Czech intrigues in this country. Czechs are ho ing to develp fairly substantially a representation oi Czechs from all parts of the wonla, in order to make good part of the lossess resulting from expatriation of the Dudeten population. Sloane hopes that U.35 will come out to Prague but on the whole thinks that his Visit might be more profitable alter the eleetions. The amalgamation of SIS and SOE took effect from the 15th. SOE now come under the command ol C. The renegade section have TIOW tried and convicted 22 Service men. Meanwnile large: numbens of other cases have bean submitted to the JAG anu a corsiderable number are under investigation. Strangin reporting OIE Visiit to Miitary 8( Government detachmenta in the British zone says tIt was a sound impulse that moveu the boys of the 7th Armoured Division wher their team was hard-pressed by the Russians in a football gamerin Berlin to shout in encourage- ment come on,eivilisationm" Strang was evidently bery impressea by tae hard con seientious work being done by the Military Government. The Potsdam policyi is as yet Far 1 rom fulfilment.. The Freneh have uemanded the separation of the Rhineland and West- phalia from Germany and resisted the estab- lishment of centrall German depts. The Russians whole paying lip service to itare Claiming all the aavantages it confers upon them, representations, the right to a say in the alfaios of the western 2one as well as their ow, ete., but still decline to raise the bartier that stanas between their zone and the nest O1 Germany, andgo their own way in their own zone mome freely than others cio. +he Americans though their representatives in Germany paraue their uevotion UO the Potsuam princip.les in and out of season, some of them have little thought but to discharge themselves as Soon as possible 01 their responsibilities in Germany. We ourselves are maintaining Potsdam policy Dut are imbuea with the 1orm of zonal particularisation which is ppparently peculiar to ourselves. The next para.follows on From page 60). Brede claims that he had no knowledge of the W/T organisation in Hussia and auds th t Kander himself appeareu only to have a very scanty knowledge o1 this part of the organ- isatdon. He and Lang were ghiefly eoneerned in establishing and maintaining contact with the Russian W/T agents. traffic started in 62 the summer oi 1941 and was particularly satisfactory from the aucumn 11941 to Jan. 1943. Brede is convinced that the link passed through Turkey. He does not know whether the Russian Empassy in Istanoul played any part in ite the Max reports provideu very detailed and also very accurate information about the order O1 battle of the Russian armies and their communications. Fremdeheere Ost considered the reports very good and required tem to be passed daily from Vienna by W/T. Even when the reports dealt with Russian intentions anu were sometimes doubted, they were nearly always confirmed by subsequent events. Lange was also in contact with some Russian emigre in Belgrade about whom Brede knows no detaiis Lange also new Gen.urkul, a Fussian emigre living in Rome. Neither the emnigres in Belgrade nor Turkul had anything to do with the Max organisation. Kander lonew the mpanish Ambassador in Tunkey,hameu Pratt. He took Or a young mpaniard who acted as one of nandert. agents it the capacit 01 a Press Attache. Kanuer was in W/T communi- Cation wi th the Spanish anu the link hau the cover name Moritz. Breue Deieves that it was estaplisheu early in 1942. Up DO Jan. 1943 it prouuced nothing 01 value. The Spanish had been trained Dy Nanaer at poria. Kander was a non-Aryan, the son oi an emig re officer of the former Austro- Hungarian Army. His mother liveu in Vienna thut moveu to Budapest later. She had previously twice been arrested py the Gestapo in Vienna in spite of eveny ellort by the Abwehr to protect her. Hander had contacts in Sofia wiith the Bulgarian police and in udapest with the Hungarian Intelligerce Service. He was also in possession of a Hungarian passport. g3 The interrogation o1 utCol.Muller, Formerly Letter T.G. 01 the Abwehr, has led to the discovery of the German use o1 two very high grade methods of secret writing involv- ing radio-active material. He described very fully indeed a seeret photographic method of communieation evolved by tha vermans just before their collapse. He regalaed it as ona which afonded Very high security. We had no previous Erowleuge Ol the enemyis use oi this process MulLer has aso giver us information about apparatus for long-distance photography. Under interrogation Rundsteat said, a propos of the Nopmaray ronding, that the Navy had always Said thet it Wars uriouy that we could land on the Deaches.o on which we actual we acuuaiy did Tanu. ine Navy awad main tained that such a lanuing couu or he made at high tide ama tat even then we coulu net get across the reeis and TOCIS. In actual Lact of course we Landeu at Low time alid useu the TOCIS as covar against lire from the lanu. When asneu that you ary wetinite grounus lor believing that invasion would also pe made in the north, Iundsteut repied "Yes, in the first place Inom tactical stra- tegical considerations. say I will land here, wait until they get aI their forces nere and then land at the other place. And as you know the faurching ramps of nose V weapons were in the Beigian arear Kopkow in commenting O1 the use OI DAS says that the finst pperablonsor buhed WE agerte with Russia started in 1942 alter having an: agents message decpnered which mentioned the name chuloze-bozen. this ecyphering was the first sign and the start of the inves- tigation which led to the rouraing up O1 cu the biggest Russian espionage orgaisacionn in GlermanyBelgiun and France. The Soviet Intelligence Service haa left transmittin sets with a number of Beruin agents through the channels 01 the poviet Embassy in Berlin on the outbreak of war in the summer Ol 1941. 7 transmit ting stations weme aiseovereu in Berlin itself. Schultzeboyzen was paid lor his treachery but nis main motive was a strong Leaning towards Boisheviism. there was haraiy any out. oIlice without some employee reauy to co-operate all give information. About 100 arresit: ware made almost exelusively in Berlir. The depth of Poviet infadtratiois Coudla be bhan- il the Case of an administrative inspeotor al the Air Ministry who save away to an intermediary the most secret documents 01 which ory a few copies existed, concerning tine strength o1 the LueWalte: and the rising production output figures. Ever in the OKW alla OKM waste ifilcers to be Lour who wene reauy to co-operate OuD 01 iuealistie metives. The Poviet ntlligence Service was for a Lomi time undar the impression that the whole organisatior was intact. they were inuuceu to arop a number o1 parachute agerrts in Brandenburg who were caught and turned round. This took place some time in 1943. The Germans were also abe to discover a number of oviet Intelligence agents who had been lett behind in Germany since 1941. Kopkow relates the story o1 a uerman colonel. who had been trained by the Poviet Intelligence Service and put through the lines anu gave himseli up to his own countryiaer He was subseuently played back as E double. This man had quite a lot to uo with en-Ivanov 01 the NAWD. Ivanov and other hith officers of the NKWD openly expressed their strong diisdike of England and in various convarsa- SS tions had repeatedly pointed out that with the collapse of Germany the war in Europe was py no means finished. The next phase would be that the boviet Undon would tare the leading position in Spain which Germany had prevented in 1936-37. Ivanov went on LO say that the pineers would close as a resut OI this development in the Mediterranean. Speaking of the penetration ot the "nglo- American Intelligerice Services through BBO messages Kopkow states that these messages were fora long time a complete mystery to the GIS. The finst big penetration into this s.ystem was accomplisheu by the ri. 1.Q. of the Cin C. bipo at Paris who had captured a number O1 English agents in northern Frarce belonging to the so-Callllea French seetion movement. Through them the Siipo was able to get a rough idea from these messages which ones belonged to the French section and those belonging to a section till unknown. As resarus the date o1 invasion these agents said that there were two or three phases which woulu be indicated by BBC messages. In the first phase Sabotage anu in particular the lestruetion of commundeations was to take place. In the Second phase there were to De acts O1 violenc against individuals especialy against the Sipo. When the thind phase was sipnalled invasion could be expected in 24-48 hours, and that was the signal lor all the Resis- tance Movements to go into aetion. The above described phases vere bic eu up by radiolat the beginning of June 1944. Koprow remembers definitely that on the 5th June towards 1900 hours the news came in 1rom Panis that according to the BBC messages the anglo- American invasion was to De expected in the next few hayss In actual 1acc the attack started shortiy arter micnight on the 6th. Kopkow WOuu like to emphasise that the MOT nettse pau HTQARH neug sn PTOn eH epeAoTsouaZ on Sutuanger ST OUM auPots on auutr 0Ap9 T put atqon uyo thauno OTa 1160 MBnueT turpu to passed ueag TuTAeu ueuapnf Lue TO MOUY ou seon MoNdoy nq Tepateur qunoo 32 arotaqques SEM eH pepaepans anau STUA and punog peuune ag PTo9 au teua padou SBM IT Ienarsupun B TO yossessod U! SEM STo3 SH rupede Pe spud PIA puetaurt on peunged meu au $1OTs8DDO snoTAaud OAT aun uO DUE Atremad onup uoTsstt pupun S Stuoy SEM stua qeun TO0T aug S8M as8o aua Suun qurnodut gsou eu suorssTu efpuordse PuB asoqes HO Atpeapeda us urea Due Out "Epuoy any pequem oun ea of urpu peaoad s.teded eSTBI pessessod on "BTpTOS-ST TO uotnottatepp aud Anauaa waeunos UE aeqtoq eouenst-auor USoTaug MIOT peddoup urean SUTAEH were paseue uean neu Tamtos temureg e neun pentodea ple eu eset sunuou Aueu os ION upedg BTA pueTSta on euoe peu DINON 32u9 uorotdsns 12 SEM euaug amta gun IV raansoa yomatd -usttiedo aug TIO room tup pimoT SEM Hotel esoum Teveser urea peu OUM HaNocOHH DINON ony Tatatesieqo umten SEM uewute STUA 1ug peuoeai SRA uoTsntotoa BUL reeg pawoo B out pareptos "syooqhed aupeuuem BJEM sapefao go eseug osfuotv 116T TO utmane aug mnoae step Takes aaun meg peu OLM ueur arjamam on gutuoteq punoI euaM s0ofqo ginqueH LIT Tenou HIE HTu shes eH otaseaue Os sn on pauees Mons esoum DNINSOY uese HOS aua mnoqe POMTPUF aua saAta MONdoy peuyiago S1M Hutunou Sramntosqe "que.odut Brou ueeg pAeU euepmnomyopum pmnom your 3021B eun 1o na9aen upeu eun spanhe. SE na stotssTsua OHH aseua paurenqo SEM yoegte out TO eqep Tennueae oy s the Ministry of the Interior ana had gone over to the military counter-intelligence though in what capacity he did not know. He imagined that Bartik had found his communist surroundings rather uncongenal. I asked ploane whether in his view the Russians would have come in in 1938 in suppor of Czechoslovakia, as I had Often heard it Saia that they hau their aeroplales on Czech Rerodromes. I hau in mind a statement to chis effect that had bea maue to me by Winant early in the war. Dloane said that he was quite certain that they woula not have come in. the Czechs new that the nussian rearmamert programme would not be complete untill 1941 and in any case any assistance was conditional upon the Frerch assistance which had been categorically refused. The talk about Russian ssistance and hussian plans of which there were two or three for show purposes, was entirely bluff. Sloane seemed to think that Czechoslovaiia was now looking more towards the west than the east. What had made a great impression was the return of the Czech Air Force which had been integrated with the RAF. They came back with Spitfires and Mosquitos and hancasters in considerable mbers, whereas with the Czech Legion which nad been fighting on the Russian front they had only a few out of date tanks and Stormo- viks. Sloane thinks that the withdrawal of the really vell-disciplined troops and their substitution by rifr-raff from outlying parts of the USSR may well be due to the fact that the Iussians need their well-disciplined troops at home and do not wish them to be corrupted by bourgeois life. He thinks that it will tiae the Russians a very long time to get on their Feet anu that meanwhile they will play a heavy same of fLurr. fo S.S.U. have row written to us that the rational intebligence authority in the USA consists O1 Aumiraly Leahy as the persored. representativ O1 Truman,who wiit act with Secretary O1 State, By mnesgsecretary Ol waT: Robert Pattenson, and Secretary o1 Navy James Forrestal. Rear Admiral biuney W. Souers former deputy uinector OI Naval Intelligerce, has baer appointed by the President Of the Celtred Intallisenc Agency. Details or the structure anu Fey personrei have rot yeu been received. The exact role OI X2 branch is unowai. Howe a cable has beal receiveu stating that they are to continue their preserit work ald that their organisation would be a key one in the newly established C.I.A. January 50th The D.G. saw Jimmie Dickson and myself. He congratulated Dickson on his report and the work that he has done during the war. He thought that it shoula continue. He lelt it was important to have a few extremely good agents. He did not see however that each Haines came to say goodbye to me. I congratu lated him on his work and explained to him on the basi: o1 Roger Fleetwoou-Hesketh' enquiries what an immensely important part D had played in the operations on the second Front. Haines was oi course 0arbo's wirele operator.Inciueutaaly he learneu both wirete and Spanish uuring The COUTHS ment with us. ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Dc20a 89 Burt came to tell me that he aru his officers were required back at the end of February. "heir work by then should be completed. It seems clearly delinite that Burt. will tave over Canning' job at the end of Feb.or thereapouts. Bromiey rang up to know whether Alley's ort on Polish organisations coulugo vendish-Bentinck. leshas been tola that we will let him have an expurgated edition. C. rang up to say that he would like me to talk to absence about RSS anu our nuture requirements. Patterson came to see me about his future. I gave him as good a picture as could about the opportunities that might exist in this office. He is I think a little worried aboutthe pay. January 3ist all came to see me Irom CSDIC bringing a Letter from Stephens. Two Swiss C.I. Officers named MAURER have been interrogating a Ge in called HUEGEL. They were well enter- tained and seemed pleased with their visit. They offered in return to supply information about Russians. Stephens wanted to know what ne was to saye After consultation with-kim and with Honnie Hay.lor who was a little annoyed that the request had not come through 1im, it was arrangeu that Stephens should thank the Swiss for their offer and say that he was interesteu to see copies Of the Interrogation reports on vote Drei, a poviet rganisation which was rounded up in Switzer- Land during the war. A little later a Iurthel visit could be arranged for these C.I. oflicer 0O interrogate some other GIS character,wher 9o it would be hoped that they would perhaps bring the reports with them. This arrarge- ment has the approval o1 Philby, who Said th was in touch with BALSINGEE the MAURERIE chief. The latter had appurently made the same ofiens in Switzer- lund but nothing vary much hau beer iorth- coming, and their upprouches were not encour aged by BALSINGER. Philipy thirues thereon it would be better to keep the lines Clear. He appreciates the last chat CSDIC have probauly got better bargaining countens than Rornie whom I have seen, is going once mote to stoke up Bria Melland aout Robui Mewuel- ssohn. He himself will be leaving il about 5 weeks time. Bill Wil.iams will tace over for about 6 weerls and may thereafter be succeeded by Jimmy Way. In the British zo16 things are advancing fairly rapidly ard more and more of the German: are being mate to run their own show under British supervision There is however a certain tenaency to try and impose decertralisation and democracy Ou. our own kind upon them. Whether the Germans would be able to tae this or not is another matter. The police lor examp are being organised rather OI the lines OJ our C.C.S THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE RUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DEC 0oo9 Bill Younger came UU O0C PEABODY who has ma rriau a Brenchman. DoCh have Deer tour to leave the couritr.i by the 9l H.0. I told him that if he Fhie ma tha necessary particulars I wou. ouitHISes CueYe WES ythirg to be one DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION February lst 3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Dec 2009 I saw John Marriottis brother-in-taw Sarmon. He Seems a nice straight Iellow but has TO other particular qualifications I Said that we would certuinly consider him. T and I werit to see at C1s rquest. I left with him a memo showing exactly what our requirements ware il respect oi the WOrK formery carried out by RSS. I emphasiseu to him very strongly that we have been thoroughly dissatislied with the management O1 RSS who had kept us permanently in the dark about the allocation. of their resources. I explained how this ha happened through the multifariousduties of G-P which enablea him to juggle with the set between one, organisatior and another. We had in fact never known at any given moment what sets were employed upon general search and nobody apparently consid ered it their business to tell us or even recognise our right to mow. I pointed out that if we had taken over when RSS in 41 was offered to us (we had been unable to do So purely on rount of personalities) we should now be making our contribution in Y.stations to the general pool o1 bigint. In that eventuality we should certainly have been given a position on the Sigint Board. I personally would be quite prepared to waive this ii it was held that the Sigint DOura was not the place where the alocation OI resources was discussed. I did this however that we should be imrored about these matters as a right not a favour Itwas impossible For us to make a case for the wigint Board if a in fact we never knew what was happening. De Grey I think saw these points ana promise to discuss the whole mnatter with Traviis and see how they might best be met. February 2nd Harker came to tell me that Maxwell had agreed to the arnuat review of HOWs. Maxwal. is rather inciined to question any HOW on the liines OI whether it strictly constitul defencel. What he does not See of course i that there is no dividing Line. Tor example at the moment it is o1 paramount importance - that we Should collect eveny bit of informa- tion by whatever means concerning Falestine and illegal immigration. It is only in thiis way that there is any chance of preventing bloodshed. February 4th We approved a programme for the Dutch C.I. officers who will be coming here apout the 15th Feb. Briscoe came once more to complain that he did not get all available information about S/W and other technical devices. Hee had got hold ol the case of SETH. This case of course was dealt with mainly from the point of view of SETHS integrity and he shou OT course have seen it. I told him that in very isolated casses like these the only information on these matters was contained ir CSDIC reports Irom the field. These I said were very curerully marked to him. I have arranged however that he shal attend the Tuesday meeting and make a short speech to 93 all concerned about his requirements. I saw the DG this evening about my going to America. He does not think my case is a very strong one and he wants me to be here in March when Shillito will be coming in fairly frequently. He wouild be qui te prepared to arrange or me LO go in June when Shillito is in the sauule. 1 had to explain to him why I felt it was necessary that I shoud main- tain the Liaison but he seemed LO think that Hollis hau been over fairiy T' cently and Victor was now going, it would be difficult to justify my case. In the end he said that il I would pay halt my passage he thought I could go now. He would line me to think it over. Februany 5th I had a meeting o1 all those who are going to take part in the course tor the Dutch officers and explained generally how much information we should impart to them. So War as HOWs are concerned we should not go Further than to say that during the war censorship had ore rated successfully but that in peace time these natters could only be dealt with in very special cases under the authority of the Home Secretary. We shoula lay the emphasis always on CE ana security and exblain subversive movements or the lines that it was there that we had to Look for potertiall spies. THIS IS COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT1958 DEC 2009 qu T told the DG today that provided he Felt that I coud be Spared I should prefer to go to America in the course oi the next tew weeks rather than wait until June, ever tho I had to pay half the iare. He has agreed to may going on this basis. Personally I Real somewhat inault 5/ the whole incident. It just shows how much Value is autacheu by the D.G. to orets eltorts to try ana build up a liaison with the Americans. I feel rather like a schoolboy W has been accused oi wangling a day' holiuay on the excuse that he is going to his aunt's funeral. I dined with Bertram Ede. He was lull of all his own arguents about O 0. and it seemed to me that Dick had rather led him t believe that there was a job for him to do on what he called the A.0. and Q.side. I told him most emphatically that T thought that the ideal way of running 0.C. was the manner in which Kellar coutroileu the Mid East. All we wanted were similar seetions to control other parts Of the world. 0.C. should do the pure administra- tion. I said further that I would have another talk with Dick. as A wire has come through From Canaua to say that Mchenzie King has approved the plan for a noyal Commission on the CORBY case. Febmuany 6th Charles has agreed to pay the ex enses and salany O1 Miss >hipley who is going out to work with Miss Gass in sorting out the Itahial Ierecoras in Rome. S.Is having failed to do anything aout these records in the first instance, appealed to us for assistance. We said we would try and give them two girls but could only spare Miss Gass at the moment. Now that we are able to send Miss hipley as well their production ide,contrary to Kimts advice, say that they cannot carry the expense. T told Kim that TI was rather browned off about the whole Job. He evidently went back LO the production as a result ol which they have finally agreed to pay half Miss Shipleyig salary. Holiis came in to show me a transeript of a broadcast oy Drew Pearson,t the Amnerican columist, biowing the CORBY case. This is ore more instance of how any thing that reaches ahigh level in the USA invariab- ly leads. Drew Pearson, who is bitterly anti-British, has now BLown the gaff no less than times. His first laak was I think Ambassador Phiiips! report to Roosevelt OIT the ituation in Inaia. Incidentally a singularly il-intormed and stupiu document. E attended the Cabinet Offices in case I should be wanted to answer any questions at the Chiers oi Stalis meeting on SIHE. I was not callea but I unuerstana thut L al they are asking Our some estimate Ol the expense involveu. Halor rang me up to ask about warie vor Mendelssohr. E Said that LI he couuld get her through the Briitish zone it might be quicher than ler going to Switzerland in March. He is going bo have a tny. A wire has cone from Courtenay about U SAW. The Governor is apparently putting him up as a riival claimant in Burma,without, Courtenay thought much knowledge of his past. We have however made enquiriies with I.P I. and find that the Govemnoris action has the full approval of the Burma Office and that thoughthe Governor may not know the source of the information, he is very well acquainted with the substance 01 the BJS, which we obtained early in the war, showing that U SAW was a Jap agent. C-apparently was not anxous for the Governor to De tola about the source, though E personally cannot see that it matters very much now since (a) there are no more Jap BJS and (b) the Americans have bLown far and wide the fact that the telegrams were deeyphered. I spoke to Cussen about the case of ZIGZAG. He has ascentained frow Paris that the M.S. was sold to uollancz who solu the foreign rights to Reuter's. Among various introductory matter preceding the First articie in "itEtoiten, appeareuthe iolowing words LEtOie exclusively presents the first great spy story ol the 1959-45 world war, authorised by the Secret Service oi the United Kingaomii. Cussen things that it might be weI worth White bringing a case against dealt with ZIGZAG in camera and hav by ng a magistrate. it summarily There could be some form of agreed publicity alter 97 the ease, which woala only inVova cI fine, anu the magistrata could make a little speech which might weill act as warring to others. Caroe. came in to see me. He is leaving the renegade section as its work has come to an end. He is thinking of getting Some Job connected with enemy property. oger,Burt,ussen,inclair ard I haa a meeting about handling hAy. There was some doubt as to whether MAY had committed an ollence under the S.A. of the U.K., or whether he would orly be liable uner the Canadian ECDE Cussen however quoted a para from the Act which seems to show that i1 in his capacity ad as a representative of DSIR MAY was at the time the act was committed a servant ol the British Govt., he woud De laple under our Act. Burt is arranging to get a warrant by swearing an information and probably the interrogation wiill have to be coruuetad at DSIR as MAY might pead that he was not entitled to disclose information relating to atomic eeseareh It might rseu mer to give him the necessary assurance. February 7 th I tolu Cimperman I was going to America. He is going to lix up my passage with wyjn Scott. Niali MeDermott ha's Just peer demobiuiseu. He proposes to sit dor his bar exxams.. He mentioned a man callled Anarew ENOEST who is assistant to thodes and is thoroughly persona grata with olbinchoven. If we wanted Some- one in Holland he woula like an opportunity of joining the Security Service. 9% We had a iong stali meeting I tola Charles that SIS had ageed to pay had Miiss Shipley' S lary and half Miss Glassis. We then con- sidered personnel or the Mid Dast. We arae that Olafield and amery shouu be offered contracts, Oldfielld on a permanent basis and mery as long as DSO Egpt continued to function. In the Far East we felt that alan Roger ought to be givexa a contract anu that ol.Bourne should be tarten on as head of SIFE or DSO Singapore for two years. Lee has got the final drait of the committee dealing with the security in comnection with German seientistas We the layiing down cartaid regulations both For the ministries and for the indivmals themselve.. Burt Came to talk to mne about PRINGSHEIM. He was a litte apprehensive lest Philip Noell Bakermight be committing a breach ol conii- dence. I tolu him that I-nad explained this point very careruliy to Peas-b but that stewant Hampshine had rung up Mayor Hope who had communicate wich me to tae elect that we had the ald oear. I thought however that to make doubly sure he should see Hampshire before seeing PRINGSHEIM and point out that Noel Baker might have a come back from busy Middleton for disclosing the source of information which she hau giver in confi- dence. T attended a meeting in Harkerts room with Cussen and Vesey (a) on the subect of the prosecution of ZIGZAG and (6) on a spy book written by one FIRMIN, Crime Correspondent of the Daily Telegraph. As regarus ZIGZAG it was agreed,subject to anything that the DPP might have to say that we should recom- mend a prosecution. We would not press the 99 proceedings beyond the magistratels court anu would hope for a substantial fine. he magistrate could then point out that althoug ZIGZAG had behaved with great gallantry this was undoubtedly a case of a breach of faith which could not be tolerated, that ii the prosecution had pressed the case ZIGZAG would probably have gone to penal servitude. We felt that this might act as a healthy errent and might be useful in showing allies that we take a serious view of matters of this kind. As regards Firmine ook, itwas agreed that the M.S. shouud be submitted to SIS for their coments and that subject to nything they had to say we would press for the deletion of certain offending paras or chapters. THISIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DCC 20001 1uo February 8th Akers came over to discuss the MAY case, e,Hollis ussen and Burt Being also present. The position was explained to Alert and he readily agreed to summon MAY to his office provided he could have a couple of days notice. He also undertook to have some competent person at hand who il a search was conducted would be able to say whether MAY was properly or improperly in possession 0l certain documents. I lunched with who has taker over Arnold-Forster's job in SIS. ne seems to be rather at sea at the moment, and lines his job singularly complex. The DG called me aow to introduce me to Pillitoe. The DG explained that I was going to America and a short discussion ensued about the merits of the F.B.I. Sillitoe did not say very much but seems a plleasant person. K.Lop Looked in. ne is justback From Switzer- land and is full of ideas of a short and long- ter'm kind. THISIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDETR SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DEC 2.009 10I Hales of SIS Wall is now working with Brian Melrand in the French zone, brought me a letter from the latter in which he said that he had already made contact with Schlesser who was very ready to help us in any way he could. He had not yet seen Tob i Menaelssohr but was going to do SO at the earliest opportunity. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DCC 2009 1 February th Sclater tells me that wvilson is coming over to discuss with Briscoe ways and means of ensuring cryptographic material sent abroad is not opened in transit or if it is opened the fact is easily detectable. came to tali to me about the VEHMERENS. The husband is now a master at the Blue goat School. seemed anxious to know how he would put his past over to his pupils. I said that we might be able to discover this if he really felt it wast worth while. It did not seem to me that he had very much that was worth dis- closing and that in any case it would not be in his interest tO say that he had been in the G.I.S. Blake-Buduen is worried about his discussing his relations with SIM. Stewart Hamoshire and Burt came to discuss the case oi PRINGSEHIM. It was agree that Stewart would see that Noal Baker Spoke first ol all to rs.Miduleton tel ling her that he proposed to have the case investigated. Stewart told me incidentally that everyboay WI was thoroughly fed up with the Russians. Not the least I gather P.J.himseli. Everybody realises that they are playing a dirty obstructionist game. Some think that Bevin has been a little too uncompromising,although they realise that he has been speaking under very great provocation. The danger is that the Fussians may avoid UNO and always insist on unilateral negotations. Their general line Seems to be to stall on everything 103 until the Americans get the jitters and say we must all go to Moscow. This generally ends in disaster as nobody diies to come home ithout having achieved something. Desmond our came to talk to me about McBryan who has gone back to Sarawak. Desmond seems to think that the whole thing as a scandal, particularly the telegran in which the 0.0. said that he had beenpassed Dy Security: What we Said was that the whoite matter was not our concern. We did however give the facts about mcBryan which inaicate largely that he is a crook, operating ith Rajah Brook February Lith Kellarl section ts veny overwokee out it is difficult to See how we can get much relief at the moment. I Saw cimperman about UDHAM SINGH, the Inidiatt who wants to go LO California, on the flimsy axcuse that he is going to hep hiis uncle OIT a Iarmu In Iact he is propapil going to Join the Gheur Party. imperman said that he would not get a visa in the orinany way less he changed his ground aind gave a Dona dide businass reason. Cussen talked to me about Fatterson. He is alraid that at the momerit ila canmad sure him. T wanted Fatitensor to start up the Far hastern section. wynscott rang to say that the Army would sent me to Ameriea on one of their planes aTtu would be very peased to Look alter me white I was in the USA. I said that I was very graterul for the passage and for anything you they could ao to assist me in Getting accommo- dation but that 1 thought that whiie il the USA I ought to pay my own hotel bills eye. T had a meeting with harles,Horrocks,Dick, EdE clayton and Kellar to disouss-aaministrative matters in connection with SIFE and SIME. LU was decided that as reganus accommouation, cars,telephones,medical assistance. etc.. we should try and get the 0.0. or the W.0. to pay. The heads of SIFE and SIME were to have a measure of administrtive control over their aneasy Daisewould not however preclude DSOS from communicating uiveet with us on certain matters Or in any way wearen their position vis a vis local GovenoTs. hebruary 12th Briscoe has put me up a note on nis orsan- isatior anu Maltbylg attempts to musele in. I am goingmto discuss this with e. anu suggest to him that he shounu sae Briscoe personally. Roger Fleetwood-Heaketh came over to discuss the paraso reception contained in Disen- howerts despatch. Those purus. sive the whoe business awayie Our grounas or objecttor are ya) that this conSLtutes a raversal. 01 the decision by the Chiets ol Staff that strategic as opposeu to tactical deception Should remain on Top Secret level, (b) thet we thhk on gereral grounds this principle should be maintained since if it becomes knowisthat a ordeception had been executed suceessiully in the battle of Normandy everybody would be on their guard in Ios the Future. (c) that recent disclosures mare it perreetuy eear that the Germans ran the battle 01 Normanuy on the information supplied by GARBO and BRUTUS ane that theiy reports were passed to Krumoechert,Hiter's persoral Inteliigence OIricerby Joal. Many of the reports were actually nitalled by Hitler himsell. If therefore the word is to be tolu that the Germans were deceivea thr- through emphasis being laiu on anl attack From the Pas de Calais this aiselosure wilI mainly point the finger at GARBO and BRUTUS A principle here is involved in giving away an agent. No govt. that gets this reputation will be able to get agents in the future. Apart from this GARBOIS own salety is at stake and his usefulness is by no means eneed. We have devised a form of words which draws the whole operation factually and more ot less describes how the Germsns made a misclaculation by thinking tha U we should attack by the shortest route to the ruhr. we have in fact given them the explanation that Joul believes nimseti. Whether this will be acceptable to siserhower I don t know. The DG considered the reorganisation plans whi had beer worked out b.y Dick,HoiriHorrocks ara myself and has apparently obpected strong: lVto to the re-amaleamation O1 anu F by B. an he has olly Seel Horrocks ard Chariles on the subject. They had sticky passage and the question is at che moment in abeyance. February 13ch Curry has rewritten his chapter 4 and wants me to vet it, particularly in regard to the part that I played in the early days oi the war in co-ordinating the work of the various divisions yob THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN IDEPARTMIENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DEC 2009 Burt came to tell me that the prosecution or SIGZAG is being ser in motion. Alley has got a: Case O1 Pole employed by RAE Farrborouih. I Linderstalle that th ane quite lumbar there auwaya g3upins ito touch with the pro-hluabieue goup Poues in this counury. This may or mAJ/ Lut he sigiri cant, but in ar Case they ane uvar 8u British CP members in Farnuordugh through whom there is aoubtless &u compete auage of information to the Iussiano. 107 February 13th The F.o: have written to us in connection with the activities of Poles, suggesting that wey SIS and the W.0. should get together with a view to suppressing any undesirable activities conducted From British territory or from Italy, against the Polish Govt. The F.O. tear that thererp may shortly be unpleasant ewalations owing to the arrest of a number of pele in Poland and their forthcoming trial. We have been particularly asked to disconnect ourselves from Polish Intelligence. This is not quite So easy as it sounds. We have a large number of Poles here and unless we have sohe contact with their CE dept. it is not easy to know what everybody is up to. Just how well all this is being done however I cannot say as I have no responsibility lor Alley and his minions. We had a further meeting, Charles,Dick Bertram and myselli. Bertram wanted to get his charter more clearly defined. In lact he wanted to go back to his basic charter which he took over From Jelf. He is of course perfectly entitled to say that this charter stands. The trouble is that Dick and have always regarded it as null ana void, side it makes 0.0. responsible for far too much and causes them to impinge on WOrK which can much better be dealt with by D.Division. I said that agreed that technically Ede was entitled to stand by his charter but that I fundamentally disagreed wi'th the whole oi it. I felt moreover that it was a pity to stir everybody up until we had got the proper decision from the new DG. Meanwhile we would do all we could to bring Bertram into discus- sions concerning 0.0. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOLMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 DEC 2o09 10R February 14th Findlater-Stewart came to see the DG who called me down. I snowed him my minute about RSS. He said that we ought to see his report and in particuar what he had said apout RSS. He sug ggested the Dg should ask Bridges for a copy It did not seem to me that he haa said anything very positive about 2ur renresentation Or the bigint Board. I 3O Findaber about the revelations in coneetior with GARBO BRUTUS and also about the reports from P/WS on the leakage in connection with Overlord which was caused through SOE BBC broadcasts. Tess rang up about the secretary o Manuilski who has imporeu PJ to Tet her remain in this country. I recomendeu her to speak to Maxwell and to mane sure that Further repre- sentations wend made that on NO account should the girl be sentt back to Russia. II the wereprepared to go so far it would be. much better to wamn the girl beforehand,since in she absconds she is pound to De in for serious trouble. Plan Sarvey of the FO rang me about a question put down by Beratin the Communist alleging that a ecial Security Committee in Egypt consist- ing ot 3 British and 5 Egyptian representative: Nas dealing with the communists and was sup- plied with British funds. I said that we Nould make erquiries and Let him know. February 15th E spoke to Burt about the future of sabotage ases. It seemed to me desiraple that the xperience of his officers should not be lost ind that if possible the proplen should be centralised iy Scotland Yaru. We wouu only be interested il there was any suggstion ol enemy action. Horrocks,Dick,Harker,Houlis Harker, Holis anu I attended a meeting of the DGS to discuss future staii. We wert through the list and deciced as lar as possible or the number of names to whom offers could be made. February 16th Ha wauld I gather be quite pleased to stay OF if he could alnord to. Burt came in to tali me about MAY whom he intervieweu jesteruay, the CORBY Case having broken in Caraua. When MAY was tolu by hicer that someone wanted to se him he turneu as whita as a sheet, anc was Very mear collllapse He failed to answer any uestions except in a plain negative He made one rather eurtous remark when asked whether he woulu be prepare to assist the authorities: "Not if its courite espionagell. Asked what he meant he WalS unnou to explain. His usual. answer was nThe alaswer is non, after several minutes silence. There is no count from his demeanour that is guility. Bunt and Spoorlare A his premises out there is 1o e:sol to thini: thai any of the doeumentie ape 01 a specislo lay ineri inatiny nature. THIS IS A GOPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DEC 20091 (I February I8th Haddon spoke to me about Eisenhowert aespatch He said that we ought to submit our abservae tions to Col.Moorep of M.0.i. Latenin the day I called on Moore ard left wit th him a paper giving our views (a) on the question of revealing strategic deception as a whole contrary to the Joint Chiets of Staff ruling and (b) on the danger to both Garbo and Brutus in the light of recent revelations which made it elear that the battle of Normanay Was fought almost entirely on their intorma- tion. I said that coulu see no reason Why bisenhower, rather than disclosing deception on a major scale, should not conline himself to stating what Joal in fact believeu,namely that the Germans made a miscalculation as to the purpose 1or which our reserves in the SE Engand were going to be ubeur. T said that i1 the Chieis o1 Staff intenueu to give way on the former agree policy, Wingateirs dralt was the best thad coulu ce mace ol a Dad Job. Lt would still however involve a considerable Risk to the agents Moore ther asked me LOO provide him with some alcernaitive drartowhich uiu. Tommy Laseelles ran up about the CORBY case which he had seen ir. the Press. I toLu him moe O Less wa t the laets were. Vesey talked LO me about the higulaation of B.lD. Their work has decined very consiuer- ably anu they will graauallly be aniiting away in the course of the next two months. Mean- while he thinks that maJ be able to give some assistance to Patterson. I am anxlous that Pattarson shoud complete hiiswork on renegades as soon as possible in order that he can take over From John Noble and act as a receiving point for information from the Far East until courtney' returre February l9th Information is beginning to come in about the CORBY case where the Boyal Commission has had CORBY under examinations The results are So War entirely satislaatory and CORBY himself has created a very good impression. McKenzie King sent for the Sovdet Charge Alfaires Deiore he made his announcement, showed him a copy of it ana told hiim that the Foreign Power mentioned was Russia. The Charge dtAif aires expressed both surprise and disitress and said enaracteristically that he would be reporting the matter to his Govt. At the DGS meeting Roger stated that the Cabinet Committee which is nvestigating Fascism is, on the lead of the A.G., rather faking the line that the existing daw is adequate ana that a prosecution could prO- bably be montea against Arnola EESE. My wfeeting is that it MEESE is going LO be indicted for conspiracy there will be an outery from the Right aDoutthe Commumists, whose organisabion anc aims have Long ago been procouneed as constituting ar iegal conspiracy by one ol H.M.Juuges. This is not to say that I shoua De extremely glad to See LEESE prosecuteu. Our terms of sanvice 1o2 B.6. wateners which were Sent to Ronnia Haylor nave evidently been broaueast throughout the Britiwh zone, H man turned up the other may with a copy of these berms in his pocket. Incidentaly ne wES 616n tallywhicn tall, which haruiy conforms to Harry's standards. ttB I gave a lectura to the Dutch Irtelligence Officers on the same lines als the ole I gave to the Danes a little white 4go. They seem to be very keen ana ane very receptive. February 2uth Vesey came to talk to me about the case o1 a man who has given the name ol BUTLER and who has been at Beltane For some timet Although fpgquently interrogated, he has only just sted ed to an 1.0. that he is a Russian agent It looks as if he had been working for the Rotekappelle in Germany and had later been sent into the British zone. Luke tells me tha t 4 through the agency of who she has now married, has succeeded in getting permission to remain here for 13 months. She has not however yet been able to obtain the release of her funds. If we can assist her in this matter we should be able to give some help to the other' agents in the Tricycle group. It is not clear whether .0.sanction to allow her to reside here was given as a resul of our representations or owing to some entirely independent approach. Imaw Burt who haa just been taling to MAY. Helas succeeueu in getting a conlession. He took his usual line and intimaveu that since the last interview MAY would have noticeu from the Press that a good real was going on in Canada and in fact that what Burt hau tohu him was true. Since the opening of the enquiry Burt said that MAY woulu appreciate that he had obtained a good deal o1 Iurther information on which he would like to put some further questions. The point I think that shook MAY more than anything was Burtis reference to the proposed meeting in London. ThilsisArcopy DEGLO ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RRETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) QF THE PUBLIC RECORDS Finally MAY signed Aeadment,h not under caution, in which he admi that he het been approached by boviet agent whose identity he would not disclose. this agent asked him lor information about atomic research. He had supplied him with a report and also with two pieces of uraniun. He had done this because he thought it was in the general interest that the Russians should be kept in the picture, and Should share in the experimental work. He knew about th appointment in London but he had not kept ad as he elt that since SO much inlormati had been made public O11 atomic research there was no further need to communicate any more. The question of prosecution now arises. While Burt feels that if there were no prosecution he could get a lot more out of MAY, it seems likely that the Canadians will expect us to take legal action. the A.G. thinks that a prosecution could be mounted even though the statement was not taken under caution. I attended the JIC when the establishment for SIFE was agreed to It will 6O forward to the Chieis of Staff for endorsement. We also discussed a paper on the down-grading OI deception put forward by Wingate of LS Both Wingate and wuutey Clarke were prese I handed a paper in which I put torwaru the same arguments that I hau already put to Co.Moore. C.spoke strongly in favour oi making a stand anu recommending to the Chieis of Sualfl that they should stand firm on their during: In his view it was lar better DO Iight this battle even il we lost it either to the Chieis or Stafi OT in Americar Wingate argument was that we were fighting a losing battle owing to publicity by such people as Capt.Butcher ana that we should therefore be wise to dig ounseves in a bic farther pack. The meating t'elt however that it would be right and proper to late a stalu first anu fall pack to our secoma line il necessary. It was recommenueu that O,mysebfy nuWingate shounu attenu che Chieus o wuati meeting on Mondayi. Alley,Co Corin, Vivian anu I lunched with the Duteh. wViate rang up to make it Clear that he was enrely with me about standing firm il this were posible. Win Scott came to talk to me about the future of his organisation. It has now been decided that 8 OSS officers will take cover in the S.Embassy ana that only one or two of the representatives of the oIfensive side of OSS will remain here for liaison purposes at Broadway. Broadwaylare more and more tenuing towards shrugging OII OSS ana it looks to me as ir the principle liaison in uture will be through ourselves. Win Scott ther talked about the KLADE case. Through the influence of Bob Blum in washing ton we are now aSned to send someone out to interview KLATT. Eviuently the Amepican D.A. has proken down. I an trying to get ho O1 Gilbert rate. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DEC 0go\ Lub February 2lst I spoke to Howe on the terephore and tola him about MAYIS coniession and the excellent piec of work that Burt had one. SCOtt came to se me apout the possibility E o wich UNO. I told him to talk LO Luke who knew the LOrT. The Russillis have come out with a very naive statement about the CORBY Caa. they Say that their M.A. in Ottawa received certain amount of intormati tion apouu alomic research ana other matters From ccauaintalce: in Canada but that this intormatior was of a very low order ana oi no vaine to the Sovlet who were much further auvaneer in these natters. Apart From this ald the intormatio they received had been given IudL puoicity by the Americans. At the same time they realised that activities ol this lcind by their M.A. were not permissable anu tha t they had the refore decided to recall him. The Russians are of course sticking out their necks badiy sincewhen the Commissions reponit comes out it. will pe show that all activitie by their M.A. were directed in detail from Moscow. I had a talk with Dick an Alley aDout the Poles. It was agreed that Alley woulii get 6u a note showing exactly were Poles ware LOCateu anu in what lumbers amlu wi1o Was res- ponsiole or looking alter them a1 their W/T sets. E 117 Bantram Came to teLI me thet he was going to pit in a note LO the DG suggesting that he should go to SAlrica insoeau o1 Kellar and raising the whole issue ot his charter. I said that I thought it was perhaps a pity to throw a spammner in the works perding the arrlvel Gh the new BG Dut that of course ha was within his Tights in aodng So 1 he felt strongly Huout the matter. He uid subseruentl see the DG who sent for Diet ante was ineaiineu Fo agree with bie that he shoulu 6o instead O1 Ielular. Dick has put up a forcetui minute 1n reply to the DG,naising the wholle issue of 00. Feomuay 22nd I had a wrbici ab bine crbout future staff raquigemeuta. I Lm going to see TAR anu asceroeal whether 113 wouuu prefer ta take a group B..ivisor deputy toD. navedraiteu EL note Lo Curry showing what believe LU be the causes 01 the conlubion or this ofllee it the early morthe o1 the war There were many contrloutony causey but the predominant factor was uruouoteuy a Tack-ot trained Stetl wi thout which no pro par organisation Olki decentalised basis was possible. I had lunch with On. he waS tuLll OU fore- bocdngs apout atuacks on the Security service by Oliver Eallawiin and 11 pattlculan attaCig on Halker. He wondered how Oliver Barawilt had aver heard- o HaTer. he seemed to imply that Sillitoets appointment was stili in the balance anu that it would he hotiy opposeu ir the House. There mast er5ome smoke here but I doubt it amount to very much. 1 Or let OuD ome get. He said you aontl like weunox var. muah I think. T said that personal I led Lemnox DUt thought quite ranisiy that there was ro Joo or him in the office. He ther sait Counsel ii ne hau taken over, it had been his intention to give you a K. to use you aS his auvisertf.I T mare no comment: I had a word with Newsam about ganetal Hyo. policy with reganu to the admission o1 alens and exptulslon OL Hli0ns. He sain that the Basic criterion Whs stimulation of the eporit traae. As regarus Poles the H.0. were on the whole resistire entry ar also rerusing permits to work In general they were bringing pressure to bear ol POLe'g as Lan as -possible to them Lo netuia DO thadr own country. Mearwhi.la the Treasury were pressig LOT POE rastaent mere DU De HUSOTD- ed into incusiny. ne utu YIOT KTOW what The outeame OI this wound be. AS reganur our owI Fenserat casesyhe wouru aways he prepared Do conider Lem in So 1ar as this was possible DUE he hoped that we Wouu deep them down far as we could. heormany 25th I saw Roger anu Cuthpene Flsetwopd-Hesketh wher they prouuced tor me documen'ts showing the pane played bu GARBO and BRUTUS in the reception plan. L was intending to use these if there was any diliellty at the the-C.ob.meebin where pubicatior 01 Eisenhowert despetch was to be discusseu. Actually however the meeting wad postporrad. The documents ane the highest interest. They constitute the dailly reports on which the battle was fought Dy the General Staff and contain whola churs oi GARBO and BRUTUS and in one instarice the comments of Gen.Krumacher,who WiES the I.0. (L( representative at OKW and the receiving point tor Abwehr information. In the telegram ated 9th June which contained information from GARBO, Krumacher has underlined an important passage about the threat to the ras he Calais anu written a note drawing Jodiis attention to the matter. Joul has initiated the tele- gram and has also made a special mark indica- ting that it was passed to Hitler. A report Di 9th June states attention is drawn to a port Irom a particulanuy trustworthy source according to which GUSAG will be supported in action by strong operations by the heavy bomber Force which points to its employment against strong Tortiiications and So fits in with our existing preparation, middle channel coast.: Cuthbert had prepared a note o1 his interview with Jodl who had been shown many of the docu- ments and ashed to explain the various signatures etc. He says that he had a con- versation with Jodl on Dec.llth 1945 when Jodl explained his view that the very excell- ence of the German High Commandis insight into the geographical distribution of the allded forces in the U.K. prior to and during the invasion had caused a false appreciatior to be made: "We knew he said Ithat you had one ny Group inthe south of England and one in the southeast. We know now that the .EArmy Group was not in fact launched against the channel coast but its continued presence in the Southeast of England constituted a threat which it was not possibile for us to ignore. We herefore did not feel justinieu in author- ising formations any large-scaae for use in release Normandy O1 intil 15th a army consid- erable time alter the invasion had started. Had our picture On you aisposit-Ors in-the U.K. been less complete alia had we IOt been aware of the presence of the Ist S.Army Group wo in S. 5.E. E. England we might have despatcheamore of the 15tn Army to Normandy earlior,wh might have had very serious results lor your- selves.! Jodl himself considered that the Pas de Calais FUSAG threat was o1f by the middle o1 July when lormations 01 the ra ..Army begam to appear in Normanuy. He admitted reluctantls,since his loalty LO Hit ler! smnemory is absolute, that the retention 01 a considerable pant Ol the ibth Army ir the Pas he Calais until long alter was due to the ruhrert own persistent Deliel in the continuing possibility o1 a landing in that area. The interview couvinceu Cuthuert oi Joul's complete acceptance o1 the existane of FUSAG in S.E.England. Vickery came in to tell me that if any questi arose with Commissioner Wood about his organisation in Vancouver, I could say that it had now been liquidated. THIS IS A GOPY ORIGINAL DOGUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 344) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DEC 2000 There is another fairly detailed report from the Field on PESCATORI. He makes a very positive statement that in 1940 there wa no organisation working inside Englanu. The Abwehri main efforts were concentrated against outposts in Holland and Belgium. In talking of the Bureau Jahnke, he says that it was dissolved about the miuale of 1940, allegedly because Jahnke Turnisheu too many reports of an undesirable nature. As a Pesur Jahrke came into corllict with the other Sources of information. He theraupon retineu L 21 A one time Jannke had am agent working uiaem nis gountny estate near Franklurt Ol Over. him in Holland called Vinzenz KRAFT who is aliegeu to have suppiieu a certain amount oi information about Engand. KRAFT was in the sixties and was evertualiy discovered to be double-erossing the Germans ane was imprisonea The Germans had Iittie knowueage OI our I.8. before the capture of Best and Stevens. M.I.5 was interpreteu as a purely army espionagi service which wouu have correspondengeu to the I.0 prarch Ol the uerman Army. There is an interesting report O1 the interrogation OI Heinrich Dietrich Wiunelm AHLRICHS @ ALBERS who hanateu a arge yumDeT ot agemus Sent this countrio to Cariada anu to the U.S.A. He worseu Tor I.Marine Hampurg. He spotted that CUBWEB was a D.A. of ours but wilen he reported the Lact to Merzel and Pheifier he was told not to be such a pessimist. He speaks weill OSTRO. He says that ostrots cover at Freetown was elected through an employee of the Lisbon ageney of an Ameriean Export Line who was later transerred to Ereetowntor his Firm. A German who returned from internment in 1944 T 1945 reported that Vera was interned in the 1.0.M. This was the first olricial intimati tion that was received as to her Late. AHLRICHS is particularly interesting with regard bo the Irish cases and the cortror OT the situated by Dr. VEESENMEYR O1 the German .0. There was am agreement between V. and CANARIS that no agents were to be Seut 6o Irelend ithout VIs knowledge. This was apparently oruKen in the case of OTREILLY anu a stiti letter was s1t to CANARIS. ine matter emengee tereuish Franctis STUARIT complaining Ea V. that he het not been allowed 60 to Iretend whereas i1d praparations were to be made to send OREILLY. AHLRICHS discovered that the agent MOSCARA or MOSCADO was being played back Dy the FBI from Nev York. An agent name Jose BENDES (2 BERNARD is mention -ea. He had been a ships ehander in Aneerp. He reported from Lisoon. T wes bEthet he Was im touch with a foruar ortuguese A1Dasaato in Lomnon anc it is said that come 2 das berore D.da AHLRICHS recaivei Iom the arertt & report giving the each place arro time o1 the proposed lieu anuing in Normanay art the soseuent hi1e O1 attacis inaltth. AS hit souree-he nettheBrit British M.A. who had spparentily Dean Emicine 01 tura arLu in his cups at the home DI Texednay tho Former Portuguese AIDESLLOR in LOLcoI BELTEST intormcion about the waLttie o1 Normanay was accurate due some suspictor attach wed DO him as there appeared ta De some resemblance tO the writings 02 Lidale Hart. The agent MEILDR in Amarica wa reundeu us an F.B.I. douple-cross. The D.G. talked to me anour Cure. I said that T had been thinking about the oblemsio years and found 11 alliost insolnablle t he did not wish to serve uimler inyondy except me. Lt was ToSiote thee TDuiLTt the Jobe Tooingatter 2rpigtize in coutriag atter than Russia but this would pe8 hiE wouIg untar Ddci, E hasthe hltthest wonko TL shmld be ver sorry tee him The D.G. ends the prootem extremely tificuit but hopes that a solthon migat be louni. T na ther gather that he thought of telling Currr that there was nothing uerogapar im worring under Delc. 93 T merit to U. primarily TO 6t his views about America. I asked him poilt-bllank whether he had ary interest il Passport con trol. He Said that he uid NIUL propo,e to made use O1 it. I then saiu unad I thought in a way that ii we diu have representetior in America, thatshouta be phe puace us DO be. He said that he Wes quite open-mire but that in some Way he thought it was ter to keep representation in the hanus O. one dept. in order that the AD.I. shoua not play oi1 M.I.5 against I.. This of course is Yivfs oua argument. C. was not ve. clear what Peter Dwyer was aoing but sugges- tau that I should have a word with Philby. Dwyer o1 course is carrying the liaison with the FBI but if C. has relations with the new Intelligence orguisation he will appoint someone else for that work in onuer to keeptr two liaisons quite distinct. He i5 rather worried about the new intelligence set-up as he thinks it will be political and change with the Govt. He told me that as regurus deception he had decided that iit shouiui De in the Cabinet UIfices and that the machinery should be worked out between ourselves.some- thing onthe lines oIthe old XX Committee. poke to him about Briscoe and tola him that the introduction O1 was causing a certain amount of friction. He said that he would look into this anu that he would be pleaseu to see Briscoe an hear his uifliculties. I told C. that Maltpy was reatiy rather a th wheal in the couch anu it would be preierable il Briseoe dealt with Cohen. U. had reau the inulater report. While he agreeu that it Lalu LTOWIT certain principle: he aid not think it had really Solvau very much. He objecteu to Some o1 the paras. (pu THISIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED recommending the introawiOrEN 1NeB SEPEOShrY. 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS Februa Februaret2e T28Uh DEC 2o091 I talked to TAR about his Iuture. He is quite ready to go to D.Division or to take over the aims to investigation section OT the section uealing wit! espionage by other countries than Russia. He would praier to remain in B.bivision,but idis that there is a oig jop in D. to De done anu wouud be quite happy to O it. At the DG meeting touay I raised the question of the employment o1 Poles in our research establishments. I said that T felt this was highly undesirable and that it was part of the general question of the employ- ment of 6.P. members I agreeu with Alley however that where Poles had been employed on highly secret work,steps should be taken to get their families over to this country as soon as possible, whether they remain in researah establishments on not. I talked to Hill. He is ready to come to us if he is of fered E700-5750 free. He says he is not in the least albitious and that he likes the WOrK. We gave Canning a farewell lunch today. I had a long tali with Sillitoe. I explained to him quite a lot about our work anu its various diiiculties. I impressed upon him that we stoo or leil with the outside world on problems like vetting alu passport ContTOL. One slip in these most dificuit JobS meant letting down the whole dept. in the estimation or OulSiders who really knew nothing o1 the mone important work. I cold him that I thought the dept. haa been in 12S difficulties in the early days ol the war. said that he was dooiing forward to woriing with me and that he would rely very largely on my past mnowleage and png aavice I could give him. He was quite prepareu LO take strong action on any convincing case. He would be seeing the P.M. at least once a fortnight on the latter!s special instructio then got on to personalities. He asaeu confidentially whether T knew what was going to happer to Harker. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN IDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT1958 DEC 2009 At any time he wishea I woua be very pleased to give him my Iulil and Irank opinion of anybody, and also about the work. He was extremely friendly and I think shall be able to get on with him. I arranged with Win Scott tand Burt that in special cases we would pass the mes of immigrants or visitors to the USA over police records. T Shall 4o this privately through Burt. Dick and I hau a long session with Caccia who dined ith us at the Travelllers. we gave him the works wit as much as we could aboutthe dept. its diiliculties etc. He was most receptive anu creates a very good impression. He is goming over tor another talk with Dick who will introuuce him to various people iin the office. 1b Feoruary 27ch was again in attenance at the C.0.5. meeting an was not Called. itwarwanus eception Wits discussed UTI the JIO when it NES iscloseu that the COS ware prepared to stalla oA uneir ruing ald to substitute something on the lines ol ngerman miscal- culuationsi. These paras.will LouLow Joulls line OL thought. Meaniwilera teegram is br sent CO Maitlanu Wvilsor. teiring him that 1 ll coming out ali Suesesting that 1 shoulu ewpdlain the whyoue position CO him wid Lo Bisellnower. I luncheu with Kim, when We aiscussea repre- sentation ir America. I tour him o1 my corversations with .,said that I was o1 an opar mind but tract ic haa occurred to me tha.t if we were represented ir America,W might uselully be in Passport Control. I then ased him how he would view the possi- bility Of our carrying the liaison with the FBI ard SIS carrying the rew Intelligence organisation. Kim Said thut in a way he would be rather reluctant to give up direct contact with the FBI on whom he relief to some extentior intelligence Iro m A.America, as well as north. I pointeu out to him that under the rew arrargemert it seemed unlikely that the HBI would continue their commitmerts in America. I explained to Kim that both the F.B.I.S arlu our point OI view WES that we must ars War as possible have direct exchange ana that whereas we as a erersive Organisution were fiot suspect,SIS particularly in view oi BLLLIS past antics, wore suupect, evert though Biil might nave acouineu a letuen icom Hoover thawing him IOT his past Sarvice: anu stating that without Securiu/ co-eruinution the Wa could 27 not have been wor. Kim I tairi sawthe sawe the force ol this argument but would probably be reluctart DO give ad the FEI ange. I saw Bill Cmeait aro Glazeurook. Orean has beer maue Security Oiricer Lo Externa Allairs in Canada and coth them are over ere to go into scurity Eererauly.p rticu.s th O machirery which wa employ suon as the ages panel ariu OTeayl; comibtae. E save then a quiet oupuise OI how it i5 woriea alu Slsbesteu that the. shoulu See DYw anu Creeu. The D.G. helo a meeting Lo aiseu.s B.Divigic alid ics amalgamatior with E. He has HDTTOV 01 the chants. He Taisec toe paeutioi. O1 F.Divisior was Skin hanxering ater putting Russian espionage into Bvalu Leaving the rest OI F.where it is. We all said that we thought that thiis was a bad idea anu he decided For the time being therefore to teat Russian espiorage where it is. The D-G has asked that the ground should be explored in regard to making olers to certain officers to join the permanent staff Fleetwood-Hesketh tells me that the germal General Meyer DETRING who was the Ops. man at OKW was spirited away to Washington some months ago: Cuthoert had wished to talk to him but he was not availluble. He now rather suspects that the Americans may have been writing up their despatche: on Detringis intorma tior. Whether or not they have disclosed to Detring any ything about deception is NOT krowii, but is quite possiol I leave For Amarica tonight. 1% THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION Apriul 5th OF THE-RUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 1958 DCC 2009 I left with Victor py the boat train for Diepne on 27th Feb. For almost the First time they were running Pullman cars From Newhaven. The ship however was hideous, packeui with people. we managed however to get bunks in the general ments cabin, with people snoring all round. We were some: what irritater py seeing So many generals on boara who were OI course well looked alter. On arrival at Dieppe we were I arn glad to say mat by Peter Hope. He took us to Paris Dy car anu deposited us at the Embassy. We then went round to enquite about ought flight. We were told that the aerodrome was closed owing to the heaviest sn snowfall that they had had since sometime in the 8o's. In fact it only amounted to about a. couple oi feet. We were asked to ring up the following morning. This process of ringing up went on about Every 3 hours until March 7th when we finally got away. Life at the Embassy was amusing though a little bit trying as it was impossible to plan anything ahead. Both the M.A. Sanay Aitkin, and the Air Attache,A.V.M.Georg were extremely nice, and George oDviousiy did a lot towards finally getting us away. There were one or two interesting Lunch panties which strained my French LO its utmost. At one, the old Comte de Chambrun was present. He was L think Councillor at the French Embassy in StPetersburg at the time when Rasoutin was murdered. He recounted how he had sat next to Prince Dimitri when the rumour went round the table. From imdtriis attitude he made up his mind that he had been closely involveu. hmong others present at our lunch party were Francois Poncet, the (29 ex-French Ambassador in Berlin, anu various literary lights. There ws plenty o1 roou anc wine and we wera certainly veny lucky in being billettea at the Embasey. piana and Duff were extremely mind. Eric Pipn' widow was staving For a few days anu was clearly, as was somewhat everaweci, ant would OT occasions have preferred LO have her uinrer in her Leuroom. She was rather a trazic figure, having lost hen husband anld her son during the dast year- oha must have Joun the Emibassy a vary dlfierent place to what it was in her time. The general impression I got Wa that Dust was extremely good in hanuing the Frerrcn although gather that uite a number 01 peeple a srd pirg at him at home. I talked to Peter Hope and also to Boouy Mc- Kerzie about the Future of our ollice. Hope T think gets on extremely went with all his French opposite numbers ani Doth quid and Hobpy find him -usetul, E tolu Dobby that the question 01 our having representation abroad was more or Less an open one out that at the moment it as-aitficuait to Sa whether with aavantage we could have anyone in Paris I hoped however that before any final aeedsio was maae Or any arrangement by whi.cl S.be re-established themselves, caratul colsicera- tiror should be giverr to the whole matter. Duff apparently has found Hope exitremely useful but he would not be able to justilly his preseree there purelly for his OWII purposes. A.V.M.George was living im Dubenretts house. He was a coMlaborator and has been in rather serrous trouble although I believe ne has bought his way out. His house Wiis rather what you might expect it to be. Very elabor- ateiy necorated and looking ouD over the 130 Loire. At the topi ne had a sont OI glass house with a cocrDail ur,which I beleve was frequented Dy Rippentrop,Boering &e GD. twas cersainiy a peniect setting Lor that bothe The lavatory IS made O1 tooiing glass O1 the tpe which enables you to sae everybos outside without anybody seeing you. We Left from Orly at about midnisht on the 7th March on a C.54 Douglas 4-engine plane W which carried about 20 passengers. with uIS was an American gererall who had dust been to the American zone in Germany ana Vic. tor and I and he were regarded as V.I.P.S and given free whiskies wherever we landed ana plerty of good in a special room. For thiis we were very grateful as the Seating accommodation was not particularly comTort- able. we arrived in the Azores at about 8.30 on the 8th March ana after stopping Lor an hour started for Stephensville in Newfounde land. The flight was Smooth and was COI- pleted in about 11 hours. We stopreu there another-hour and ther Left for Washington When over Bostor we got a call to GO back to Presquesile cn the Canadian Boruer as owing to bad weather the fielis at New York and Washingto hau Close clown. Pr Presquesile was surrounuea py show-but conditions there are such that you can dand in almost any weather. We a.II punuled out expecting DO stay the night be alter a wait of about ly hours e were told that New York anu Washington were again open anu thaD we were going ons We passed through a belt of Storm on the way but lanaed salely in washington apout 5 am or the 9th. As it was Saturagy we decided to go up to New York by truin,and sueceeded in getting into the Pierre. New York is very tul and it is almost impossible to get a room anywhere unless you have some ina of Ful or have bookeu through a British Mission. Victor knew the manager So all was were Through Sol Hosenbilatt I got into touch with Gay and met her and Carl Pauison. He seemed a nice quiet type 01 Americane It was lot possiolle to mare very much OT him OI first acquaintarce. II saw Pat stone arid drew some money and left for Washiing ton by the night trair on the Lthe Next day I was met by Vince Huriley of the FBI who got me a room at the Washington. I rang up Cornwall Jones whom subsequently saw and explained to him the implications of of Ike's despatch as it stood at present. I went with him to a meeting of the Joint Security Council where I met apt-Thurber or the Navy side and Col.W.Harris on the army side. We discussed the whole problem anu I found the Americans taking a much stronger line than we were. In tact if our Chieis of Staff had stayed firm and asked fon the total excllusion o the offending paras. o1 the despatch they woud have got the rull co-cperation of the American members o1 the Joint Security Committee. They might however have met wit th dtifficuities in putting their views across since I gather that Beuell-Smith was being quite troublesome. When I got there however the pass hac mone or less been sold since Wingatets note which I felt went further uhant was necessary had already been submitted to higher authorit and IDome or less approved. It was arranged that I should go ana see Fieid-Marshal Wilson ana that if necessary he Should tane me to see Iice. In the ftemnoon I went down to the Bureau where I had a long talk with Carsonywh is 19 now more or less Lauutis deputy. On the 13th I saw Lish Witson anu Harvey, both of whom are working o1 communist matters We coufined ourselves to generalities and back history as I was not au fait in any very great detail about the Canadian case It seemed however that there haa been no startling deveopmentsas a resut of the reports received from Canada, neither had the Speed Case developed to any point where action could be taken. I saw At 12 noon/F-M.Wilson and explained to him in some detail the success of the Normanay Deception plan. I pointed out that there was now conclusive proof that the Battle of Normandy had been run almost entirely on the information suppied by Biutus and Garbo and that as the Germans were stil in the dlark an and thought that they-haa mnade miscaaeu- lation, we should ao our utmost-t leave them and the rest of the world in igrorance of the true lacts.. IE could not possibly do us or anyone else any good to broadcast the fact that the whole operation wad bem so successful. Secondlyytther was the question of our agents, one of whom was already in exile and whose lile would be in danger if hiis iuentity became known, If the acts came out itwouid be clear to the Germans that it was Garbo and Brutus who had mised them. In the afternoon I saw Murphy OI 0S5(2) and also his chief Gen.MaeGruder. The latter was leaving shortly anu would be sueceeded Colquin. MacGruder was an ions to know my views about their future organisation. T said that I thought that it would perhaps be more logical if intelli gence were divided into uerensive and offensive, in which Case it might be right 133 and proper that Hoover should carry 0SS(X2 in addition to his present commitments. At the moment OSS ao not Seem to De doing very much, and of course many of their former operators have heft. X21S main comd tment is the vetting of visas abroad, wilich they do on behalf of the Slate Dept. I dined with Joe anu Elsie. Next day (the 14th) at his special request I went to see Colusweeney Pertagon Building. ol.sweeney is concerned with deception on behaif of G..2. He knew broadiy Spearirig the story OE the Normandy deception and he was seeking some guidance on the possibilities of employing deceptior against the Hussians. I told him that thiswas a very different proborem. In war time we haa atb sorts 01 restrictions and we were operating in Erglana in the reasor- ubIe ertainty that there were no other than controleu agents in the country. We could therefore go to almost any lengths in what we put over. Ii we were operating against the Ruasians in peace time it would be a different thing alto- gether: Firstly because restrictions on movement would be taken off and secondiy because the Russians penetrate most Govt. Depts and aetories and unless we were extremely carerul woulle soon know that we were tieceiving them. 1 thought there- fore that although one hadt provide chieken food for agents, major deception against the Russians would in present conditions be extremely ditlicult. E lunched wiith bish Witson ane Harvey anc discussed mainly aincient history. In the ltemnoon I saw Vice-Aaminel souera (94 and was accompanied by Jimmie Murphy. Souens seemed a decent telow,although the had not very much experience of intelli- genee worry having been only a DDNI in the Caribbean during the war. He is at present more or 1ess marking time anc see ing what eomes in from the various agencies. It is not likely that he will ever be more than a collatite pour ano one which will lay down general policy. I hau a short talie with Laid and gave him a general idea about our post-mortan. He told me that it pemeu possible that he-Boss might TuT foreign intelrigerce as wel as home. II he aid Laud was all out to do 1t. Lau said that he hat open aSker Dy a committee which WaS looking into the future of intelligance what he thought or 011 anc what they win. He said. that he was tllite aware Dt what the did, that he had his own opinion BDOLU their workbut that ne thousut that il the Committee wanted LO KHOW about ONI they should send Lor' ar ONI orTcer to tell them. IM the evening L dined with tacemuuer and about a dozen OS8 oflicers,at some private CLUD in Washington. I was apparently the tuest of honour. on the 15th Manch T saw -Hover at Bhout Bbout10.15. He talked So Lon that I missed the 11 ofclocis train to New York. Hoover WaIS putting over his usual set piece about Russia and comunists. I told him my views about our future inison an asset him whether ii we put af otloer in Passport Control to look arter Recurityy cases there and to cover Washinet Lor ano ottawa he wothdhave an ouvection. Ha Iss haa none and said that he wouLu hiwayabe Dleased to sed one o1 our officers in the Bureau. Hoover ave orders that I was to be tookeii afhen 101 Callilornia In the evening II dined with 3o1. on the l6th T luncned with may and saw her against on sunday 17th. I left that every ing for ottawi. On the 18th T was met etrbyCaniae- Cartae: and dagnon and had Lunch wit th cannac. II the alter- noon E went to the House of Commons wheie heard Heenzie King spear OI the eapionage case. Fred Fose, the Bommunist M.P. who was one OlL bail, was in his seat. T dined with Peter Dwyer draw Hris wire. We were afterwarus oined by Crnee ald his wife. on the 196h I saw tha Commissdonanat LOi 50. He was as usutll extreme coruial We diseussad the espionaee case and things in general batar I unched with him at the ROMP headquarters, just outside Obtawa. Gagror, Sifm HarvisonyBethed o1 the EBI. EK.Williams, Fauteux,Camie and Jack Mead were present. wiliams anu Fauteux are the two examining counsel or the Hoyal Commission. In the afternoon I saw o.Andenson the new DMI and oL-Aclana who is NOW leaving We talked quite a lot about security am the DMIIS future responsibilities He explained to me that the JIC dilfered From our JIC in that Externat Afdairsand the RCMP were only holding a watching brief and that External Affains were in a sim- lar position on the Chiels Of stati Commi- 60 ttee. This meat that very little got settled as between the Services,Extern Affairs an the ROMP on a ow even. DMT was worriec about his responsdbilities. He was evidently not satisfied with the enquirie that he got from the ROMP into people who were going to be employed on confidential jobs in the Services. He was therefore doing this with his owI FSP anc as far as I could see doing it pretty thoroughly. I tried to. persuade him that the best line WaS to get closer ogether with the RCMP and to build them up as much as possible. I had a long talle after dinner with Williams and Fauteux who were staving at the waurier. We were Later joined by Senator Haig. On the 20th I had a talk with Leopold,w Gagnon ana with Mead. I then Lunched with ColAnderson. He told me that he was shortly goingto Englland. I urged him to Look LIS up. In the afternoon I spent an hour with Corby. He is a youngish man, I Shoud say not more than about 25. He is extremely alert and intelligent. He Should I think make a good witness. He will not De drawn into maing any statement about matters o1 whicla he has no lirst-hand krowledge. He is somewhat temperamertal though when I saw him he was much elated by the fact that MAY had lot bean given bail and by MCKerzie King state- ment in the House of Cammons commending his (CORBY'S) action. I ased him now it was that Russia had been going on in its present state for 28 years and how it was that the Russian people fought so well. He said that if T had been brought up on Marxiian dialeeties from the age of 6, if I had heard nothiing but roviet press and radio telling me that con- ditions abroad were far worse than any con 137 ditions in Russia, in fact that the rest of the world was living in Snualor ani revolu- tion, if I had kowI what it was to walk down street with my best inienu arrt feet I coua not talk freely, anu i1 I had had rIo oppor- tunity o1 comparing my seaarus with those of anypouy e.lse, I should have been thinking as he did before he came to Canada. The im- pact of Canadian conditions was so terific that he had been completely converteu and had realised that from his youth up he had been deceivede He said that although he was under guard day ana night by 5 officers of the ROMP he had never Telt Ireer. I had no idea what it meant to him to be able LO go out and buy a bag of oranges and a pound of hamburger. AS a matter of fact it meant guiite a lot to me on this occasion. T then asked CORBY whetiter the Fussians had deliperately let the Germans into their coun- try in 1941. He said emphatically no. He was at the time at intelligence headuarters. The Russians were in-fact running away and throwing away thein arms to an alarming extent It was only at Rostov on Don that anything like a halt was made.01 this occasion statin put the NKVD behind the troops and gave them orders to fire on anyone nunniag awa. sub- sequently there had been a tremendous wave o1 nationalist propaganda recounting ubeus oi Soviet heroism. In this way the time had just been burnea at Stalingraa. I saw Norman Robertson and Hume wrong O1 External Afrains. Robertson Was deplorirg the whoe Corby incident put was clearly alarmed and felt the prosecution of secunity devolving upon him. We had quite a Long discussion Russian policy genaradiy. Fobertsar I think is still reluctant to believe the worst of our allies. I tried suosequentiy to see Malcolm MacDonald but he was away. T saw his deputy,Stephen Haines. I explained to him that Iwas arious to See macoonald in order to put him in the picture about SIFE. I hoped therefore to see him in London. IT the evening I dined with Carnac, McLellland who is in charge of Corby, and Peter Dwyer. Carnac isisted on going out to see whether Corby was all right and Tound his guara sleeping in the next room. There isuno doubt that the ROMP are extremely conseien- tious. This may be due to the very rigia diseipline under which they are all brought up. Later on we called on E.K.Williams and as ed him to use his influence to get the Court cleared when Corby gave his evidence in Montreal against Fred Rose. Special arrangements had already been made to prevent any photographs being taken. on the 2lst I had short talks with Mead, Gagnon, Carnac Leopold and the Comissioner before flying LO New York. Next day I saw Pat Stone. He told me about a Pole called Ignace ZLOTOWSKY who was a physicist and was travelling on the queen Mary apparentiy in transit to Wansaw and may be to Moscow. He was friendiy with the present Goverament ard gereraily Left Wing. I got a ine an this man through Hans Halbauyd Iriena ol Victors who had been working OF the atomie project. He new ZLOTOWSKYhavi wo ecwith him under Joliot. He said that Z. was not Likely to be of much use to the Soviet Govt.i their work. He was 1ot ereative and could only, work under guidance. He WaS a disappointed and aisgruntied man whom everyonedislikea. This inormation was teegraphed to London. (39, on the 23rd I left with Gay for California and spent the following day in Chicago looking at some wondertul pictures and going to an ice show. We arrived in San Franeiseo on the 27th. While on my holiday there I SaW Stein wlto is the local FBI representative, He WaS very helpiti to me in getting reser- vatious. On the llth April I left by air fro San Franeisco for New York, arriving miduay or the 12th. I stayed at the Waldorf and went down to Washington on the 15th. Here T had a long and very satisfaetory eveing with Micky Ladd and also a final talk with Hoover. It seems that the reorganisation of inteli gence has been moving a bit during my absence Committees are being formed and Hoover has beer drawn in on the Advisory Committee to the N.I.A. to assist in deciding how home and foreign intelligence is to be divided up. Hoover wouid have had me believe that the ball was completely at his ieet ann that if he warited it he could have the whole thing. He had however some uoubts about taking on the Far East. Alternatively he might do his present job plus OSS X2. Again he might retire into his shell,con L,confine him sell to arerican territory and the establish- ment 01 liaison officers Or a purely overt counter-intelligerce work. I lunched with Jock Balfour who is a charming host. Jock is very depressed about the Russians but under no illusions. He kows them well as ha was 01 counse in Hoscow 1or soe time. I saw Hoover for the last time on the 18th. When I got back to New York I hau a talk with Bill Stevenson and told him the kite of wuo story that Hoover was putting over. He said he was quite certain there was no question of Hoover taking the whole of intelligence, home and abroad. He thought he possible he might get X2. Apprepreations have apparently been voted for a foreign Secret service until the end of 1947. As regards our representation Bill seemed to think that Peter Dwyer might carry both. I left from Ta Guardia at 9.30 OI the 20th Aprilyarrived at Shannon o.15 New York time, 4.15 Irish time, motoreu with Dan across Eire to Rush where I was met by Daphnels chilaren and crossed to wambay in a motor bogl. I was on the island by about 10.30 pm. 141 April 25th My first day back in the ofliee. ColAnderson, the new Canadan D.M.I. came in Allen, ana discussed Harker his and work myself. with He the had D.G.,harry with him Lt ol.Raymont from Canauian H.a. We went aver much of the ground that I had gone oven with olAnderson in Uttawa, He seemed rathar apprehensive about his responsibiritie which he did not think he was kely to be in a position to carry.out, e.g. if a spy was discovered in the Canadien War Dept. or in any other miitary establishment he would undoubtedly be held responsiole, although the orly body that had a charter to keep Canada Clean of enemy agerts was at the moment the REMP. We said that in a similar case here we shoula have a certain responsibility if the man had been vetted by us tor confidential employment and cieared If he had not been vetted the responsibility would definitely lie with the W.0. The point which ol.Anderson has to deelde is whether it is desirable to set up an organ- isation on somewhat similar lines to M.I.5 in Canada or whether he shoud concentrate on getting the ROMP built up in such a way as civil to but enable service them Security. to look arter This not is only of course a unfortunately domestic problem. seemed The to DG come I dowii thought OL rather the side of setting up an M.I.5. From what I have seen of Canada T am quite sure that if t this were to be dore properly al enormous orgarisation would be required owing to the immense distance: anu that the expense of it would notreallly be justifieu. It seemea to me that it would be much more profitable to build up the ROMP and raw them much more wuv into the JIC orbit. To do this it is necessary that the Intelligence Branch of the ROMP should have a much more important status and not be mixed up in the ordinary criminal pollice heirarchy. It needs an assistant directon with direct access to the commissioner. At the momerrt nivett- Oarnae as to 6O tnrough LWo other inuivi duals who know nothing about his workpeiore he Can get to the Commissioner. Dick has been doing a lot since I have been away in the matter of shaping B Division and getting recmuits both for the organisa- tion at home and for our overseas stationst T The D.G. has got the final chartar from the P.M., which excludes the recommendations about Treasury interterence in finance and personnel to which we took exception, but allso I am sorry to say excluues any refer- ence to consideration being given to our representation abroad. The new D.0. and the department are to come directiy under the P.M. in his capacity as Minister of Defence and the DG is to See the P M. once a fortnight. This part of the recomrnenta tions is satisfactory. The D.G. does not think that the omission of the reference to representation abroad necessarily means that the matter should not be one ton discussion. T gave him my views about America and said that subject the final settlement there in regard to chartens T thought that we Shouru carry representetaon with the FBI an SS with the nationa'l intelligence authority, T pointed but thet Peter Bwryrer, thotath an excellent teow and doing extremely well, actually doing. our wonk in Canaria and thet th ne Seemed to b a very positive need for someboty from on dept, bo assist Passport control in the granting of visas. T mentioned to him the 143 case of Earl BROWDER who had applied for a visa to the U.K. while I was in New York. If we had a representative in America I thought that he ought to be in Passport Control New York with freedom to go to Washington as and when necessary. T had a talk with Courtney about the Far - East.. He seems to think that things were egirning to settle down and on the wholle e thought that we might do well to leave jin position at any rate for the time being. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RET RETAINED IN IDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Dec 2009 James Robertson came to talk to me about a meeting on illegal immigration. It Seems that there is very little that can be done unless the authorities are prepared to tare much stronger line. This may come about since the ANGLO-American Committee is evi- dently coming down rather heavily on our side, and advocating if not the abolition certainly a drastic curtailment of the powers of the Agency. It is also recommend- ing partition. The only thing that can be done in the meantime is to get better inor- mation about the organisers and finance of the illegall traffic and the conliscation of hhips which take art in it. (uu April 26th Harker I am tola has been give. rapriave until September'. when hya is definitely to go THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. Dec 2ec200 2009 General "Bubblest Der er, the nw 6.0.0. Pal- estine, came to see to. we told him as much as we could about our part in Palestinian affairs and about the genera salup o SIME ale DSO Palestine DErKec suruCi me as being rather o1 the toloo au gutsl type. oursting lor actiolee It TDokS as it he viene 1417 likely to get it and he may thererore be the right man for the Job. I explaineu to hi that the basie reasor for inaetlon up to now had been the Govt. ins tructions that every- thing shoula be done to avoid the provoekton of an incidentparticulariy since the estab- lishment of the Anglo-Americancouunigsion, Alee Kellar is at present ir S-Afmica aund wilI be returning Mid East where he will see Barker. Rogar Lu k me over to se9 Maleoim Mevanaild LO whom T expiirea out sat up in the F.. He said he would do anything he posibiy col to give our organisatdor alli assistance, He would always be aecessible to the head of SIFE and woula ma4S a point ol seaing Dixon on his arrval. April 27th I attended a meeting at the W.0. on illezadl immigration in Palestine. The D.M.0. was in the chair,ant DMI a1-F.O. were also there. SIS and the C.0. failed tO turn up. We want over all tha ground and finally ueclued that the most effective action would be the coriiscation OI the Snips. Eversthiny is to be done to entonce this 11 possible. There is in Taet a test case going on at the moment. I had talk alterwaras with en.euplar the new DMI who L had alread meu. He was very frienuty. I toldhim aboutm my visit to America and particulanll! Iy conversation with JuInDo Wilson. 1 ESired him whathar he had head DuT report or the double-cross syatem,a copy or which had been Left with de Gulngand. He said Ghat he haa cleaned almost everything O1 his sane but on taking a Look he ounU that this report was still there. He said he would he much interested to reba it. ub I saw Chales. He toll ma that it had been declded that Honrocis Should atay on. cussen on the other hand wats retumirg Lo the Bar, The D-G. is hanuing over finally on Tuesday. the D.G. has asked me to write sorD hote on my Americar visit 1or the PMT report. E had a talk wi th Bertram De. He is still fighting for an overseas division Dut Dick has placed hin quite uefinitely.in B,30 in the new organisation. The final WOPU now rests with the D.G. Courtrey tells mhe that the F.E. want a change in the designation SEHEand to calit the orgarisation Sendor Secuniity Liaison OIlice. We all think here that thiis is a mistake. STHE ab AB-aalagousongauisatig tion Do SIME and reallly meals something to the JIC anu the Chieis of Staif here IT we reduced the orri to any.thinz 1 the nature OT a liaisol office the status 01 SEFE here will go dowia accora- ingy. AS or as there are military forces in the FE. we ca see 1D objectiol to the title ol SIFEATd mary opjections DO its Being changed. We have talegrapheuie accordingly. We received a message 04 Sathitarnod from OSS to Sav that Eart BROWDIR was Lending Hurn ithin a rew hours. Out recorus do not show THAT we hau reeeived aly ap lica tion Tor trarsit visa. I yas interested since BROWDERIS applicalior came it Whole JI was in New Yonkc. Pat Stone consulte me about it. I 1010 him that Clearly the applleatiol Shouldbe reierretto us anc that we shoud.d consult the FBI, aa matter which coud De more expeditiously dealt with if we had representation with the FBI in Washington i47 ot New York. I recomierded tha L the elica tion shoulit be se..t homewithout an,/ sbeciai instructions the it Should De Yarecren to us. I would De intnested LO see low one machine woredl when I got home Evidently it did not Work at ull. April 29th I saw M.E. with TAR. ME. is a tittle doubt. fu about the desirability of having Howard ur reresentative with G.e. & C S. THIsIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 EC Do09 M.E. thinks much more of Martin who was working under him at R.S.S and will find out what Martin is now doing. M.E. is doubtful about the job of our repre- sentative in the BSIC as he thinks that it will be rather a difficult one to carry out. If our representative was part of the WOrrin machine he must owe a certuir loalty to the head of his dept. but according to the chart he would have direct access to Travis. He will. also have responsibilitie to Phil bi's seetion, and he will in fact be pain by Both Dic anu TAR feel howevs ar that we ought in all the circumstances to accept th plan proposed by SIS in order to show goou- will. If it does not work we shall have to say SO. M.E. on the whole agrees with this view. M.E. himself woulu o1 course have wider responsibilities ir cortroI OI B.4. but would closely supervise our represerite- tive in LSIO. us I lunched with TAR, Wyn Scott anu Bossard, to whom I gave an account Of may visit to Washington. They were unable to tell ma any more than I knew alreaay about the future of Intelligence in the USA. One thing however is disquieting them. G.2. in the person of Gen.Seibert have set up in Frankiurt what they call "target investigation" This is T think particularly directed against the Russians. The trouble is that in many war they are trying to duplicate other people work and that they keep all the information they get to themselves. They ask OSS for data and then refuse to tell them what the results of their enquiries are. This of course is an echo of Gen.Seibertis visit here some months ago when he asked for all the information we could give him about Russian espionage If I remeber aright we referred him to the Control Commission. It also ties up with a recent request by the M.A. here to the W 0. for information about Russian Spionage. In addition to Seibert,t.Comman- der Begin representing ONI here is seeking for somewhat similar information. Belin I am told is one of 43 ONI representatives ir this country at the moment. I said that quite frankly we were only too delighted to help anybouy who had a clearly delined charter but that we could not give similar inform 1on to 3 or 4 departments. Firstly thie involved us in a great deal of work and secondly it was apt to Lead to serious confusion. It seemed to me thut we could not aeal satis- factorily with American Intelligence until they had got their own house in order, and their own charters clearly defined. It was' hopeu that the discussions Tow going on in Washingtor would eventually clariiy the position. I saw Byrd,S/Ldr. Marshall o1 Air Intelli gence, ana TAR, about a possible case of action against a man who has offered to produce plans of an aircraft at present on the drawing-board to the Frelich or if they. are not interested to tha Russians. The man in question called Ol the at on Saturday. He said that his brother-in-llaw was hard-up and was prepared to sell the plans for a itable consideration. He was told that the matter would be considered and he offered to call back on Tuesday. Meanwhile informed his superior officer who told him to say nothing about the matter. to the British. however who I believe ulti- mately wishes to become a British subject spoke of the incident to Marhhali and offered to co-operate in any way he could provided his partidipcation in the affair did not come to the notice of his superiors. We have a description of the man in question and have arranged for to be Kept under observation. As soon as the man turns up will telephone to Marshall and we shall try and house him if he leaves the builainge that way we will perhaps get on to his brothnsitAaw ana fect an arrest of RIOOthDwbenEtheeplan erfe handed over. this shoulagivs the necessary cover. JFhs Shal RicHhEIS 1958 Dec 2009 Burt came in to see mer. He is very pleased about his new appointment and finds that he r has a great deal to o,particularly with protection duties and naturalisation cases, of which he has to produce 250 a month. He has told the H.O. that he cannot possibly do more and that in his view it is essential to have the cases properly investigated. I told him about the possible case of French espionage and I also discussed with him anti: 150 sabotage enquiries. We shall return to the latter subject later oi. I Feel that some centralisatio will be necessary i1 this can possibly De affected, particularly in the case ol Aamiralty enquiries. The Admiralty do not like the interierence O1 the local police but would be quite ready to accept assistance Irom burt. Burt seels quite confident apout the outcom. of the MAY case although he may have rath a rough passage. The whole question turns on the acceptance of M4AY! statement which opposing counsed will try and mane outwas obtained without caution, and therefore invalid. The H.G. is quite confide..t that the statenent will be accepted as evidence. 1 gather off the record that MAY is quite preparea to plead guilty to a misdemeunour under the act if the statement is accepted. April 50th Horroasis making arrangements For a detinite o1fer to bermade to Gash who will probably go to Roger's division. M.E. has accepted our offer ana will be joining us in a weer or SO. The DG has put a nol-committal minute on the recommendation that 0.0.. shoula tow become B.3C. He seems to have missea all the points we put up to him ana the mEtter will have to be lett to be settled by his successor. He told me yesterday that when Harker goes in September I should be succeeq ing him as D.D.G. He thought this would give me menth the scope I wanted and enable me to continue with the intelligence work. It seemed to me that he was really trying to justify his action is not recommending me fo ISI the post of DG. Personally I am by no means certain about the job unless it is much more clearly defined than the present DDGIS charter. It might easily become abackwater as it has been for So manyyyears. I shall however be discussing this with billitoe. Bertram talked to me about the DG' S rulling which he equally thought was unsatisiactory ice it really decided nothing. He agreed that it would be better to leave the matter in abeyance another week or SO and then tall it over with the new DG. Meanwhile it appears that during my abserce he has been to Gib. and formed certair views about the kind of work being done (a) for ourselves and - THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED INDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DEC 29 Alley came to askeme whether I would be prepared to go to Holland for 2 days next weel. Apparently Moyland was very keen that I should go with Alley and Corin and help to smooth over difficulties between ol.indhoven and van Angeren. I said that much as I would nike to go I did not feel D 62 could be away just as the new DG was taking over. T saw no objection to his going with Corin if this were agreed. Vesey tells me that there is a lot of interesting information about the Etappendien. st. This shows quite clearly that before the war there was an individual named JAKoBs, a British subject living in Wimbledon, who was receiving E60 a month for providing information from various ports about our naval craft. The case is under investiga- tion. It seems likely that JAKOBS returned to Germany before the outbreaic of war. There is also information relating to the transmission of funds for secret service purposes. he idea was to build up a fund here by making remittances through the Norddeutscher Lloyd. tt is doubtful however whether any such fund wassin fact built up since whenever the payment of an agent was in question we always had to work out some scheme for the Abwehr who seemed incapable of making arrangements themselves. May lst The new D.G. had his first meeting. He wants to continue the weekly meetings and wants to get I think more of a contri- bution from everybody on the current wOri that they are doing. I did not say that I had not been accustomed to do this in the past because the late D.G. did not really want to listen to it, and that I had not raised anything at all outroversial as L was always afraid that I should get a snap decision which would not be to my liking. I attended a meeting of the JIC on deception. The idea isto set up the old machinery of the N.Baard and XX Committee and to reconsti- THIS THISIS A A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED 133 IN DEPARTMENTUNDDEI SECTION 8(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS tute the offibero5the Controller in the Cabinet Offices. Dudiley Carke is Suuseste as controller. The Committee First sugges- ted TAR as the Secretary but I said I doubt whether he would be available for a job of that kind unless he could carry it with his other dutiess We should however in any case make him our representativ on the Committee. DNI sugsesteu Charles Chol- mondeley as secretary. I said I thought he would be an excellent choice but that I had last heard of him pursuing Locusts in the Middle East. I would endeavour to linc out what he was doing. Courtney brought in Hunt to see me, He ses to know his area Pretty well T I gather that he is not keen about going back to Burma and I coubt whether there is any other place whare he would be ou reall Value to us. I understand from Aaam that the question of travel without visas bewween this country and America is once note under consideration. Hall Cain came to se me. He was formerly in ATA.G. in China and Hong Kong where he handed over his pupers to Ingram and Alan Roger. He had come to do a job with the economic side of the Control Commnissio in Germany. This has now falllen through and he is at a loose end. I did not quite frankly take very much to him and cannot see him as a member of the permanent staff. Bromley rang up about a journalist called KIMCHE who had got hold of the Palestine Commission' report two days before it was (54 published. Apparently Howe OI the R.0. Security Dept. is anxious to K OW whe KIMCHE'S contacts are. We have a fille about him showing that he has already been a source of leakage. M.E. has got hola of Martin who would be quite willing to come to us,if he is accep- table to LSIC. May 2nd I had a talk with John Cimperman. From rumours that have reached him he thinks that the Boss might carry a wider assignment This is probably an echo of the Doss himself The wish may be father to the thought. I took the D.G. round part fB.ivision and the various officers concerned talked to Piim about their work. I Lunched with Kim and at one stage his father joined us. His lather is just bad from Arabia and OT course full oi the Palestine Commission's report which he feels must be totally unacceptable to all Arabs. Various Arab legations were calling a meeting DO deeideywhat line they were going to take I told Kim about my American visite I sau that Peter Dwyer was doing excellent work and that he was thoroughly ersona grata with everybody. At the same time the work that he was doing was really our work. Kim was evidently rather worried about a rumour that had reached him that I was positively opposed to SIS having any rela- tions with the F.B.I. said that 1 had not the slightest objection to SIS working to the F.B.I. but that I thought it possiole that they might get better results by working 1878 through us since I knew quite positively that whatever letters Were written oy Hoover to Bill Stevenson 0C.there was a fundamental distrust Ol SIS in the FBI. I did not actually mention to him what Barty Bouverie tolu me 5 days ago that when he was in Washing ton quite rece.tly he had dined wi.th Miciy Ladd who had expressed those very sentiments. What I would Suge: consideration would be the placing of an Officer in Passport Control who would ( carry out a liaison with Washingtor and Ottawa and assist the P.C.0. in dealing with security cases. Kim did not seem to see any objection to this. I told him L thought it would be difficult to reach a decision until the Americans knew exactly what they were going to do qua reorganisat and liaison. Peter Hope talked LO me about his Future, and the future OI the job in Paris. I told him that L saw many advantages in having ar office in Paris but I doubt whether we shou have the necessary finances to ru it. It seems clear to me that there wounu be many jobs which Hope is carrying out IoW th for the Embassy and for ourselves which in the future wound rot be hand- led. If thime is any question ol sending out an S.B. officer again I think we ought torcouSiuer whether iy the general interest would not be servea bettar by an M.I.5 officer. Anthony is worried about Padgham. After long waiting he thought that he had got Padgham placed in an administrativ job in Germany. We are now told that the local German authority does not want him. Anthony isquite sure that the objections are entire ly invalid ard is prepared to go out ir 56 DC2000 2000 THISISACOPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED necessary and see our ledEpARaMintheDerefigh on the Spot. 3(4) OF THE PUJBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 May 6th Briscoe cane to ask me about the carding of Germans who had been concerned with secret writing and other technical devices. He had made a short list of these people which he had passed to the registry for card- ing. The registry had refused to card. I Suggested thut Briscoe should discuss this mutter and if necessary refer it to me. Personally I have no doubt in my mind that all such names should be carded. T lunched with VORONETZ. He is looking extremely fit and well and said that for some years he had been worning as a wood- cutter in Hampshire. He has about 4 Itali- ans working under him and under contract thins out people' woods and cisposes of the products. He lives in a caravan with his wife and works from about 6 am to 5 pm. He likes the local people and Seems to be thoroughly happy. He is clearly too out of date on all Russian affairs to be OI much use to us now. He reminded me inciaentallly that Wilmott the present Minister of Supply was formerly an official working under him in the Bank for Russian Trade. Willmott who was very Irienaly with Casparson, Party member and chairman OI the Bank, was eventually thrown out owing to a general purge of individuals connected with the Labour Party and Communist Party which. took place some time in the early 30'S. Wilmott was concerned about this and did everything in his power toget reinstated W without success. The D.G. spoke to me and Horroeks about the 157 destruction or LRC unearded files of which there are some 20,000. Horrocks had got a snap decision out of the D.G. to have these files destroyed wi thout showing him the minutes which had been recorded in January of this year on the subject. A decision had then been reached to postpone this matter for a year. Horrocks had put the case for destruction forward on the grounds of the PMIS directive about the purging of our ords. I pointed out that the PMIS ruling really had nothing to do with the matter and related solely tu any references that may have crept into our files about the private lives of MPS and other public individuals. The DG said that this was the impression he had gained when talking to the PM. Horrocks apologised for not referring the matter to me before the decision was made. It was agreed that it should remain in abeyance at any rate until tha move and that meanwhile I should ascertain From Allley what view the allied gover merts would take. I felt that we were under an obligation to them to supply there with any information about people who had passed through our hands during the war, and thereby assist them to clean up their countries. II for example they were investigating a case it woula be evant to their enquiry to know what the man had said when he went through the LRC. We shouud therefore at Least tell them that we were proposing to destroy these files otherwise we might be accused of bad faith. A compromise would be to hand the files to each allied government. I undertook to make enquiries. T had a talk with Dick and James Robertson about the future of the Middle astasection. They are extremely hard-pressed and there is an increasing demand for memos prepared 15% by experts in each particullar Field. Thist -thwaite is good at this kind of work but only covers his own particular Field. It seems to be a necessity for someone else to cover the rest of the ground. We all agreed that it was of vital importance for memos to the JIC and outside depts. to. be clear concise and well-written. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOGUIENT RETAINED IN DEPARIMENT UNDER SECTION 314) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DEC Dcoa Dick and I had a talk with Col.Thicknesse, who is at present employed O1 the Control Commission in Berlin. ne has had a fairly wide experience in the Middile East and elsewhere and made a very favourablle impression on us both. Harold Caccia met him in Berlin and had spoken to Dick about him. He is a friend of Geofrrey Wethereds We regarded him as a possible future head of SIME or SIFE. 1S0 Imhaa a Short word with Dick and Bill Williams, I ased the latter what he thought oTRalph Ing ersorilis boo. He said that he was being constantly rung up by the Press and aseu to give a reply. He is a little worriea as Ingersoli apparently was right in or the whole qecep tion plan. May_7th ciiscussed with James HObTuon the erae0 of the declare tion 01 the Govt.or the esacuation ot Egpt. The uestiol arihas as TO whether wa shel Le able to Keap SIME or our 1SO in cirae I shola imanin thet BIME would have TO TONB bucr wich the Commanuersmin Chial, presumapl,r Do Nonth Airica, Dut it is possible that we might still be able to keep Jenkins as & Liaison Oficer with the Egypticla. heltit' will dioubtless De going into alt this WiTdl. he reaches Caire on May 14the Vesey and Cussen discussed wi.th me Fim ir cooK on espionage. Firmin 1S 2 corresporide of the Daily Telegraph. Much o1 whet he writes is sensational and inaccurate, but lit t is noteworthy that in every Case where have touched the policehe hus acquired good information. Ar example oi this is the case of Muselier, and cases of counter sabotaie etc. He has al.so speculated a greitit deal about cryptography and the use of machines forthat purpose. We are asxin him to cut all this out. AS reeards Museliar we do not propose to tae 9 Iiri stand although we sheio that it seans regrettable to rake up this mut. II never erce to counter-sabotuge,vict Victor is going t see Firmin and Cussen anu get his somewhat sersatiomal thcts rationalised, on the 160 understanding that he mares no relererce of any sont to an interview with Victor. The .G.held his Second weekly meeting which was very different to the ones that we had uner the old D.6. It was possible to discuss things very freely. The main subject was the PMs directive. It was agree that it should be sent out to I ambers OI the office with a covering explanatory note from the U.G. Horrocigs compllained about the amount of vetting that had to be done for the Cortrol Commission. It aver included lorry drivers. We agreed that steps should be taken to cut this vowe Adam said that he was relying largely on Passport Control to tip us OII in the everit O1 ary undesiraole alien coming to this country. I pointed out that the changes of our getting intormat -tion of this rU were douotiul Dut I do rot See any chance OI getting nything sensible done as long as Adam is here. In fact a large numpar Ol these applications will not be linked up. Though PCOs may have a certain amount of local information ve know from experience that they are not briefed by SIS with any information which emanates from delicate sources. II there- fore there is no look up here we shall never know who is good OT whrg hists bac ORIGINAL DOCUIVENT BETAINED DEPARTMENTU UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBNIC RECOROS ACT 1958 Dec 2009 and woulld like to be in touch with us as well. I said there was ro obJection to this providea he was not covering the same ground as other American agencies. He aited first if we could provice him with information about American desertars. I saiu that this was / 6 a matter for the Provost Marshal and for the police and woud not come our way. He ther wanted to knowil we could give him information about sabotage I expiaineu to him what we had done during the war at wh the present arrangeniet was. II there was a case in which it Was suspected that eith the agents 01 a foreitr power Or any suD- versive organization was Behind the inciae he police Were under an obligation to inform us. It follows therefore that ir we heard nothing of lires or other acts of sabotage they were wue purely to acci- dent or to uisgruntled individuals. We should always be ready to transmit any information to him which came our ways He Said that he was also interestea to know any move lor example oI the O.P. to perie- toate the ar eu Forces. I saiu that I saw no difficulty in passing iniormacior of this Kind. He aid not S sem to want to cross our lines with the IBI in any way. Derbyshire brought me L-note O1 the activities Ol the NKVD in Pouland. It seems that they are pretty well running internat security in that counury. Hewill continue in liaison with bihan and Mampuys and will deal with ali enquiri both From here and from Colinson of PCO. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED NDEPARTMENT DER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DEC 200 161 May 8th Dick and I had a talk with urry about his proposal that he should run straight intelligence. We both have misgivings about this Since it will cut across the general organisation of B.Divibion. various steps were recommended beginning with an attempt to get hold of newspapers ana technical journas and to get them property studied. Frank Roperts who is YIOW Councillor at Moscow, was present He said that he hau great aiiliculity in getting these paper- He submitted a list to his news agent but was tolu that the papers were not available. Whether this was deiinite obstruction oi whether aue to short age of paper is not clear. I thouht that possibly we might be able to ascertain wha papers come to this country,and whether firs dealing with Russia get technical journas in which their products were aaver- tised. We then discussed the question oi translation. It was suggested that perhaps the JIB should provide a pool of translators. It was also necessary te have intelligent readers. I said that I thought there might be a job here for RusSian renegades who knew the whole machine and could interpret Soviet decrees Letter than anybody else. C.diselosed that Sigint sources were likely to provide considerable information for the future, particularly on the hussian order o1 battre. We were asisea to prepare a paper in conjunc- tion with SIS on comnunist activities at home ana albroac as it was felt by all that they nad a very mariea bearing on Russian intentions. (63 We had a meeting OI the Appointmerts Board ana selected Do candidates both o1 whom Look promising. Corin came to see me about a refusal OI the registry to look up 6 names of diplomats coming to this country. He is referring the matcar to me. rrarkly I CLO not under- start the basis o1 this rerusal and the whole question wili hav to be taken up in a big way, May 9th Harier consulted me on a Letter that he had hac From viictor suggesting that he should saver any Oificia comilection with the Security Service and cease to pe on the parroll. He would of course remain at our disposal as aaviser on scientific matters, anut would make a claim if this involved him in any expense as and when the occasion arises. Briscoe consulted me about the truth drug which is a refined Form oi marihuana. de wanted a practicall demonstration. It had been suggested that it might be tried out on Jap prisoners but for some reason or other this is no Tonger possible. He wondered whether CSDIC in the British zone could do anything. I said I thought this would De difficult particulary if it could not De core without the individual becoming awane of the fact that he had been drugged. ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINE BETAINED THISIS A COPY Dec2co DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS Dick ana I continuecou with Curry wha ugsestad that there Shout be two 1bu D.D.BS. one concerneu with C.E. and the other with what he called straight inteilli- gence. He envisaged that all memos would go out through himself anu that he would be gererallly direetingan supervising on that side of the work. Dick explained to him what our reorganisation scheme was,and what our ailliculties were with regard to persoralities We both agreed to consider his scheme Dut ve lelt that it would set up a kind of dual control which would cause diflicullties and colusion. It is not easy LO see how .E. anu straight intelligence cay really be treated as separate subjects. Dick ana I eel that he will either have to take B.2. or retire. Curryts main concern is that some means should be found for ooviating the necessity for his taking a step down in the hierarchy. He still holus the rank of a deputy director The onily other JOD that I can think of is the Secretariat. May loth "oger ald I wert to the JIC to discuss Russian sources. A number ol other sugges- tions have been made and the JIB are to set up a committee to discuss the avail- ability to press material. A decision WE was also reached about periodic reviews and appreciations on Russian activity. There has been a blaze in the Washingtor Post about McCormack and aleo all article in the same paper dated 29th Apriu by Joseph and Stewart Alsop entitled mhe FBI becomes a Secret Service. It goes into the intellligence set-up in consider- able detail, draws attention to the work done by OSS anu mantions the possibility of Hoover taking over the. whole of secret 165 service work at home and abroad. It is pointed out tha't the FBI have alienatad the British who haverdone se much for the Americans during the war and that if Hoover were appointed American inteiligarce wouda suffer accordingly. IL draws attention to the Iaet that the FBI led the move to force the British colillis,who heaued the Brtish becret service in America early in the waT, to leave the country. Elis it is mertionee reporbeu direct to the labulous Maj-Gen.enzies,head oi all British Secret servicas whose rtame is quite unknown to the British puolie although he can irequentiy be Round holding forth geniallly in the Iamous Whitets Club in Lonuon. winaliy the objection is raised to Hooverts appointment on the grounds that an extremely powertu. Gestapo with executive powers would be created. Drew-cam to see me about 5 majorleakages which had occurred recently. Two O1 there were in connection with Lron and steel reponts and the 3rd related to atomie research. Reference was made in one to a cabinet discussion Erld the informatio vas accurate. the interence is that some- body having access to cabinet papers,possibl it the Ministry of Supply is leaking to the press. The PM is very concerned ana has given instructions DO the Lone Chancel- lor to investigate. He through Normal Brook and Drew is appealing to us as there is in fact YIO other body capable of under- taking the ennuirye T said to arew that this Seemed to be a pretty wide inter- prepation 01 the PMs Mew directive on our functions We of course vere only too ready to undertake the emuiry anu Lit eoudD Justilied om the grounus that il a 166 leakage was going on in Cabinet circles about a matter which aid not directly concern the defence of the realm, the Charmel was operr for Leakages wildeh add some within these terms. It was therefore incumbent upon us to aiseover what that channel Was and to block it up. This however Was stretching the directive to some etent. I thought therefore that we ought to have a letter asing us to conduct this eryuiry. He said that he LOO had considered this matter with Norman Brook who Test that this was an investigation which we shoud undertake ana that the charter shoud be stretehed aecordingiy. He would let me have & letter. Cussen who was also present then pointed out that our machinery to deal with these matters had cosome extent run down. Formerly we had Pam Fraser on the one hand and B.5 an the other. If we were going to be asked to carny out enquiries of this sort the question of staff would have to De considered. I also pointed out thut this matter raised the question of records. The instructions were that our records were to De ept clean od anything that diid notcome directly within the terms ndefence of the reallmi, and the PM had made it clear that he aid not want us to have the names of anyoody on our cards who was TLOt considered to be at danger to securiby. Drew was TIOW telling me that possibly Brenaan Bracken and siT Andrew Dunean and undoubtedly Freddie Kuh were ail mixed up in this business. Ii wa were to investigate Casas o1 this bind we should probably have to have their lames on our carase Under the present. ruling we might weli have destroyed all our fikes on Freddie KUH. We should thereby have been deprived ol valuapie starting points dn the preserrtt enquiry. Drew ertireiy (67 agreed. Cussen is going to make out a short report and wili De seeing the Lond Chancelllor on Weunesuay. He emphasises however that it would not De possibile to go further than to indicate on general lines now far enquiry was likely to be profitable and ir what directions it should be made. I reported all these facts to the DG who seameu please that I had asset for an oflieiek letter From the Cabinet Ulfices should De sent to us requesting that the enqulry should be made. He uy unuerstoda all its implications with regard LO state records.. May l1th Sclater came to see me this morning. He is a lttle upset at having received his notice. Actuauiy I did not now that the notice was going out. I should have preferred that M.E. Should have reviewed the whole position before these notices were issue. M-E. comes in on Monday and I have arranged that he should go dovn to Barnet to dis- cuss matters with Selatar. What I am most concerned apout is Selaterl smatil unit which tares a cross-section of the ether. I am sure that this Work ought to go or and I doubt very much whether bigint will do it properiiy even 11 they are prepared to tare it on at ala. I talked to Charies about various problems firstly Cyseconuiy Join Auamn anlu thirdly D ana c divisions. These were major issues about which I had very strong views. I Coulci talk to the DG but I aid not want to give him tha impression that T was trying 16 to rush him into a number of aecisions before he had had time to look rounea Chatles said there would De no har'm in talking to him,bu we Could handiy. expect him to decide on any but tre most ungent controversial matters. May Ith Mea. joined 1s this morning. I parbieulin arew his attention to scli terms little organisitiion which has Deen taking a Cross- seotior Ol the ether. I said that in my view this work saouu certuniy go on. I was doubtful whether if this comm Lhenit went to Sigint the work wouldever be done. It had I thought amply prove its userul- ness and il it did mot continue we shoutu never have ary idea as to the extent of leakage through Service and civilian signalseo I talked to Curny about the possibility of his taking or the Secretariat. L thought that there was a Job to De done 11 all the JIC papers came into the secretaniat instead of going to D.Branch. The bcre- tariat shoulu also be concerned with matters of policy. There would too I thought De an opportunity for putting up sukaes- tions about memos ane lnes O1 action that the ofldce Good proditably taice. curry said he would lke to consider this. Corin has JuS returea from Hollanu He sas thad oliindhoven is rurrine Lwo private jaiis aro that when his prisoners eseape he never reperus the la0t to the police. He IS Caeariiy running into ailti- culties and it seems a title uototfud whether ne wilI stay the counsay We seem to pe on Iirmer grouru in ueaing with toe Ministry or Justice. /69 I haa a talk with vick anti TAR abour our liaison abroau. We came to the conclu- sion that it was useiess to ao nyithing about Paris at the momSwt. As reguras America I put all the points I am inclined to thins that it wou.La be proritaole to have a man in PCO N2w York. I ShalLl discuss this with the DG belone I have a Calit with Dic mlliis Whom I saw at une club hinks that I am going Lo encountar consider -able opposition mainly. due to Viviian who takes the view thet il we have a representative there We Shall cut out Dwyer. the real Facts are that the FBI will never trust SIS owing to pust history and the fact that they are al af feasive organisation. Further that we can ana do alreauy conduct direct liaison with the FBI through John Cimperman who passes us information which he does not pass to SIS. Harry and Dick discussed with me the figures for our mobilisation in any future war. We felt that without prejudice to ary Further build--up we should require 20 officers at the LRC (we have hau 26 ir this war) and LO officers at 020, W Office or each region anu 5070 increase for all SO points ineuding SIME and SIFE. Harry is arranging about the SCO staIls. I tallkea to Courtenay Young abouu that the Chinese are anxicus to Obtain intormition apout our Irtelligence Service anc other matters. It seemed to me that we ought TO do Something about this. He is taing steps to set some machireny in motion. There is T understad a development in the Frerch Leakage case. thas returne 110 From Paris ard has tOLU las that ir the mee time tha individual has called hesil, offering 14 blue prints from Hawzers factory whame his brother in Law WOrKs, we havenow the name coth oi te mal atalt hig brotner -in-law. The JIC nave cir'culnte: a very hot memo by warren OI De FO O1 russian intertiQis Warren points ouD that thase intention have when mase plain the utDeraicas O1 woviiet OIliclals ar ir their Yes. He thinks therefore thet Ve snoulu three ther at tnair acs Value. He points out that we faileu ao this in the case of Mein Kapf, with aisastrous Pesuts. He suggests that as ic may be inepenient to attack the Russian yovt. we shouii conuct propasanda ant iplomsitic action against O.P.s throughout the yorlidi whieh 4 o on? OI their prinoinile irstrurents ti tomeit nolc/. May 4tih T saw Le Mn this morrinie. 1e is u lortuna -1 Leevitit is. He ertmerelir likeaoile iCharscter att would val EO do the licison wOk hera il hie could Work quiecly on his own without interterele I tola him that we an vany much regretted his departure and hopei the he might come bac to us Ole day. I also sai chat it was our earrest desire to astaulish a Clos liuison on a conficentiui basis. Poasibiy when things settled uTOWI chis might ye brought apout. THIS ISISACOPY IS COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMVENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE RUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 DEC 2009 71 At the DGS meeting toau, we discussed the P.MIS directive and the circular which is to go out with it. HorroeKs has adopted some oi my suggestions ard I think thad with a full ex lanation oy heaas ol Divisions on the question ol Curuinegi can go out ir its present Form. This WES generally agraeu. I mentioned the recent demand on LO conduct enquiries into the Cabinet Sakages and Said that this meant that we shouna have LO be Very caneyul. about what recorus wa destroyed. The DG thought that we were amply covered by tha PMS direetive. We then aisousseu travel control. T mentioned that ADAM had said at a previous meeting that hewas relying on PCOs to keep us informed aout undesirables. I said that they were rrankly not in a position to do this. First-y they ony had a certain amount of local know.ledge,seconaly the suspects in one COurETY, thinking that they would not get facilities localiy,wot) propaoly 6O somewher ese whare ther woulla ce no recorde ard tharois there wene many recor.s which owing to their secnat nature SIS would nt eirculate to Passport Control unaten any conitiol.s. This meant that a check on our orus an.d possibly those S1S was tha Day real sareguma. There wa no axyarent solution LO this problern at the moment but it was Suttauten the we should aiseuss this matter with SIS. I said that inlessaweagot proper leads From Passport Control which was our first line o1 uererce, our work would be very seriousiy impaired. We then discuss- ea the H.(. Traliie Index on which there is a time lag o1 something like 6 weeks. It was agreeu that Harker should see Marwell and try anu get some improvement. 172 O THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UVOER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 DEC 2009 /73 THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOEUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENTL UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT1958 DEC 2cx99 May 15th OOK the D.G. round the rest o1 BoDiviwion ts morning and he has made the acquaintanc of M.E. We had a long sessionof the Appointments Boa The future OI B.Divisiol is to be discussed tomorrow. I pointed out that this denended to a considerable degree on what the D.6. proposed to do about the JIC. I thought tha he at any rate nominally ought to be our representative Or the JI and that generally speaking he should attend the meetings accompanied by a representative ol the Divis concerned with the particular item on the agenda. If If.he he decided to do this all papers from the Chiets of stay and JIC shou reallly come direct to him,o more property the Secretariat which would be reppousible for seeing that ald sections 01 the office vD)e consulted and if a memo were required that it was properly CO-ondinated. This led me to talk ol the possibility OI Curry rurmning the Secretariat. II he aid there were a number of other matters affecting pollicy which shoul.d 6O to him. At the moment 1or example D.4 lorulated their own policy with very tittle regard to the requirements OI the rest OI the Ollice-Adam blandly announces that he has placed the onus on Passport Concroi for waring us about suspects coming to this country. Hence it is not necessary to look up visa ap lica- tions. This is aL.L very fine but the Passpo] (14 Control cannot possibly carry this respon- sibility in the circumstances Firstly they may have no local knowleuge of an individual vho,finding difficulty in getting his visa from his own country, does totan adjacent one. Secondly there is much ormation,particularl, that in a highly secret category,whic SIs will not send out to PCOs. Thirdly it is dillicult to put information from highly secret sources on a Black List since it is our experience tha such lists sooner on later come into the posiession o1 a foreign power Harker said that he had discussed with H.O. the possibility of having landing caras sent to our fice before they were sent to the Aliens Brance. It appears that there are some 6,000 alliens arriving here ever. weer. The problem would therefore be a consider- able one. The H.O.index is in a real mess and a good 5 weeks in arrears. May loth I saw Scott and tola him that I was very much afraid that there would be nothing here for him OI a permanent nature, but that his services might well be required in a temporary ca acity to deal with Anaersts Army when it was demobilised. I said that I would do my utmost to find him some suitable em- ployment. He is I think not unlautrally concerned about his future. He has a wife and chila and was anxious to bring a sister over from Poland. I had in mind possibly Some Job in dealing with the foreign Press in J.I.B. I saw Tomy Lascelles at his request. De COURCY had been to see Lord Clarendone He said that the Dure o1 Winusor, for whom some job in connection with the British Embassy in Washington had been considered but turned 75 aovn, was proposing to make some statement to the Press iin America retailing all his gnievances against the King aru the British Govt. This seemed most undesirable and de COURCY was doing everything he could to persuade him to rerradin Iromn any such action. Meanwhiite he wondered whether Some palliative could not be administered by allowing the Duke to go back to the Belvedere. I told Tommy that I would rot put it above de COURCY to have fixed all this up with: the Duke in onder to boackmaii the yovte into allowing the wuke to return to the U.K. I told him what we knew about de COURCY and that this was just the kind of matter in which he would probably like to dapble, He might well think that 1t wouLIU enhance his impor- tance in Royalcireles. Lommyls line is to Refuse to sae he OOURCY and to take the wish of the Due giving a statement to the Press Which he does not think would cut much ice. Mat 17th Cimperman came in. He tour me that he was visiting certain ol their overseas statlons ineruding Gemeva, and then returning to Washington for a conference in Jiue. He did not think that this implied his with- drawal, ME. has show me a report on RSS by Hesten which indicates that ta whole OI'ganisatior is gradually being disintegrated and that there i.s nothing very adequate to take its place. A sergeant has been placed in Co utrol. He appears to have few qualifications other than association with Dlair bunningham who used to pun the organisation. The latter is at present away on 5 months leave. Two cap- taiins have been placed under the sergeant. 1 M.E. thins that the discriiination work is going to suller for some eousiderable time and norly recover if some ver drastic changes are made in the personnel in charge. An interesting report has come in on the interrogation oi PROTZE a 3F mala in Holland. Paughamts dowraul is now epained It transpires that the indiviuuas who DIlered their services to the Germar Embassy ar ware reported on Dy Paagham to Stevens, Meme subsequently kept under observation on the orders of Rinten anu Henarieks by a man called KOUTARLCK. KOUTERICK was a werman agent, hence it appeared curious to the Germans that peopire who raporteur ET the E-bas: were within 24 hours uauer olvervation Dy the British. The Beimanmuassauo refused at first to eieve that Baugham was involved Because his name was im the ALmanach de Gotha. Ha said nobody such standing woullu ao suc a thing and that it was more 1i ely to be the Nzi porter at tie door, Kruegeris downiali (ha was the SIS agent wh 0 had worked for 21 yeans) was also aue to KOUTERICK who was tod to cover one of his periodical visits from Gotenberg to the Hague The Germans arrested him and he committed suicide in jail. The report also confiirma that Hooper was fon some time in the pay of the Germans. PROTZE aornoborates almost everything thing that had been previously said byFelaman,Gisies and Perry cordon. May 18th I had a long meeting with Durt, TAR, Hunters vilcinsor o1 B.,Cussen ang Sangent-o D.3 on thecase of the man who went to the branch Embassy with plans from Hawer. Hawers now say that this man might have had access 177 not only to the Furies but to a jet-propelleu fighter which is on the secret list. We felt therefore that we could not alrord to Leave him at large. It was decided that Wilkinson should take a statement from him at the factory anu that his premises should then ba searched. the DG was Tot here at the time but I told him alter Lunch what had been done. Wey anu Wadeson talked to me about a documen wich we had received 1rom the liela indica- ting that the Germans had information to tie effect that we wene going to oecupy Norway alu that titis Seemed to have a Dearing on the trial OI Raeuer at Nuremberg. Raeder was saving that the Germans occupied Norway because the/ had information that we weme oingto co SO. We are arrarging Tor the documente/to be set out.. It was obtainea originally from ole o our P/Ws. Man 20th Herbert came to see me this morning. I showed him the PROTZE report. He was interested. He took the view that while it conlirmed what we hid h previously said about HOUPER it did To add very much. While he thought it would nos.ible to mount a prosecution he felt that the old reasons for not doing o,ramely the exposure 01 SIS, stilt hela good. Henuerson came in to sa./ goolbye. He is going bacie 1o his hotel anu restaurant busiress and said ir at any time he could be OI asaistance to us he wound be ven 1a0 to help. THIS IS OOPY ORIGINAL DOCUIVENT BETAINED IN IDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DEC 2000 76 We hau arcather Long meetira toat DI the Hawker CFti. It treIsoira.d 2S result of the interrozasion: O Saturiay that Uete were LWO peou involved it sees that the real icher in the wpouuile the nrothrillaw Hre Hicharis. a rrencnmer who amifteg thee ie rule to the Emorsol out toll once. tie had barar mdarus white hau Laver latt his posrmepi b2 them way again. He VIA ITOT very CLEED what the plane ware but his brother-in-uaw the words in Hawcer, sas tha.t ha never brouht out of Hawaers ai-y plans except thos relatire to the Furies. He brought them out becalise he was going to anothar branch O1 the fsetorr and had no icet that his brother in-law had takerl them. There anee quite a number oi diserepancies in the stories or these twe. but the general opinion i5 that the Eng lishman is imocertyalthouith it is dillicult to understina how,if he to k certa plans out lor some specific purpose,it not occur to him that they wene missing. Th were no plans in the house and it WHS asalme that they hau De tunen Due the fetor.' We decided not to approach the French put to get the air Force officer who is going to Paris this Wear to Ii-ze Corcthcit with and inform him oi what ectioit has wen taker. otherwise he might 1ee1 that we haa Lot him qOVI althousha tecnmicall ounce has Deep admitted by Alit'e Richares,ther is clearly IIO Case for grrasecution. we are however going to trt aet Et the Full facts by further interra abLor. D.6. hee LI meeting OII 0.0. at which MeTei', Dutler, Horrocis, Se.1c1 aru myseur ware present. He listerau Co al. tha aneumerts and T think will decide OI the aboitiol 01 (79 Walter Bell cal.e in to a.goodpye. He has got a JOD as P.A. to Cuari Kerr in Washirg- ton. Roger ana Cuthbert Feetwoot-Hesketh came round to tale to me about the Tecert internd -gation O1 Keitel. Keitel was showIl Ganbos message of June 9th 1944 anu is o1 opimon that the decision of the ONW to divert the 2 panzer diivisions and 4 iniantry dividions destined to reinforce Runusteut to the Pas de Calais, the Lagebericht of the Loth which formed part of Jodlt diary draws attention to a report fnom Maamid an also toaBritish propagunda directive as the evidence on which these tactical moves were carried out. Unfortunately the actual reports have bean destroved but the o1e rom Madrid and the propaganda directive almost certuimiy refers to Garbols message an which he pointed out that his contact in the MOI had been told that no mention wis to be made of the Pas de Calais. Vardous other things have come to light. It seens that SUE or some underground heacquartens at apout this time were giiving instructions to the underground movement in Brussels. The orgamnisacions with which they were communi- cating naa recently come under the control of the Germamse he imitiat terdercy there- Tore was to regeru communications as intended to mislead. Later however the Germans thought tha as the Belgian oryanisat tion had been sorecentiy taken under control flhis lact would not have SO soon come to the notice of tile British ana thet therefore the communication about starting trouble in the Brussels area should be baer at its face value. It was lLueky that they dia take this view since it reiniomeede the Pas de Calais duea. It does show however (40 how dangerous dange erous communications to the unaer- groura movement cart pe to uecepton. Jouts arary was apparently written up by roI. Schramm who as 1uCk would have it was at Nuremberg as a witness. Schramm succienly asked Cuthbert whether the whole 01 the mPatton Army" idea was not a blind. Cuth- bert replied that we had of course had forces in the S.E. O1 Englana and that if we had seen the 15th Army moved down to the bridgehead we shoud have in ail probability struck across the Chanuel. Schramm,obviousiy very please, said fAh that is just what we thought, I told Roger about the leakage through SOE about D.day. This I have previously mer- tioned. He is going to try and bind out who was responsible for communicating with the underground movement in the Brussels area. May 2180 Dick, TAR, ,Cecit and had a meeting about the eontroloi passengers arriving at Rineanna. It was decided that we should approach waT in are couse and see what ne was prepared to do in giving us information about particular aliens arrivirg or in telling us what aliens arnivd on a particular date. We then discussed the possibility of putting someone into Hineanna under BOAC. Such an individual would have to get to know the various pilots and orews and ascertain whether ary of them were acting as unollicial couriers. A Further suggestion was made py Cecil that we should have someboty here who realty knew knewapo apout all air routas. I thought that possibly we might have a contact in BOAC who would supply us with this information. I thought THISA A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONS 13(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS that possibly Vic Coa fold six this. Rine- anna is rapidly pecoiing t very important traiic centre with lines to Norway,Sweden, Norway, Denmark,Holland,Portugale ete. Cussen brought Capt.Wiison to see me resara ing a theit OI inter-service cyphers at Ghent. Somebody had broken into a room whi stained only these eyphers ana removeu th ali. It Seemed therefore that the person who did the job knew very definitely what he was after. We suegesteu to wilson that he should gat Philny to communicate with I explained to Wilson that in a gererat way we were MEX interestea in knowing about case of this kind in case we Ware conuucting other enquiries about Heaxages o1 intorma- tion. I arranged with him that where we had arr important and urexplained case we shouia firat reler to him in case he could provide any explanation From his knoweuge OI cypher therts or breaks. At the moment he said that he thought our eyphers were entirely secure. T remirded him OI the went during the war when DiCk went to Gi to investigate the Leanage apout the submarine Rutland He hau,oi course, though I did lot rub it in, contended that it could not have peen aue to any cypher break. He conlessed that in the light of suuse- quent revelatiols he had beer mistaken ald that the Germars were il fact reading quite a number of our naval cphers. TAR and Careron came to see me about the cases of Federico,Kuhlenthal and benz who were all concerned with Garbo. These people are now in the hands of USFET having Deen flown From Spain to the American 2o1e. 18 The Amaricans being short of interrogators Were proposing to talk to them at a rouna- table conference We do not wish then to T late the whole history OI the Garbo case to USFET wha are therefore anxicus to get them to our OWII CSDIC. A strongly wonded letter to this effect is being sent to S.S.U. representative on USFET. May 22nd I attended the JIC meeting today. Gladwyn Jebb gave a n interesting talk on the Paris Conference, He said that the keyrote was th toughness Ol Byrnes who was adopting a polid of not giving way an inch to the Russians. We they of will course see back tha ned the light Americans ana up. qualify Whether thei demands in conseuuence will become clear at subsequent meeting. If they do not: it may end in the whole proceedings being submitted to UNO and even to the Russians walking out. This would mean two opposing eamps in surope The three nain problems discussed were (1) Italian reparations, whether agreement could po sibly be reached, particularly ii it were decided to give the Russiars the Italian battleship Littorio to which the apparently attach very considerable importance. On navall experts say that this would not matter a great deal. (2) the question 01 Trieste is lar more diilicult;tron a strictl navall point of view it is felt that as the Jugoslavs already have two bases it would not matter very much. The issue is more a political one in that it constitutes further encroachment by a power within the Russian orbit. A possible solution is to make Trieste a kind of Danzig with a corridor to Italy,but the Jugoslavs may try and put a kind of enclave round it and ther build a Ganyia allongside d.t and freeze it out. Two 63 other raval bases that the Jugoslavs alreaay have are Pola and Fiume. (5) Italian colonies. Jebb was anxious to know whether the planners wish to hola on tocyreraica, making a port o1 Tobruk. He thought that by making some concessions in other matters it might be pos sible to achieve this objective. We were alter alt on the ground and coulld sa. that we were not going to move. We could ther make atreaty with the Senussi and start putt: in our installations. There woula of course a certain outcry about painting the map red. This might be offset by some overall mandate from UNO. AS regaras Eritrea and Libya,an suggestion that these places should go back to Italy seemed unthinkaole. There was equally an objection to giving them independance either now or in 1O yeans time since the French were insisterit that it woue only Lead to Simillar demands being made to th in the case o1 Algeria Ali Tunisia. the only other possibility Seemeu to be a quaari- partite mandate which would have to include theRussians. The inclusion OI the latter was objected to by some as enhacing their prestige in these areas giving them opportun- ities for intrigue which they would not otherwise have. Jebb pointed out that even if they were not participating in the mandate thay could not be prevented 1rom establishing lomatic representatives or O-suls who would be in just as good a position to carry out intrigues. The Turkish question was haraly touched upon although it is expected to come up before long. We then discussed Turxish c/phers. THISIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED NDEPARTMENT UNDERSECTION 3(4) OF THE PuBHCECORDs AOT 1958 su The immediate problem was to get the maximum sec- urity before the Turkish issue came up. At that stage there would be telegrams passing between London and ankara,and probaply betwee Ankara and Moscow,which would indicate the measure of support which this couutry might be pre ared to give. It might be a serious matter if this information fell into the hands of the Russians through a weak cyphe system. A committee is to report on what can be done to reduce the risis. While it would be possible to get the Turks to send all their communications by table instead of W/T and possibly to use the bag only, it would probably not prevent the Turks in Ankara from passing on information to their representative in Moscow Equally if all the negotiations between ourselves and the Turis ere conuuctea in ankara,it was probable that the Tur Turish ish ovt.woula wish to keep their Ambassador here informed. The problem, is not therelore an easy one. ELmhirst raised the question o1f a representative in Beirut. I said that arrangements were being made to Dut in an assistant M.A. who would be working to SIME. Elmhinst thought this was Satis- Factory. I saw Victor. He is going to find outwhe there is a useful contact in BOAC wha will be au fait with air routes alt over the word. He is allso going to see Fish and ascertain whether he is has any suitable contact in Rineanna. He told me that he had heard from Duif that de COURCY had been in Paris and he believed was marine contact with Right Wing cireles there. He was giving outt that he had some kind of mandate from U. /875 THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION ACT 3(4) 1958 OF THE DEC PUBLIC, 2o0 RECORDS 0b - THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DEC2Q May 23rd I had a talk with the D.G. who gave his permission for Cussen to go to Paris to interview Dlaise. I then discussed with him the future of D. Diviior. I did rot KLLOW what he was interaing to to with regard to the JI but personally I felt that he should be our epresebtative,attending as and when he w le and taring with him any specialists he lived. II he thought this was right; and apparently he did,it seemeu to me to folow that all JIC papers and papers from the Chief's of Staff snould come into a properly constituted Secretariat which would be concerned with all matters allecting policy and with tha integratior. of any replies or memoranua Which wert to the JIC. I then diseusseu the D.Sections. It seemed to me that although it Was necessary to have 3 officers to control factory work, they might weli utilise the services OI ALOS (87 for a great uea.l O1 the for that WE'S cone ix the provinces. IL seemed to me unecoromic to have Ewo sets OL people touring the country for diiierent This lec us 1O discuss the ALOS. 1 salti that onthe whole 1 thowht that they had performed a useful Function during the Wain anu that gereraily C.0.S were aretous that we should 1.ot return to the re-war isolationiat poley. on the other hand it Seemee to me that the job must be made live antthtAho ahtF ththe Also Should be really well informed lanot whan visiting C.0. do mote than pass the time Of dey. 01 the Bebivision Shue we autaien lite a Lot oi troubile to ger G.C.: U their 5.B.' informed about out who an Tor this purpose we had sent roud people. Do leetune. We had however been ir some difiicaity ewing to restrictions placed upon UIS concerring secret sources which wana in bact bale to all bur work. I quite reulised that police lorGes in the provirees might thurerent-l 1TO Scotlaru Yard Dut our experience Dhhere hau Tot peen atogetner sacisactory. L regrettec to to-say that whenavon we hattouched the Metronolita Police the 1ctS were eithar im the possession ot the Daily Express who probably inatenueu to rereuse them and Other possible, alad I hau uren reintorced in this view Dye yoor recently suomitteu to 1s D3/ one Firmin,a correspondent of the DallTeregraph. This BOOK purported to deal with C.bein this country A great deal oit was nonserse, but whereven we had touchac the police the facts were accurait I that psychologically I thought there something in contiruing the ALO system put that he would probably be able iLo put me right on this pointe I believed that C.C.s fixed to feel that they had someone in their area whom they could instruct to get amt answer from MT5 Dout certain problems whiiich conceviter then, and that the/ liked in a sense to resaru this officer as a sort 01 member OI their staii. Otherwise a GO-mitht think that M.L.5 MaS a rather secretive bony somewhere ir London which he could not reattiy penetrate The DG said that han entirely mniit the nwil. on the head, that he thought this WaS a moSE important aspeet the whole problem, He was proposing to get togethe a lew selected C.0. both Boroueh and Country, and obtain their -views. He ended by saing that he was at the moment conseious that a hLmDer O1 matters aftectirg the orgalisation needed adgustmest and that it WIAI desirauie that something should be done nt as early a cate as possible, an before we move to EI new building. He was also 1u1y seized with the importance oi getting I S arid ourselves info the same building He had already mentioned this to air B,Bridges anu Berel Sa-House WES uner consideration, With regard DO our reorgarisation, however he stil felt himse1i vary much ir the wame .and he would welcome ary Buesestione that I might have to make. undertook to pratere lor him,iin conbunctionwit consun tlonwith Dicksom kind ot Chart arectirg all Divisions. AS Iar tnaigama- tioni O1 B arc F were coreerreu the matter was simple.Al that was neeessary wus to call Divsion B.l Vesey nas discovered that NOUTARICK was 1or a short period in 3:24 but that we gat rid of him in 1040. I LO nat think t ere is the least linelinood that he woul have been working for the Germans then: Had he witheu to dio So he would probaiily have remained where he WES. He subseyuentiy worreute SIS but where he is now I do not know. We shall have to lind out. 180 Ede came to see me apout his proposed visit to the Caribbean. It has NOW been decided that OC is to go into lguidation. He is of course very disappointed an does not know what he is going to do. He clearly does not relish anappointment as ADA to Lock alter the purely adminstrative side of OC neither wouldhe come into B.Division. I think he will probably resign. He does not propose to talk to Kircy Green about the abolition 00 because he thinks it might arlect his morale. When he has linisheat his work in Jamaica he wi.ll spend a fortnightie hoiday in USA. I sa u L thought I had better Just mention this fact to Cimperman. I talked LO harny about the Turkish cyphers It Seemed to me that the ory possible course was to issue very delinite instructions to our Ambassador in anicara to the elect that ii the Tur.ish ish issue blew up we proposed to conduct our negotiations with the Turks through him and not through the Turkish Ambassaaor in Lonuor and that as and when the occasion arose the Turish Ammbassador here and the Turaish Covt. shout be So informed. The Turkish Govt. woulu also be told of the reasons and urged rot to telegraph back to London resumes of the conversations in cana or to send indiscreet communications to their Ambassador in Moscow. We may also see whether it was possible to ensure that any communications between Pnicura and London were sent by cablle and not by wireless. I did not think it was possible to do more. iqo May 24th we have been asked Dy Garvey of the KO to give a security course to Howard Briage who is going as F.0. .Security UIlicer to MoscoW. D.G.has agreed. It is the First sign of tha FO seeking ouD assistance in security matters. Bosserd O1 S.S.0. has tola TAR that Aamiral Leahy woud very much line to see the DGmyseli alt TAR. I have asked the DG about this and explained to him the kind o1 things that may be aiscused. I thou that we Should be caretul about saving anything that might be quoted to Hoover ana which he might think aamagins to his interests, Leahy is here purety on an Intelligence mission. May 25th THISIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUHENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE RUBUIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DEC 2009 B O 0 9 THIS I A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED NDEPARTMENT UINDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DEC 009 May 27th- We had a meetire about 1 pivinilol. at which it was ayreeu in principle that B anu F should be amalgamated. It Way Felt however that such al amalgamttion could take place more proritably when .division court De house in the same building B. I said that it the move Wois rot Hoing to tare too long we coulu wait lor it out that we uid not want to wait langer thein was absolutely necessary. Hoilis felt that from his own point of View. this wasextremely importarzt. It was left for consiueratio whether F.3 should go into B.2 and whether D.1 shoura not also go into B.2. F.2 would then become B.l. Malcolm Johnston came before the Appointment: Board as a possible candidate for the heaco of SIFE. He makes a good impression and his qualifications seem good. He has been confined during his 20 years service with DIB to worn in Bengal on terrorist ongarisa- tions and to work at DIB headmuaarters. He therefore has more of an inteulligerce outlook than 6 police outlook. He Sems ean to dor the job. We felt. however that i it could be arranged he should be on loan from the Indian police for a year. this would ensure that he din not lose any compensation that might be coming to Inuian police Officers when the Indian GovE.toor too over. It woura aiso give him al opporturity or getting DO KI.OW us anu 113 we Should also have a chance of seeing how he got on in the TE. T hed a Longish talk with him aftonwalas about the SILVER case for the during oi which ne hd been mainly responsiulle. Urorturatela all records huve been burrt and he is really the orly person who COL.LCI write the case up rom memory. I told him I thought it exsTeme ly important that he Should do So since his experieree of DA Wom was very dfrerent from at own anu ighit ir laet nave more Deaning on Nature tactic&. The ebnui itiors im ruria were UI oourgeentiredy llirerent From those in this gourtry and in ma ways to moza complex. I spoke to the DU about a contingent O the Jewishi Bnieate wildch is coming overt to tare pant in the Victory Furade. L DOLLd him thought we oughtito inform the WO OT the exact position anu point out to them taet- fully that they had ueparteu From the ruling in granting permission tO these people to COma. e-ruine i5 that only British sulec can come here D leave and that Flestinians or other nationaities have to the their Leave on the continent ano cammot come here except on extreme compassionate grounds. The was just a possibildty that the contingent might inelude a terrorist although this T thought seemed likely. We 1elt thaith 1or political reasons 15 wOTil.al be an ITieuLt to cancel the Jewish Contingent. I had a hale with MARTIN wkIo we Wat lox oun representative in LSIC. He seems thoroughly gualitieu to ta e the sob am is quite eer to bake it on. May 28th Miss Wadeson came te talk bo me abelat the Etapperienst Umortunately T had not yet read her memno. It aopeans iwite ciefinit that JACOBS wina obtained British natuaisa tiang was working For the Getmans prior to the outoreak 01 wary buD thera is no 1aason to thirue that he has done anything since the waTT. His oWI spymaster AHLRECHS says that he hever Sheweu any signs of life alter his metumn here Et any rate after Novtor Dec.1939. The Eteppendienpt was-realigy Set upon un the assumption that wa Should rot De baking pant in the war. Hence Germna hau Leer reepmited rether thar neutrals om Britich suulects. At the DGS meeting today the question of vetting shortterm Service olliceis was raised Howuis thinks that if we vet people for reguar commissions wa should ahaa vet those who ate receiving shortterm commiasdans up to S OT 7 years: This seemed ogical but the amount o1 wark may be considerable. Before coming to a decision we are going to ascertain roughily what the figures are likely to be. We Frave also to vet some 9,000 Polish officers. I said T thought this cou ondy be tone Dy oemit small corittee 01 Poles who ae thought to be reliable since our records would not be hey to be OI much help. These Polesar coming basis from Italy. I raised the question o1 the aboli olibior Don OI tha American visa. 1 took a very serinus view ot this because it seemed to me that it was the fouruation stone Of the whole OT Passport Conereti tabpic. As they stoou at present the proposals did not give uS reciprocity. wve shouta have to Bsht sasyelthoush free of charge, whereas the S Amenicans are not to be assed to get visas at all. I thought also that it would be dafficit for Us to resist other allies, particularly the Russians, i1 they asked for similar facilities. I Sugsasted to the DG that we shoule whi-te a stror letten-t Maxwell and that I should also see Caecia. Adam was inclined to disereuit this idea. I diu not think it was any use writing DO Carew-Robinson or Prestige on & matter of this importance and since the FO and in particuar our Ambassior in wahington had raised the matter ir the first instance, we should Any Hot get them to change their Views. It ditc not saam to me that the project haa arythine Do recommend it. The DG agree to the course I had sugsestel. The DG raised the uestion O1 intormants. He thought that he, Harwand Butler ought to know ntore about what we wene paying fora, I explained to him how intormants were tarlelr on by this office and that in SO War as I vias concerned this was never done without my sanetion. I large aums were avolvea Invariably consulted Charges wutan. I Cou. not however speak for M.S. While I agreed that it wouaLa certainly be a good thing to review the information received from time to time and assess whether the agent was worth keeping on, this was not alltogether a simple matter. bometimes we had to keep people on as at insuance and although the balancesheet at the momant might be poor we might get al dividend later o1. After the meeting the Dg talked to me pri- vately about MS., He hau Learned that Robertson was conducting an ensuiry.. I cold him that I hau had na resporsibility lot MS until a few weeks ago an that because Ittd not feel ver happy about the position I had 17t asked Robertsor to conduct this enguiry. I then e xp.lained EO hit about police intormants and how it had been bov experience at S.l. that much of the information they received went down the drain because they had not got sufficient imormation to Leads the informant properly. Dick to whom Italked atter the meeting was a little in despair. He Ielt that the DG was thinking of the orgthisation too much on police lines. This I thiniis orly naturall anc time wilil be needed For him to get into the picture al understand the somewhat dirlerant approach. T Saw Peter Hope ara told him that I was afraid there was nothing that we could ofter him. I thought he would be well aavisea to take the job which the FO were ofering him in Paris. He gets the rENK DI First Secretary anhu the possibility o1 being tear on permanently and going over from the adminis- trative to the political sice. TheDG,TAF and I were tahen by Win Scott to see Admlral Leahy. He is an oldisn men, nearer 70 than 60. I tola him what 1 felt from our point of view to he the various alternatives in sebting an inteilitenee organisation. I explained that we had found our liaison with SSU and the FBI extremely proritableand that we very much hoped that it would continue in the Future. He said that he would tare note of this anu impress these facts on the committee set up Dy the President. He was sure that we Should keep as close together a's possible ana he wa'S extremely graterul For all that British Inteltig ance had done Tor the Americans during he war, He sdd That the present 197 programme was to maintain G.2. and ONI as producers er inormation through their Service Attaches, and to buila up a new Secret Intelligence Service using some of the remnants of SSU. The FBI would continue as at present to operate as an offensive organisation in D.America. It was however anticipated that when the new intelligence organisatior was going it would take over in .America from Hoover. Hoover woulld then be espousiule for American territory Dut woud contirue to have his liaison Officers abroad. the Director under the N.I.A. would be a collator of all information derived from Service Attaches, from the new Secret Intelli gerce organisation,fror the State department where necessary From the FBI wiithiiwhom the present director WaLS already in the closest touch. Souers is I gather to go back to his peace-time work ald will be succeedea by someone else. May 29th Vesey came to consult me about the case of JAKOBS. We have now reached the point where we should decide what action ought to be taken. I said that I would first like to see the file. It seemed to me to be just for conideration whether we might not profitably leave JAKOBS alone in the hope that at some future date he might become a focal point. The odds are however strongly against this since if the Abwehr were ever reconstituted it might well oe thought inadvisable to take on any former agents in view of the thorough- mess f our post-war enquiries. JAKOBS is a naturalised S.African and is at present in this country running a tobacco business. 1a9 Dick and I and Harry discussed the question of reresentation in Irac. The F.O. are proposing the witharawall OI SIME1 officers We Ithink however that we might come to some arrangemen with the Iraquig. Everybody had suffered considerably I'rom our withdrawal from Persia and it might strengthen our hanus considerably in Egypt i1 we could point to Some arrangement with the Iraquis. the Egyptians may well want Jenkins and his ASOe ithdrawn unless we car get some agreemen embodied in the new treaty. THIS IS A OOPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION 3(4) OF THEPUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DGC 2000 May 30th I saw Harold Caccia. I talked to him about the abolition of the American visa. He was quite sympathetic and saia test he would do all he could to back-peual the matter if I would let him have 3 copy of our letter to the H.o. 199 I also talyea to him about the building of the Soviat Fleet being the basis of most of thir political action quring the past 8 months. - He agreed with my thesis which aamittealy seomea a fairly obvious one. He said that in fact it was being treated to some extent at any rate in a memo which was at present in course of prepapation. THISISACOPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UIVDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DEc 2002 He then mentioned Case of Leakage in the "observerf about the disbandment of Anderst S Army. This had appeared 48 hours before the official announeement. I told him that we were already investigating 5 cases of Cabinet leukage. He promised to let ie have particulars of this latest one. He menticnea that when he had spoken about this at the e carry Allen dia not Sham to know anything Out it. I said thet this WES not the kind of thing that ould normlly come his way ana that in fact there were many things dis- cussea ait the JIC which were more my concern than his. I explained that he was generally very good about taking me along Whenever there wene items on the agenda of intrest to my division. the difficulty was that discussions oftan became geneal. Caccin said that they wentea more ond more to make tie Meonesahy meeting a genersl diseussion vihen any of those present could raise points p5o off the agends. He thought it would be extremely helpful if I could find time to attend the meetings regularly. I said that if I could arrange it internally I should be only too glad to do so. I attended a. meeting on D.Livision which did not seem to Fet US much further. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCU FAIT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT ER SECTION 3(4) OF THEPIILLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DCC2009 DCC I raised the question of ALOs doing .Branch work but Harry was evioently against it although he thought that occasionally they might be used as indeed they were not. It seemed to me that he had rather saddlea himself with Brock ana Bennett, at any rate for year or SO until they reached the age limit. This is indeed 3 gloomy pros pect. We did not get on to the uestion Ol the Secretariat. May 3lst I talked to Thistlethwaite about my views on the Soviet Fleet. He is collecting a certain number of additional points. Tommy came in to see me about an incident which nad occurred St the Spanisr consulate when he recently applied for visa for him- THISIGNOEY THISIG OFY ORIGINAL DOCUienl RETAINED NDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 201 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC BECORDS ACT1958 DEC 2000 self and his wife to take i holiday in Spain. The consl Moral said in conversation that he could certainly gront a visa on his own responsibility, that he had done so frequentl in the pust and only in one case he he got into trouble. He then suid "You remember, tht mun who went to Venezuela ana has been trying to sell Gutos and Velasquez pertriits". He WES of course referring to Garbo. Tommy says that if they trace these portraits they ares bound to connect hit with Garbo sinee the portrsits are all well known to be in iiis possession. Fresumably some engniry has been made about the loss cf Garbols pas port, here and again in Venezuela. We decided that it was better not to say anything and tht if Lommny were chal- lenged in Spain he would simply say that he had been given in introduction to a Spaniara in London to whom ne nad given photographs of certain of his pictures with St view DO their possible sale in S.Ameriea. He nad not however since heara of this individual. James Robertson talked to me about proposal by bj(ne ne DG to get C.C.S up here in order to discuss the Palestine situation, and to seek their coPoperation in the trecing of any terrorists who may arrive in this country. He thinks it desirable that they should have the necessary background. He also thinks that they might assist at tne orts. We both later saw the DG to whom I pointed out thet it might be mise to have tulk ith Burt first,since vie did not wish to cross S.B. slines, who alrendy had offisens in the principal ponts. I either from the DG that you locul C.C.S do not very much welcome the presence SB officers in their rorts and they thought they ought to Go the work theinselves. This does of course mean a considerable spreading of knowledge. If the are really going to fet definite advantage from it I should be 811 in favour of it. I am acuotful however ES to the extent to which the police can be of use to LS in Case of this kind. Howev I do not vish to discourage tie idea of getting the C.C.S here. It will certainly oe valuable to hear what their views are about a lisison with this dept. ana how it can be improvea. I GI going up with the DG on June 7th to meet other 0.0.S in Edtburgh. June 3rd I spoke to the DG and shoed him a draft letter to Maxwell about the american visa, which: he agreed to sign. Dick talked to me about Kirby-Green. We agreed that Ede should male nis position quite clear. He should tell him that while hewould Be required to remain in the Caribbeen probably for another year or-so, he might possible be wanted at some other station abroad later, or alternetively have to go back to a section job. If he was prepared to face thisitwe should be delighte to keen him on on the oth] r hand if ne stayea with us for some time he might if he wanted to become C.C. since his qualifications wula obviously e.extremely good. Zo3 This IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DEC Door I sam Maxwell today and discussed with him the American visa. He was quite sympathetic and said that he would take an opportunity of geaking to the Home Secretary. The trouble was that he thought that Bevin hed a big idea about freedom of travel betieen allied nations. I then talked to him about the case of el CANG, the Polish journalist who represents the Times,observer and ifanchester Guardian in Poland. Later I also talked te Hutson who is nOW in Markbreiteris job. Maxwell said he thought it was a little absurd that we should be making CANG into an Englishman in order that he could osten- sibly more easily perform a job for which he was peculiarly fitted by reason of his Polish origin. I pointed out to him the inconsistencies in the case. One thing to me seemed fairly certain,namely that CANG wanted British naturalisation for a different reason from th. one staned. He was seeking the protection of the British Govt.aguinst Dontcl. Ct Bentinck and British journalists in Warsaw he gets more facilities than enybody else out of the Pclish Govt.and appears to be thoroughly persona grata. I then talked ab- out the naturalisation of certain Germans whom Stephens wants to employ in CSDIC. Maxwell thought that the cases would receive sympathetic consideration. THIS IS COPY ORIGINAL 00C4 RETAIIVED NDEPARTMENT JERSEOTION 3(4) OF THEPUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DGC 2909. Burt came today to see the DG who wants the COs to be better informed about Palestine ffairs,particularly those who have ports in their areas. I had suggested to the DG that he shoulld first discuss the matter with I Burt as .B.had of ficers in tho ports. I tol Burt that the DG was to some extent of the opinion that 6.C.S should manage their own ports. Burt is hotly opposed to this and I am bound to say I agree generally with his view that matters f this kind should be centralised in a police force which has much more experience cf political affairs. It transpired an our interview with the DG that all ports will be covered by 8.B. except lasgow,Liverpool and Bristol. We shall therefore confine ourselves to the wru.s of those arnas. I gather from Burt that Tarry of Pcuthampton rather resents the presence of S.B. in his area. Burt says that Tarry is an extremely ambitious man. DEe700 THISISAOFY ORIGINAL DOOUTLEIVI RETAINED zaul N DEPARTMENT LINDER SEGTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIG RECORDS The J. LAET a5pe.n dated 22nd May on Russian troop ovements in .E-Europe ard Persia makes what I think is the first reference to Sovietnaval policy and the basis of diplomatic tetion in the hediterrsreon. It is referred to as a feature of he Paris Peace Conference. It states fThe positior originally taken up over Libya and Venezia Giulia,especially Trieste, and the argain- ing over the disposal of the Italian Fleet, fall into place as part of a long-term scheme for establishing Russin ss a maritime power in the Mediterranean with footholas if possible at Trieste,in the eastern Adritic,i the Lodecanese,on the Straits ano even in North Africall. In this connection it is interesting to note that evidence from neighbouring countries suggests the possibility that Russia is becoming interested in the Albanian coast line and that in particular have been noticed in Vallona Bay. Suspicion is strengthened nor that Albania,s country with no naval tradition whatsoever, has been asking the Powers for a sare of the Italian Fleet "to protect her coastline". It is note- orthy that 4" coaste.ll batteries at Carander near the Greek frontier fired on two British warships passing the port on the 15th May. Vallona By a.nd the Albanian coast wculd be an important link in such 11 strategic chain as that outlined above. June 4th Perfect chine in to see me. He is baek from Malta on a visit. He said that he felt rather isolated anc cevoid of informtion as to what the office arere doing. He thought that it soul0 be an aavantsge if he ccula be kept ITOT informed about general trends. I said tost I felt that his needs woula be provided for when 4.3 became a going concern. It would then be the duty of the hesd of the B.3 seetion concerred to visit him End to se9 thet He Was well briefed in al1 that concerned him. I gare him as much geher 1 information as I could. Lavic Scherr came to talls to me about thea DAMATO broth TS. It seemed that Sir Hector McNeill and Lord Sempill were seeing Creech Jones at the Colonal Office with regard to the Damato's return to Gib. I told Scherr to try and find out through a suitable contact in the C.0. whether any such approacn had bern made. The DAMATO brothers are bringing an action of libel against one of cur consuls in opin. We know that the evicence they are putting forward has been forged and if proceedings go on they will prob bly be charge with forgery. It is therefore aesirable the case should continue. I went to see Burt ara showed him certain informstior opteined by indicating the pos sibility that certain memberg of the Revisionist Zionist Youth orgenisation vere in possession of ayna- mite and a German pistol wit th 50 rounds of ammunition. The information was extreme- ly vague and disjointed. We discussed with Chief Inspector Jones of S.B. whether any action wa's possible. Me came to the canclu- sion thet nothing could usefmlly be done. S.D. could not swatch the partiess concerned as they have not sufficient staff. I arranged with Burt that if he felt that it was absolutely vital for .I.Jones to know the source of this information I would con- Soaer it if ne would let me know. I explaine La that I yaS not anxious to spread this SoUrCE beyond himself as if it once got round we should certtinly be in serious trouble. Burt agreed and siio thit he did not think test it weS necessary to acauaint .I.Jones. Burt told me that he hed a satisfactory conversetior with the DG who had asked him whether he uid not think that local police would on occisions assist the S.B.officer at ports. Burt replied taet he thought that it would be insovisable and probably cause friction. Burt had also maae it, Clear that there was quite lot of confidential informeticn which he did not think the polic, ought to have. He cited the case of sabotogl we had during the war in Suffolk where he personally nad ovised against anyroay boing informed except the C.C.himself. ick,bertra,Clayton,courtenay,'a ,Courtensy, ames Robert- son and I had a discussion on the licuidatior of 0.0. recraft of Hiorrocks S instructions is to be made. We are coneentrating on ensuring that information from all parts cf t the office snould go through B.3. seetions concerned. ive thought that officers in other divisionsscould sign their cum letters Iter they had been approved and initialled on the carbon by the B.3.section. they should however write on a B.3 number which would ensure that the letter came back to B.3. Only letters to L.h-and W.E. should go direet. hs regards telegroms, the action copy should go to the .3section concerned but there will be a wider distribution to other interested sections which woulla take place eomultaneously. THISISACOPY o7 ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS Cussen sav ACT CT1921 Eanis. He came to the conclusion that although his intentions were generally good he was not a very stable person. His story had obviously got twisted bit by Marshall in transmission. it now seems clear that only intended to say that RICHARDS called once at the Embassy lthough he did ring up on another occasion. There is no reason to suppose that any other documents passed or indeec that the French took any interest in the particular onees that vere submitted to them. story now substantially coincides with that of RICHARDS. We have therefore deci ed to tell RICHARDS to clear out and to inform that we have done So in' case he is questioned by the French hir Ministry. We have taken into account the possibility that RICHARDS may report the incident to the French Govt.o his return. June 5th I saw Marshall and told him that SIS had no special job for him at the moment as he was rather above the age that they were recruitin If however he took the Passport Control job in Paris and a vacancy occurred there would be no difficulty in his getting a transfer. Marshall nas decided therefore to take the Paris job. Dickson brought me particulars of documents which had been handed to him atomic raseaxch. These documents hae been seut to the Ppanish Monsul in London by a man called O.W.MARSEALL. the Ppanish have evidently onsidered them and the consul had been instructed by the Embassy to return them in a registered envelope stating that they 28 did not come within the sphere of the con- sulateis auties, I.arranged with Allan thet E check should be put on MARSHALL and that the documents should be photogrephed in the most, in cse they might be re uired as evlaence. It looks as if MARSHALL was not 2 serious customer and had merely tried either to embroil the Spanish consulate to get morey for uorthiess information. H may evin be G Lunatic. I has long tal with Diclo and Alley about Poles. Alley has & linison with Klocek of Polish security on purely security mgtterg THIS IS ACOPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED INDEPARTMENT INDER SECT 8(4) OF THE PUBLIG RECORDS AOT 1958 HC DS0f mcnen discussed the return of Anders's TaN. We thought tat as soon as we got tae figures ve should probably call an interdepartmental conference ana try to get a clesr Picture of the machinery reuired, tO deal ith the rehabilitation of Anders's forces. In the first instance they ane tc lie divided into 4 divisions,one for each British conmand. Some g,uuu officer mo are going to be vetted will receive Eritish tonmissions. Ultimately however we undorst ne tant tae whole of the Polish Army wi0l be demobilised and settled into civil employment. Miss lacNab CEtre to tell mo thet MARSCHNER the say in Irelna has expressed wish to return to Germiny ane that tha Irish vovt. are reprunoa to let him go without reserve tions GS to treatment hen he reaches Germany I suid tht ve should be. in agroement The DG,IAR,M.E. and I saw Travis. We gut before iu ouI requirements fron LSIC. sarned gererslly in agreement and asked us to specify one or two thins in more detailed way and lethim hive i.t in vriting. We may t.hen have a further meeting. He is quite agreeable to thartin being our repre- sentstive. instand of Homsra. He WS also agreeable to errengeinents bing made by which any of our sgecislists could go down and make contest wth the spproprinte seetions in LSIC. also ulscusseu Kirby-Green's clse.. We are writing to him putting his chances in the Security Service quite plninly. Charles is in favour 0? his leaving the police and tthing nis contributions. It seems that he would not really lose anything since if he hos a 20 years rericd mrith uS lie is likely to get S big on bigeer pension than he would if he stayed on in the police until he reached the rank of Superintendent. 210 I spoke to the DG about Dicleson's work. He said he had been vondering what value there was in the type of woman whom we had supplied him with as a domestic servant and who had previously worked for us. He thought that she waS somevh t neurotic and that her indemant weyle not be worth muck THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DGC 2009 Isham talked to me about Mrs. s.Ingram Fraser, of whom he had formed a good impression. He thought she might be extremely useful in upplying information about the Bergson Group. Doth he ana James Robertson are quite Certain thet the person who was meant to make contact with her was SMERTENKO. the tter has been away and this may account for no approach having been made. We aecidea to leave matters for the present end if nothing happens rs.Ingram Frazer migh ask New York for an introduction, June 6th Cimoerman brought fousseau,formerly FBI in Paris, to see me. He Will se coming here while cimpermen is on leave. I asked cimper- man to tell Laaa that we should be interested in any further inforustion he m ight get 211 abcut the Bergson Group. I also mentioned the fot tuist the American visa question hed been raisea again. I very much hoped that the FBI would dig their toes in. Lastly I told wimperman to tell Leda th't I hoped before very long to let him have the Garbo story for his own private information. It was not at the moment cuite complete. Cimpermun told me that he cad had request from the Dureau for some report that was written on communism in India I gather that the State Dept. were intarestd I imagire this mst be the report hich the late D.G. wrote when he was hewu of DIB in which case it is Et least 10 ers old. I tald Cimrerman he had better discuss this ith Hollis. I rather doubted the value of such a report which under present-day con- aitions might be somewhat nislending. Ciinpersaan spoke gbout requests which wera reaching him from G.2 for certain informa- tion. It haa apparently been agreed that a separate channel from 0.2 to ourselves might not be altogetorr desirable. He anted to know whether this arrangement was satisfact- ory. I said thet I could see no real objection provided te did not get the lines crossed. It Was a little difficult to say owing to the present ill-defined sphe spheres of American Intelligence. I thought he might also usefully discuss this matter with Hollis. Hill talked to me about varicus undesirable aliens that he had come across in connection with his Black Market encuiries. He said that the policy of the H.0. was only to get rid of those against whom there had been a conviction,or where ain ten had been interned for Black wrket offences. Where the nllen viaS concerned in Cubio S financial 212- transactions and had not been eonviated they were extremely reluctant to take etion unless informatio was of a very recent after ALL ou inforation has already been passed to the H.0. ana to the police. It seemed therefore thet there was very little that could aG beyond Sligeesting te the police that they mnignt try ana stiffen the HU. attitude. I 00 not see taat we can intervene wvith the 41,0. ir purely criminal cuses.. I said- the I would have a word with Burt. Vesey tells me that a Swiss citizen in this country called verner STREBEL wist given an assignment by the Abwehr and after the out- breek of war made one trig to Switrerlanu. He had secret inks and was told to eport mainly on aircraft mattrri His masters took veny poor vie of tim and dropped him altogether early in 1940. I sd that we would consider his Cise in conjunction with that of JAKOBS. During the course of their enguiries in Bucharest 1 to the security of telephones, GPO have discovered that for the last 5 years all military telephones have been activated by some small condensar which formed pant of the equipment and enabled the telephone tobe used cithar in the normal manner or as a buzzer circuit. Half a dozen new tele- phones were selected from Oranance in order finally to test this cut. they all reucteas and it is now clear that anyone who tapped ir on any of those circuits could have got the hole of any convensation within 15 ft. of the receiver at the rest position. A number of F.O. instellations are using this equipment on the eontinent. June With At the DGemeeting today the DG said that he was holding a meeting of COS from angiand nt .30 tomorrow for the purpose of finding out thein re uirenents with regard to liaisorl the DG thought that James Robertson pight give them short talk on the varicns orgnisatiols operating in Palestine. Hollls sad that he Was: finding considerable difficulty in CO-ordinating thm report on Commnist activities throughout the onld which was reuuired by the JIC. He did not know wae aceoraing to the present-charterwa present chanter was really responsible. sIS had written a certain mount but Hollis thought that much of it WvES rather off centre and that many Of the old fallacies about the Sovlet Govt. anU tire Lomintern MEne creepine backs Jane Arcner had rather 1et herself EO on her old theories and had ot included in her note any referenee to the veny important conference of O.P.S which had taken place In Prague. This conference really a reconstitutiion Of the comintern Conference except that these present were confined to representatives of countries within the Soviet sghere of influence. Jane said that S1e had not seen this report. I sEid th In my viewwt were,i aceordanee-wit the chart r,really res onsible for the overall preparatibn of the report. Hollis said that SIS seemed to take different view. The net result weS likely to be E bnd report. I talked to Dick about D.Diyision ana the Seeretariat. I asked him to try and get out a emrrt of the reorgenisation of thewhole office. Only in this may I think shall we be able to Met anything done. I think Curryls 5 original basie prineiplee ane 2/e sound but it must be mede clear that A,C a.na L wivisions mi11 have of neeessity to take their cues fron B.vivision. June 12th I took Harry the report on aruy telethones cien vie received fro.l the Fost Office. He going to put the matter tc the JIC. I talked o Disk about Curryts position ana the Seeret ri t and ve decided to raise the matter at the next staff meeting. we Learn of 5 pecullar financial transactions to trasfer money from Paris to Cniro. The connections incicatad tet this had something to 4o with the Mufti. Thistle immediately got into tcuch riththe F.O. who had haa a report thrcueh 3 Ministry of War Transport reprasentaitiv in MErseillles about passage booked for a LAmne SHAWI, ana since SHAWI was connected ith the finencis trensections, the two things clearly linked up. It looks Vary much as if the Mufti wer: on bourd a tish vessel bcud for Alexnaris. Mme. SnAI yes perticultrly anxious not to EC on S ship that chled t t Nalta. Te sta cbling Mia East sna the savy have been mocilised te intercept tha ship cutslde territorinl waters. We had a meeting of Chief constables from var -ious parts of England. They vere asked to alive their views about future liaison with ourselves. Comments wane sonlewhat varied but there was lmost unanimous feeling that ALOS should continue and should where possible attena distriict aet ctive 215 conferences. There semed to be a general appreciation of what had been done by the Security Service for L.C.S during the MaT, The onl, rnl criticism seameu to be that in writing we might at times give more details. L said int this wes E, perfeetly lesitiaate criticism ana that we would enue your to meet C.o.s re uiremerts as far EIS possible. i via sey howeven that there mere certain types of inforntion Waiich ald not coue from ouP OwD sources ana these sor3oS we ware under a striet ban not to disclose and if ive did st times appear rater chgey this might well be the explanation. one C.0. Williamson, referred to rumOurs that we had agents in different parts of the country. It was made uite dear that tye haa no such agents except where C.0.S were informed. This had always been our practice nd S fr as I knew it hau never been deprted from. the DG suggested that if C.C.s thought it desirable further con: enences could be held. Hordern WaE very strongly opposed to any form of integration between ourselves and the police He thought it woul be dangerous for both parties. This remerk came after a suggestion by l.Young test the might have 9 small body of police officers here who would be responsiolf at this end for conducting Ilalson in Cases which conernea the police. He thought they would know better what the police reauirea. I am glad to say that this Vias vetoed. it was agreed that where possible ie nculd send aoNn expects as we aid during the tsT to locture to police conferences on particular subjects. THTSTTOTN COPY ORIGINAL DUGueNI RETAINED INDEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DEC 2o0 206 June lth I SaW Driaee,th future t.0.Secnrity Officer in Moscow. He WIS 5 years 25 Vine Street, foinea the air Toroe during the ET when he Was employed BS rotr gunnor 7n hes recent- ly gone Dacl to .B. He is not a veny mgressiva cheraeter. I had previously spokerto Durt about him tho via not feel that he ES really the man for the jcb. However asi has now resigneu from the police ANO been definitely tEdken on by tha 1.0. we shall probably have te make the best of him. K,Cuaming nid I hid talk about security within the office. We 011 felt that uIS soon as we got into the new building it ould be necessary to tighten ur car own security in a number of respects. I drein attention AT- ticularly to the mattor of keys. Cumming' solution is that vte should have 5 ar 4 resi- dent officers in the uilding one of whom woul be responsible for all security out of office hours. All other Govt.depirtments nave a resident officer and I am quite sune tiitt we should nave no defense whistevr if it were known that the whole of our security derendea on the integrity of the night watenman. I cooner with Lick. I took avite a favour ble view of him although he hos not done that we call case work in any of his variea joos. I think he should be seen by the Appointments poard provided wargaret Sample,wn worked with him in Italy, has a good opinion of him. THIS ISISACOPY IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED NDEPARTMENT LINDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DEC 9009 Dick,F-J,Hill,Horry and myself aiscussed 2 request froh the Senool of military Intelli- gence for inforaaticn as to tetype of course that we cuireu for port security and militur permit officers eto. The answer is of course that nopody in the S.A.I. knows nything About these subjects and in fact that we an are the only people to give such a course We dlo disc ssed that type of course or instruction to army personnel we ought to give in .B.divil Securiity duties. "hile we felt that there wene certain principles which would be enunciated it would be difficul to give much instruction until we knew what was exactly the situation wlicn we had to meet. In the case of the Second Front opse it Was lin easy matter but against 9 hypoth- etical enemy it was not SC easy. This led us to consider the point as to when intensive: instruction should begin. Prior to this war Munieli mas certainly the moment. It should ve felt be somebody's business to give the word "go". June 14th I talked to TAR and Dick about the securil of BJs ana SMs and We all agreed that we sho: ld maintain our present standards and not adopt the modifications suggested by Horrocks, that the scrambled versions of B.J.s sna the full versions of SMs shold go into oren (i1es. We are quite definite however that 911 5 categories should ultimately be sen by 511 those concerned. We do not wish to begin this until the temporary staff have left. I nentlonea the feet th t I was anxious that a.ll sections should think very carefully 218 before putting away any of these papens whether they haa one everything that it was possible to CO. It seerisc to me th t any rate many of thie nevr people nd indeed some of tre old did not tike all the oprortunities that E resentea tnemselvas. I had in mind a parer which indicated that an Austrian girl was well informed both about the Jewish mant in about Anstrian com unists. It sesmea to me tht some aTpronch throuen 0.35 was indie ted in E case of this kind. I am afraid that if we uc not watch these things very corafuily and read quite number of documents rsel; eS.,we shall fina many oppo- tunies passing be passing us by. T SaM Petiar Irwin. of the Ceylon Police,who is anxious to come to us when the colony goes over to aominion sttus. I liked the look of him and I t ought he might ultimately be useful Lo SIFE. I have teld him to communicat ith US as SCo1l as ne is free,which willl not be before May of next year. The Mufti episode has I am afraidd turned out to be something of G flop. Mme SAWNA has been identified as Mme SHAWA but certain doubtful people got on board at Toulon and a veny thorough enreh OI tha ghi has beer made. There is little doubt I think that Mme SHAWA is coureateu in some iy with the Mufti's escape and although har suspicions have ben aroused she IIPY be worth wetching. ya w Me considerec number of casas ait the Appointments Doand but had no interviews. I mentioned the question of the Secretari t and wDivinion. No progress agparS to hve been mnede with D.Divislon. Barry is insistent on heving L.1 IS the nunitions securit. bramibh ana then a liaison section ith the 1.0. I ssid that I hought the JTC e CHiefs of Staff 9 per's 511 ourht to ETO to the Secretarie D.1,2 End 3 should IU tain Maison with the Service Lepts. on meue affecting security cf factories ano oecusicn- ally on other mattore of securty. They shoul also male use of ALOs for considerable amount of their factory work. Ned Ralo has sent me printed documents from RENNIE ASSOCIATES of Box 1708 ashington L.C. wicistates that this orEtnis tion vents details of inaustriad anu economic analyses and proposes if it Can raise the funus to reconsitute the ramanants of OSS as a kind of industril espionage organisation vorling rosumably for big business. "oulabe subscri: bers are as e8 not onlyto sey Vice t places and what countries interest then in S.Americ: but prlether they desire similar service for Europe or the British ommonwealth,R Russit or Asia. June 15th This IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDERSECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DEC 220 June 1Zth e Wehen hen a meeting about Fripp thp hes omplaine to the 1.G. about his treatment on return here. He was in fact seenby Dick and also by harles and tald that his services-ould-not bs required after September. There was never any ouestion of llis staying on with us indef- initely and we want to get our arganisation in the Fr Enst on to its permanent eace-time fcoting, SS soon as possible. Fripp I think rather wants to hund on in the capacity of D.S.0. and meanwhile to build Dp his business again. This would eleorly be undesirablle apart from the fact that he is not very Fopulr in the colony. I hed meeting ith Dick,TAR,Curry,Vesey endiss tndeson on the Etaprendienst anu about the cases of JOKOBS and STREBIL. With reraru to the Etappendienst we have deciced that e should get the eportas complete EIS possible in conjunction with 9.I.S. and that we should continue enquiries to ensure that any Etappendienst agents here have-bee finally rooted out. We should then give the regert a fairly wide circulatlon. It would seem clear that we should not be called upon Lo put in force any very elaborate machinery to deal with Eteppenalensit aetivithes until the Germans get somnemeasure of freedom in their owI country, beein to travel and establish business with hiseeountry end with coloniel IITO aominion territory. As regards the to cases, te Decided that we should llgutdate they both and that the best method for ccing this Should be discussed with Oussen. I subseuently had a dhscusshon with wussen Miss Wadeson and Vesey. We erme to the conclusion that the first step should be for Cussem to see both these indviousls and get them in the right frame of mina. They shomd then be called upon to do thir prep,vnen they would be further interrogetd, We would then consider ways end mpans of getting yid of them after thir clearance from the DPP. Me did not think prosecuti n in either case would be profitable or cesimable. Jaues fobertson brouint me 301 Istric document inderting that the Agency had had-go got hold of a document showing exactly wut cur plans are with regard to the Lutuntion of the Hagana if tis is finally decided. Mganwaile serles cf outrages ana kdnappings are goiTE On ii Palestine wi th tho threat to execute those kidnappea if two news now under serise of death fur muraer arG not reprieved. June 18th went to Eainburgh with the DG ana attended a meeting called Dy Morun,the C.0.of Edinburgh at Which vlrdous other 0.0.s WETE resent. .C.Glasgove did not come but sent his super- Intendent and another officer. The meretin were asked to express-theip-vlewss to Whethn they were satisfied with the existing linison and wether they thcusat there WS any way inwiien it co La be Improved. I sensed a slight idereurrent particularly in Sunt.Gla Glas- gow,that It Was te pollce who meally hedto do 1zI.5's work and that they wend generally speaking keot rather in the dark. L tried to cispel this taes 89 mueh as ossible by giving them franke picture of the situatio immnedistely prior to the outoreak of war and up till the end ef 1941. I explained how 222 through no frult of our own we were understaf fea, naa no money or accomnmodation, with the result that we had no trained officers for expansion. This wes all unavoidable and Iwas anbicus therefore that they should frame their recomendat ions for the futurenot-o on the impressions that they had got of us inune- diately prior to the WaUrr or inredjrtely after the outorenk but rather on the subse went years na the present situation, They wer'e cui unantaous about wanting an A.L.0. and on the ouesti-y of his residing in the areas they 8130 seemed to think this officerrshould more frofitably be a police officet-whowas persona grata with all the various forces in Scotland. I explained to them that it wa S in no sense our intention bo their york for them or indeed to ao more than give them a cileer indication of out uirements no the delicecy of our somrees. In this connec- tion said that 1 quite understand their wish forthe fullest possible partieulers-and as much background as we could give them. At times we might lae failed in this respeet but it waS not necessarily due to a raluctance on cut part to give them the information they retulred. te-had a variety of sources of Information some of which were not our on. e were under the strietest ban not to impart such informtion to anymoutslue body mind indeed te omiy a few selected officers in our own dept. On other occasions our enyuiry might ell be fishing- snd thi t we Lnew no more about the indivianal or subje- Feet than viaS contained in or Retter. Another slight complaint was that L.C.s never hand what happened as result of informations wurieh they submitted. Iexplsinep to them that very often it took a long time to develop the information and that sometimes it Ted to nothing. there vas merhups a neluctanee to 123 reply until Me had explored every avene and that this might leed to the matter being Overlockea. I thought that in such cases whene they felt that that wene entitled to SOmR answer, they should cet hold of the ALO an ask him to produce It. The next hestion fer aecisicn 18S the loca- tlon of the ALO. They all Seemed to wnt to have him in the are and an cflor was made by CEdinbungh tc house him and loon after ois records, which of course would be hept in mis cw safe and apart from police records. The uestion of necords anase because C.0.s seemed to think thet when they wrote to Lonaon thay trau to sent copy to the ALO. I explained to the DG that this meant having an office and secretary and thatwe had eensiderea this idea and abandonea it on the grounds cf econoryi. If hovnever the ALO had a room In tie police office It might hot perhaps be necessity fon him Lo have a secretiny. Generl appneciation WS expressed regarding the lectureg that have been given and 2 gope tust these wil eontinue. It ws so suggested that selected CO. might porliaps come coun onee every 6 months for a1 conference. hs roearas the appointment of 9 olice officer, L nointea one that in my viev WIIBt the poice wenteu more thn anything was someboay who knew the macalnery of 1I5 End could get tried the answerss they re uite partlculei her letter not as Scomplete as they woulu like it to De. They Seemed to think that while the more important uCos would know how Lo hanae tha enquiniesy if given sufficient information, some of the less important borouehs might be rather at sea ana there would therefore be n navantaga in 92 having police of ficpr ts an ALO who cold diceet the course of such en uiry in MIS'S intersla. Lustly I diseussea priv tely ith O.C. Edinburgh the guestion of records. 1 poir -tea out IC im tnet in some Cases there MES certain reluetarce to rt mon tiinn limited arount of information on Lper because me ilise0 that the letters ire wrote must go into the poiica registry aha refore UVaileoile te most if nICt sll Tnibers of tae police force. There MIS 1( certain Oringor bere with wici i personaily nad to con- tend U Scotland Yaru. I eplniined how eye ha at One tiise been force to key cu recone in M.B. and thit when found th t two olice offibens were handing tile infaritic! out to tha o.R. wir John inderson he given crdens for us to keep registry of OLI own. I was not accusing any rarticular police forer but with an crenisation SO lange there was bound to .be risk. Our letter therefore wel not always as infonmative as turn might be out I tnougnt the gop here eculd be filled in tnsir personal contact with the ALO who could supply aaditional details veroally. Derally speaking 1 think thore VIES plenty of acodwill arid anxietytocco-operete to the full although it is necessary to get clear in the minds of the police that MIS "rork is not olice or, ana tiit the police can never be more ten sn Erency for certuin types of emuiry. this is D difficillt point to put over without giving offense aa withicut damping the enthusiasm of police in conouetin ty en qudries W in me may want them to make. THIS A COPY 235 ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINEC INDERARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS June 19th AOT 1958 DE<.2009 Me nave receivd a shoek this morning. wno is concerned with ,has been missig since 1 ocilock yesterday. It rather looks as if he had been kianepred. It is not certain whether it is a change kidnapping or thether they knew that ne was employed specially secret werk. James Robertson is a Little oxrisd in dase Alec Aellar shouilt get picked up in the same hay as Chaawick. We want 41ec back and are Bshing him to Give us an a Erczimate late. Hollis tells me that the FO have asked us to iet them know apout the connectionstofa member of the Roumanian Legation here with boviat representetives. This means that some- body will have to put a telephone check on the Houmanien Legation. We decided that we should give Henmiker-Heator the opportunity of handling the matter. If he cannot do SO we shall have to talle it on. We Ere trying to get Mr's. Caica,t the wife cf a British officer in CICI The is Russian by origin. She hs been in this country since early 1920' and is no about 46. The hussians did make a pass at her in Persia and much to her anuseuent presentea her with expensive fur We have taken every possible opinion about her and are inclined to think that she is 100% relladle. Joe pencer,this and James nobertson al1 vouch for her. She knows foumanian,hussian and a number of other Siav languges. I saV Harker -na told him about the visit to. Euinburgh. 0.24 I haa lunch with Norman Archer. he said that Freauie Boland had spoken to izi m about the I.H.A. who non appear to he conslaeraoly in funds. Boland is inelineg to think that this money may be coming onlgimlly from Hussian sources via Michvel ODILL and Genald DREILLY of some amerienn Transrort Union whick is affiljated to the 0.1.0. He I5 join to tell Bolna that he has reported this Ctter to LIS and tnt we sa 11 be tkine it he mit Dan. We might consider later writing to tae R.B.I. He also spoke DO me apout the uesticn of supplying Dan with black list of aliens and also ossibly of Britisn subjects. TL3 whole. uestion is cf course very aifficuit nu de icate. We shall have to consider it ond then Let pain over for discussion. Sclater Chine to thank me for intarvening on lris behalf in the matter C1 his grtuity. He is i gather being given the extra 250. June 20th I Is WT Curry this morning and discussed "ith n the Secretrrit I ssio that I dio not KTOI ho it was geingto work out. would he therefore Crare as an ltamnative to take the JCB cf B.l Wavicil iscuilu mean decline with the control ounission in Germany in SO fur as both uermin end hussign msttars wene concerned and any Questions like the Eteppendienst. I think he felt that this was slightly insult- ing but he ala nst sy SO. After thinking it over he came back tna told me that he would rafer to Co the Secretariat job. 27 THisl A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN VDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIO RECORDS ACT 1958 DEC 2009 Andneas Mayor came in and brought the John DEVOY decodes which he had done mhiile taking a holiaay at Achille Island. he cypher messages had been left by a relative of John DEVOY to the Eire Govt. on the strict under- standing that they would net be publicised. The Doe was deliehted.to get them decoded They ara not in the parers of ADMIRAL Sir neginald Hall which have now been hand a over to us by ithe Admiralty for safe keeping. Jamnes rlobertson came in to tell me that Chadwick had managed to escape. This is the only bright piece of news that has come out of Falestine for some time. Alec fellar is aue back on tne 24th. C. talked to me about Passy who is still under detention. He had apparently spent about 10 million franes on buying up some paper for purposes of anti-communist propa ganda ana promised the paper another 5 million. en.Ismay has now arranged for Wingete to carry on as controller of decention in the Cabinet Offices until the end of this year. After that regulitr officer is te tobe seconaea from the services. He will hold in the first place a G 2 job as secretary and after 10 months would be promoted to talceo the 6.1 job running the orgnisation. After that ne woulld presumably return to duty. Ismay naS no objection te out getting Chas.Cholmondly as permanent G.? provided MI5/6 pay for him. 28 June 21st I hau a long balk with Iryin and explained to hiin the set-up of the office. He is taling various lctures under TARS direction. Betar..H Hope came in to say gcodbye. He says that nobody nas told him what he is going to To or whether he will be responsible fon security. AS far as he knows there is no Security officer in the Embussy and he does not think the arrangemshts are rarticulanly matien- tight. He has 8 possibility of going over to the pelitical side Et later cinitewith the rank of counsellor. Me Sat a number oi candiastes at the Appoint- ments Dourd today but aid not feel very positlf about any of ther. I raised the uestioh of Bancroft. it WhIS agreed that ie should epnrcec te GPO to second him on his GFO salary. Honroeks thought hewvever that It might hend to alrfsculties if we supplamented his normal pay. E gave Hot rocks 14 copy of a note on the Secretarist and ywid I hoped this matter could De sericusly discussed. June 22n0 saw the LG and teld niim about CHADWICKI. E also Fave him my impressions of the C.C.S confenence in Edinburgh. I said that although I did mut thirty it fopplied to all, Esansed an underlying feeling that MIF'E vorl was police work which in the main had to be carried out by the police forces in this countrywho Wene incined slightly to nesent receiving directions in this matter from people they would regauu as amateurs. I said this was of course very for from the case, that MI5 wonk diferea entirely from the work of the police, who were merely operating at the periphery on certain aspects of the departmentts wonk. The deptshad many other sources of information which were of necessity highly centralised. I emphasized how little in fact even during war time SCOs could provide-by being told in detail about the Cerman organisation end its methods The best exatiple was the dot. We had debated a good dell as to whether we should infont them and nad ultimately uecidea n het tethe SO Else we reslised that there was neither the tiine for the opportunity to con- quet 2 uetailea search of people cn arrival and that their-chances of finding 2 dot which might be conceiled anywhere ere so remote as to be neyligible I gathered from the DG that my visit had made 0 Eooa imp tression OTT the cOs end that they all very much appreciated the talk I hau given ther The DG then told me that he had considere the question of the ALo having an ffice in police headquarters at Edinburgh Or Gllegow, thet he wis soewh t doubtful about the desinability of this,sinc he realised that the presence of that fficer would become known and that ZI disgrunthed policeman might quite easily blow to the press. This might leau to compllcations. He had therefore approached the 1ocs1 rerresentitive in the Scottish Offce at t.Andnews House, Edinburgh. Who had volunteered to sive or officer similar facilities. This seamed fr bet en arnange- ment. I empnasised again to the DG the point I had made to eEuinburgh about reeoras. I said that I WES sorry I had not raised it at the general meeting since it LS point of considerable lportence. There was EEND elweys 230 would be a reluctonce on oun part to rutemore On paper than was absolutely necessary on accout of the fact that our letters would go into police files which sire available to the ATole force. I had experience this diffi- culty at Scotland Yard which had in one instance at any reta led to disastrous results. The LG said he thoroughly appreciated this poin which he considered of groat importance. I sni that I honed that I had not iven offence isiny this but it WIS mnatter I had cften uiscissea ith Burt WHIO was vell aane of its potential dangers. The difficulty was inherent in the whole police system. We had rIo. further disuession about tie desirability of appointing police officer as ALO Scotland since there would in any onse be such ground to clear before such an ppointment ould be possible. James cbertson nd Thistle. Came to ser me abou request from the DMI tnat te should send a representative to S sub-comnittee of the anglo- Lmeriein Comniseton whhich is going into the feasibility of carrying out the main Commiss- icn's report cn Pilestine. The particular ciseussion is concerned with the screening of D.P.S from wurcpe, who would go back as part ofhe 100,000. te agree that we should iot of nl1 ask what the standards of vetting nere to be. If for example we discovered member of the Irgun,would that be considered grounds for refusal. My point wES that dts as no use veteing people if no action weS going to be talten. We should also point out that ES the action NE.S ostensibly proposed on humanitarian grounds, it would suit our book sna facilitate vetting if 9 high rereentage of aged and infirm accompanied esch arty. Thlrully we ghouia state that neither our recuruz noe Mid [ast records wette likely to 23) be particularly productive although it was possible that we might pick up suspect. It was srrnged that Stevart should attena the meeting with urs. I naa a talk with Harrison and exn gained to hin the general structure ena purpose of the office He seemed intelligent. June 24th THISIS A COPY ACT 3(4) IN ORIGINAL DEPARTMENT 1958 OF THE DOGUMENT Dec PUBLIC UNDER 2009 RECORDS RETAINED SECTION 232 I had tlk ith whom we are going to coasider fer hu job in this office. Dick nad I think thouent that who vas to be demobilised in Februpry next, might be a possible candidate Icr uib. I aouot however whether this will suit His wife aied recently anu he is left with a smell irl seed 8, who is in the charge of his mother-in- Loy. g He thlin's hat he ought to see s much her aspossible And that matter of a couple of weels every six months would not really enough. This L SI1 afrtia ill be a bur to nis emp-oyment in Gib. kad talk with Dick and Kellar about the future cf SIME. Ineir impression is that SINE at the moment is wsulk 5S an orgenisatior and tht turer? 2i09 many things which need going which will not be comyetantly carried out by tue existing staff. Dich's View is that Alec shoul take over when Douglas Roberts goes,and that he sho Na probably tale cut ith him two other officers tho have been rking in B.3a. would thon Steff up the London end again. "e envisuge hell r being there for perhaps a sear. I seid I thought possibly John hair might tale over the London end if we got him. las noberts nas been behaving rather bidly, mubsby because his pride has been somewhat mounaed by net being offlereo THSerepyot MIT. RIGINALDOCUMENT DOCUMENT RETAINED June 25th INDEPARTMENT UNDER SEC NDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION (4) OF HE PUBLIC RECORDS PUBLIC RECORDS Hollis talea to me about nguagersannslas] ACT 1958 he has been unable toget the services of Mrs. Caird. I suggested tet we might try ano get somebouy who was formerly employed in Pilkington's section of Censorship. I according- 75 ly ranE ur bavia Dcyle pho sig trat he knew of people aind in fact is employin them on an ad noe basis. He Stid tit if would write to him he voulu give me the names cf jecpl he thought suitable. Adam,vick Alley,h- rnu I haa tik apout arrangements to vet the personnel of Andersie army. It seemed tc me that many suesticns would Elise wnich would probelly have to com befcre Creedy'! Committee. At the moment we wore very much in the dork. I subsebuenuy rang up Drew who theusht that a littie Ister there wculd be uestions for Cresay's comaitta He S baested however that meanwhile 1 should get into touch with rig.w.Davey, Folish Liaisen Section,ibbey 1272,h0 knew H11 the details of tre arrivel End destinetici cf units cf Andersis prmy. Other questions he thought at the moment were largely on the plate of the r.0. I sat sho he.s just arrived back in this country,ina who ve prorose to tone on cn a tempora basis since he is regular Army officer. He gae me al account Of his escape. He wuS alking aotin one of the main streets in Jerusale: when he pssed taxi arawn ug at the side. Thero were two men standing or side and talking with EL ran and woman insid As he approached the men drew thair gims nd bunaled wim into the taxi. The woman then took out a chlorofaria nad and stuck it over ais face. When he recovered conscicusness he WES in a bakery,tied to plank in a lying position. He WiS told he Nag among 26 cther nign-ranking officers who naa been taken ina woald be executed if the tc Irgun men under sentence of aectoweve shot or hangea. His guaras were masks and later on an officer Caule to interview nim. For this purpose his eyes were blindfalded. The officer tola him 234 more or less Whet the guaras had told him and then chatteu quite amiably. He Was Eiven food and allowed to sit on low ecuch provided either nis arms or his feet there thea. Later he was allowed to exercise anu for this purpose got rid of his bonds. He then floued down on the bed and pretended to go to sleep. One guard remained inside the room and mether WES Close Bt h'inc outside. While lying on his bed he noticed a piece of sacking over the roof, and also EL ledge in tne lnich would enable him to renew ET beam. Noticing that his guara 1s apparently tdeen (he could not see his eyes owine to the mask out he saw muis head nadding) hegot up on nis bedyput his foot on the ledge Ard reached the beam. te looked Tour once more to see whether the guard S still usleep, tore away the sacking and went out through t t hole. This of course minde certale smeunt of nose and tite gusro waked. le slid dova tha roof ana dropped into a courtyard with inon Etes. Luckily the gates opened wherhe used certain amount of reshure He ran down the road, Pursued at certain distance by the guuras. He could get no assistance but as look would have it he wS able to jump on a passing bus. He askea where the bus was going. at first nobouy replied. inally he got n answer out of a woman who spoke Engllsh who saia that the uiLlS WVES going to Jaffa Gate. From there he went straight to the District Police cffloes There wa5 no doubt that he was kianeppeo fcr- tuitously. His captors sald that they hid hoped to cet the G.0.C. He He was was never sericusly nterrogated or even searched. this Ws luok aS ne had several somewhat incriminuting docu- ments on him from the DSOs office. I had talk ith Aellan about Afries. He seemed to think that the whole machinery of Govt.. was extremely one-horse. the poliee ane y3? reluetant to do muon .B.work as should the Afrikaans Govtget inte rower they would lose their Job The Sinster of Justice,ua yawrenee, formerly minister of tite Interlor, was very frienaiy end aven sugEesteu ti T AI5 sho 1a set up 112I Eanigeticn in S.Africe or iterne- tively use some sort of private it elligence organisaticn wnieh WEIS to be established by Ran maenetes. Keller very properly said that t'id5 would not LC and that 17e must confine our Llaison tor purely offheil channels. benton teS brought into the picture and apparently D re-concdliatio has been effeeted between nim ana the police. His records one: to be available to 1S as remvired. Communi- cution Is to be throryl the Hiigh Coumissiomerl ba. the High Commissioner, Evelyn Barint, maS very friendly and ready tohelp in any say he could. The negro problem in S.Africa 1s likely to become somewhat serious since intel- 1icent negroes Are receiving auvaneed education amu going into the mnedicel and local profession A1L Hov t. employment however is berreu to them. No use has so far bem made of the informaticr that we gave from the field spout van Rensbung. The line WIS then that the avidenee is not strong encuth to obtain E conviction. The raal reason robably is that Smuts wishes to hola-ur the rerort until there is eleetiou June 26th I Saw Roger Moore for S moment. I told him that Normtn Archer NS saying on the auvloe of Bolnao ti the IRA Mepe in funds. Rogar Moorel tnougnt this wUS extremely doubtful. I attanded meeting of the JIC. D1I talked about nis recent visit to Washington and Ottawa. He said tht in Oittatt the central 736 point of the maps hanging on the walls was the North Pole no that poth the Canadians and the americuns had 4 real bee in thsip bonnets about the possiblllyof Russian attack from the north. This hid been Retively 4scus9ed in the American-canadfe Defence Cormit tee. The ape ressine to install metereo- logics stations an mURT sphantus in the north cI CanHuc. Thay say they have the mane poren anu the egulpment na thet they wish to inst 11 it this summer. The Canadd ns she taliingg they would prefem to do this Job taniseves. They think that if the Amerie ne do it the hussi ne may think that it is an act repertory to Bggresslon. On the other hand they tuave mot BLL the moment EOt the necesseny steff or equipment to carny out the wark themselves. the American-Canadian Defencel comnmittee aces otaceordine to DNIimply thet th Cenedime in any WET isl to secede from the Britisa Commonwenlth. It ig purely 8 atural defensive maasurorin which both Canada Amerien ate intimately concerned. as Teguras the echange of infonmstlion betuaen Canede anti the USA there may be ertain infor nation particularly that pelatine to dameriee whleh the USA would not wish passed on to curselves. DMI made it It clear to the Americins aG Cunzoenb to t this position whs uindenstood bne accepted tina tht he would totie ne ttempt to obtain rmericr informetior from the wanadians. On the other hand he hope that in the course of their leltberations they voula leep it aetively in mind thet cert in matter would be (f Interest to the British MoN. and should be passed to them. Memnwhile lively exchange of informstior is to continue between ourselves L1U the Amenicas but till excluue any reference to 737 S.American affairs. Effort will be made to brsk down tha reserwation about -America at any Date on oueetions affecting the oraar of bottie of Suemenicas sttas. It is felt that the American objectians to being given information about americe are more economic and commercial than anything alse. DMI has set up omtore: lth Intelliigence Bureau in washington which mill include the hustrallins pnu bangeians. He He-is having two working representatives of bansaian ntelligsne in his dlectorate and is sending 3n officer to were uneer the Canadian DMI in Ottawa. UNI will continue to have rolitions wita ONI on a separate basis since relations between them na G.2c 6.2 use known to be gOO0. ONI ame being given the benefit of D good deal of technical information here at ith certain reserv tons we up receiving Amerlean technical inforrtion Atterts vill be mede to improve the quality und volume or inform tion thlchwe get from the Amnericans. I menticned that aecoruing to cur informatior ONI some 43 officers in this country. DNI said thet he dia not know there were so many but he WES are of the fot that considerable Tunter mrpre constantly tllingon various Admirgity est D- lisments. C. said that he hou refused to deal with Cept.Belim of ONI until the Americuns guns got their erous intelligence spheres mone Che clearly defined. DNRI Sirld that ErS far ES he knew,t the central Intellirerce Authority was still more Cr less marking time. I SEW C. this aftemnocn and discussed with nim the Frobhem of the Amerlcenvisa. he said that ne would give cir Views His fnti supportif I sgoulu lat nim have ecmias of the correspondence He took 8 veny grave vie of the proposals whic he thought might vitalfy affect the future of 235 Passport Control throughout the orld. We werit on to talk about cur representation in the US. L told him thet I had sicuseed this matter with V rious authoritie in the USA and also at length with Dick wllis ana Kim. C. said that he WAS quite ready to let us have a representative wnt he would like to see him the same office with Peter Dwyer in Washing- I said that quite frenkly I did not wnink this woLla ao. My information, ana I quoted him Barty Bouverie's talk with Micky Lada, WIS that the FBI woud never really trust SIS. they rebarded them ss an offensive orgenisation and were conseluently shy about giving tham the some assistance as they gave Us. I told him that from out point of view it would be infinitely referable to rut our man in Pass- port ontrol,NeH York I thought he could perform really useful function there for h our offices offi ces and be cf assistance to at tone. He voulu moreover De placed between washington and Ottawa both of which places he nould want to Visit fairly frequently. C. said that he would give this metter further consideration and let me know. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIO RECORDS ACT 1958 DEC 2009 3a June 7th Cunry told me that he nad seen the DG who he said that he vaS considering the uestion of the Secretarist but did not wish to make up is mind finally until he knew a bit more about the office. THIS IS ISA( A GOPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED INDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DEC 22009 2u0 T said goodbye to Sclater toasy and thanked ni or all he had one. he said he was very sorry to go and that he nad been vary hepry while nere. He was I think pleesed about my being able to get him simaill extns gratuity. June 28th Vesey came to tell mne that he nad nana book by Ltour SCHUTZ who caused us so muen trouble in the eerly auys cf the war and who we had regaruaa as suspect una oven put into 020 for a short period. We came to the conclusion tha he was a more or 1ess harmlless lunetic The Mes. which is in the hands of McMillan,is violently critical of ourselv ana Censorship Most o1 the book is nonsense.. I said that. thought DPR should intimate this to wcMillan ho would probably turn the proposition down. THIS ISISACOPY IS ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED NDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) (OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DEC 20091 ick brought Winterbourne to sep mf. heis going &s one of cr military offisens to SIFE. We had a general talk about the building UTI of sources of information. buzzard came to say goodbye. He is going to Moscow as Language officer anu E firm contract has been give nim for years witll an alost certain prospect of being kert on and absorbed 1 talked to the DG yesterday about his visit to the PM. He said th t the latter wes still asking whether wb had eleared our records of any irrelevant me terinl. he DG assured him that this was G normal practice but pointed out certain information we had accumulated which wa'S pernops a little outside our strict charter but was valuable in providing leads and that it would be inaavisaole to destroy it. I asked the DG what the PM rua in the back of his mind. He said ha WES quite sure he was still afr that the Oprosition might accuse him of running a Gestapo. This is of course quite ridiculous in So far as MI5 is concernea,since sm certain that Winston wa's merely referring to the socialisation of industry and controls which causea the appointment of staf'f of a Gestapo kind to see that the regulations were carried out. The DG pparently discussed the questior of cur getting accomnmodatio and told the FM of his int erview with Bridges end de Normann who had said that We could not use Derkeley Scuare House. the DG said that he has spoken to D.who he thought WaS quite willin to come in itih us but he aid not wish our move to be delayed on that account. +his think is ity unless we nove to a building which could ultimately be occupied by C.as well Louglas loberts ned telegraphed in a rathe neurotic way about CHADWICKE implying that he might have been douole-crossing us and that his eseape WES bogus. Fersonally I ao not think there is any foundation for this. The proof is that Oats still goes on. Join Gwyer brought in to Belgian officers who had come over from Bihan to discuss the Tote- kappelle case. They have two cases running now in Belgium which may link up with lbhe organisa- tion ena they hope before long to let us have full particulars. 242 Meanwnlle TREPPER l2as bean identified In the files of the Palestine Police. As he is more 01 1e55 olown in Burope we think t possible ne may gravitate pack to the Mid Enst. He had always Deen to Belglum under TifTerent names ana the Belgins have now gat the full linl-up. They at anxicus to get an effeetive finger- printing system going which i11 dleteat the hussian allas. June29 The raias In Palestine Desun at 4 am andi we alnesuy have newsthat certain number of the leading personalities nave been arrested. Sneh, the Letder of the Hagaina, has however not yet been caught. There had been consider- able vaccillation by Hali, the Colonial Minister, who haa noD ieneu to arrest either Shertok Bengurion. On pressure from the High Commissioner ho aver he officially decided to tell Paastine to to ahead. Bengurion is S far as we know in Paris ana is in the circunstances likely to st y there. F.J. ana Clayton discussed with me the question of sending the reeommendations of the Briages Panel about retining officials signing the fficial Secrets Act to wominions and Colonies. ve deeleed to write to the D.0. suggesting that they send the documents out not only to the High Commissioner which they have done already but 1130 uinect to tna Dominions. AS regards the Colonies, where there is reluctance to send documents to the Governor we have obtsined permission to send it to the DSO who will bring Lt to the attention of he Governor. July lst I had a talk with Battersby who is going out to SIFE. He seemed sensille and intelligent. the DG tot me Down to discss ith Horroeks theproposeu destruction of LRC uncardea files. Horrocks says that the H,0. will be unwilling to except any files unless te can EnOW that the alien is in tris country. I said that I was quite sure that ne ougnt to retain Polish, Czeeb, Hungarien, noumsnian and Bulgarian files after they have been reviewed. I would hoever like to Look at a certain number of the tiles filesbafone bafone expressing final opinion. Horrocls has promnised to send up a uncle. Meanwhile I have Vesey exrmiring the probint again. DG seemed redluctant to male decision and suggested that Horsoeks and I should work the matter out between 1s. July and Thistle showed me various messages indicating that the Agency ane cosideraply wornied about the nalds. It Icols as if we had obtained some quite impootant documents relating to the Palmach anu also some of ouT CWTI top secret Documents aa ut military dispositions in the Mdale East. A considerable number of Arms havevelso have been eptured. The andourn- inent of the House was moved to discuss the whole question last right. bick Crossmany one of the British members of the tnglo-American Cominission,ade a speech strogly in favour of the Agency. On the thole the Govt. held its ground well. 244 At his weekly meeting the DG fave n account of his last Interview with the PM. The PMiS mind still muns on the recorass Horroeks explained for tae first time how the matter of the necoro nad arisen. When visiting the registry Find later Stevart haa looked down a list of fies anu selected 2 or 5 the names on Yhien were familir to bim. One was pileen Bennetirthe tennis player ane the other wS Gen.Mantell he tank expert. E cannot remember tie 3Tu. It was apparently thesefiles that had worried nim and which had led him to ma B the recoumenustion about keeping cur necorue clean. In actual fact there WES 1 erfeet justificatid for out naving both miles at any nate during wartime. Elleen Bennettifa the wife of an SOE officer and nd been reported to us a9 talking indiscreetily apout her nususnu's job. She had to be severely chutionea. Martell had been in communicatio with n.Fuller ina LIEO also been talking indiscreetly. The matter nag becA taen Gn the VCTG1S level and the latter had ins Emeted us to bring any further instances of Indiserotions by Martell LG notice. I mentianed to the Dg the Case of Crosscan who had come ve y much to the fore in cornectior with the Agency out of whoI he had successfully extracted copy f our military orders for the Iguldation of tie Hegana wneht the Ageney alleged thet they nad got from the captured offilder. This docuent was stbsecuently putrlished in the TEIV Statesian. Crossman Bssa member of the Commission was clearly man in Whom we hed to take some interest, norrever mila, otherwise Vie eouid not get 8 leon picture of how the wires wore being pulled. The DG thought that this thiswas was very much edge in point orre hed some lieu of bringing it to the notice of the PM. I toldhim that I youla let him see tre papers. rus I hed a yora with Vesey and asked nim to go again into the question of the LnC fiies aind try and were out seme Freeticpl solution. I was Laath to destroy them as, as documents, they were Extremely ood. They baye NXXSY a photograph, the deseription tna life history of the IE TI. I asked blayton to tell Ie about BUSTAENTE and PIXLEY, the were at present on trtrt in Jemadea. BUSIAMENTE is leader of the Lbour Purty, head of the Inaustrigl Trade Union organs tion nd need 61 the Stevecores Union. llis rival-i is HANLHY, venyintelli gent K.0. tho is head of the People's Netiunal party anu closely conected with the Negro Communist Movement in the USA. He eontroils the eomunist unions which form what 18 known as tie National Union. Ine eplovees-of mental institutions who mere Efilliatea to ANLEYI union, nad struck for higher pay. BOSTAMENTE had taken this as personal challenge anO han caused 71 isturbance by beating up pickets. One man had been Killed. BUSTAMENTE was churgea yhith unlawful assembly and with manslaughter. he hed objected to being tmled in Kingston which yes stronghold of MANEEYIS porty and compromise hed ultimate ly been rehCnea by tnich he mas to be trlea-etsome other epepleee. If the vendiet went against him there might be veny serious trouble and the loyalty of the police Iva.s in question. He hias however senLRCquitted on both charges. Vie made reference to this inttertd cur rerort LO the F this menth. I Stanbury Who vas working under Joe Stepnenson in Hamburg. He is reandidata for Mid Fast. He Is very koen cn Intelligerce work und snxious to come to us parmenently. He looks promising candidate zib Z I talked to Stewert about the screening of 100,000 Jevish immigrants. L suggested that we might, rather-t than photograph those who were refuseu on account of their political background, photograph the whole lot and send copies of the photographs. to alestines This would aet as ain effective check aad produce quite useful documentation Me arererbodyir erabody ing our viens about the whole problem in letter to Nonman Brook who is in charge of the Anglo-Americin committr te which is investi- goting the nngio-American Commissions report. July 3rd At the JIC today a rBOLSOVER gave AT balk on Rusisla BOLSOVER is E situdant of anglo- Russiin history, was employed by the MOI during the WT end has for som9 time peen in Noscow EIS a member of the Embassy making study of general trenus from Press and other souTeeS. ne hae Ded the JIL drafts of thein latest report on Russia. He agreed witin their conclusions but thougnt that thhy had no not laid sufficient stress the importance of the long-term party view. From such mubilie utteranees nad been macte Ie thought that the party line WaS almost back to were .t was from 1924-1033. There were at that time 4 eases ofeanfliet Which tould play into the hanas of Eommmisi. (1) rivalny between the LSA and Britsin. Britsin waS thought of a awi indling power ad the USA as $ rising power. (2) rivalry between the victors and the venqulshe in ht e 1914 wat. (This has now been eliminated). (3) Antagonisi by the capitalist povers for the USSH. 4)Desin for emancipation by colonial peories. He was uite interesting on the subject of Stalin's position and on those of the leading pereor- alities. He thought that the principle wu characters half Molotov, Zhdanov, Mnlankov and Beriya. He dia not think there WAIS any thenee of Stelin fhding out. He would dle in harness, 3S he woulnave B poor chance of surviving if he went into retirement. He 0io not think that there would De ang division on the guestion of copperstion with the mest since this matter wia laid down by the marty. there could only be differences as to tactics. He felt therefore that it WaIS Important not te uTW deauetions From opportiist motives but to keep one's eye on the Farty line. Harold Caccis made me outline my theory about the Fleet being the basic fhetor in recent Boviet moves. Dclsover substantially ngneed. he thought that the matter WES certainly Ltoportant anar trat a close ae should be kept on it. DNI said thet t he had lyayerealiseo this altnouen personally I dr not belleve he given it thovent. Colonial OffIce Security in the IiEnt of developments in Falastine WSIS raised by the LIII ana Caccit said that he arould suggest to themthat MIS might possibly Rive some useful aavice. DMI raised the question of India. He thought the JIC should be considering what the posIt fen of Intelligenee would be whe nIndie became eithar 3 dominion On seceded entirely fro the British Emapire. We considered n number of cases at the Appoint: mente isos I ruisedthe uestion ag-In of the Secretarist End D. .Divisicr ane Eve at viens. also abouta Police Seetion. Horracks stid that he was considering both and hoped to proctce a document. They 11 agree that it would not be LOS sible to make much progress witiy uDiv. until number of people wene eliminated. w8 There is aman colled VISSER over here who is sppurently charged by Smuts to ccllect data concerning Van HENSBERG and his associates, presumably with view to prosecution. He se9ns to know tint we intercepted cert in signals relating to SIITIG and BAASCHE. July 4 4th led to Hollis about intelligence. celiting to atoui energy. It Seamea to me that for our can defensive purposes e ought to run some netork of informants into scientifi ic circles in order that we could identify potential MAYS. On the preventive side we ouEi-t to stimlate all factories producing any sort of equipment which would be used for the production of atomic energy, to notify us when and b. whom orders were placed. Hollis agreed but felt the on the preventive side we shotla co nothing until we hau eliminated Brock,Wi WIO coilld only thik in terins of barbed wire ana fences. John Bingham came to say goodbye. He is joining the contro 1 Commission where he has a 7-year contret. July 5th Harker calllled at meeting of Hinchley Cobke, Cuss -en,Vesey nd myself on the book which A. SCHUTZ wishes to puolish. It YES decided to ask that certain matters relting to this dent should be excised on the basis of the tentative afr ement arhn up with The Press ndnublishers after the cessation of Censorship. It tns Eul.so agreed thet wre should inform the ublishers that the book WaS largely inaccurs te and that the deductions drown were hopelesaly wicie of the mark. A DEC 200. THIS A COPY 244 ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED INDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIO RECORDS hptistoit cony of hACOR hs been made for future refarenge. At eating i th Cusson, Courtney Young and Miss hussell King on the proresed handling of VIRSER and BATHETT, the to >outi: Africans mho fine collectin vlance L E inst Van RENSL BERG and his associations, it was still not clear whether they uunteo B.J. inforstion It WRS agreed heevem that GuSSon ano Ccurd 7 would them unu drat them or this point. 1 inclined to think that they are intereste in the EJs since air John Ste: henson nang me ur 1 ter to shy that he n5G hac cominunica. tian from Africa House indic tiny that there WS certe in information which we were age rent ly reluetant to give. I told Stephenson that we were trying to oral them on this point ana ve ould come as elean as we could. Lick,Kellar and I had a talk about Douglas Hoberts coming visit. Ife agreed to explore whether br.orE waS any cpening for him on the Control Commission. Dick thought he might take over the Russinn side of the control Cormision affsins E 21 Drigadie and more or sess on level wi.th Shoosmith. Me felt that he was fairly well U lifisd,a ne lots Russ ans SO is 8 fluent nussian speaker. Lick mi11 take up this matter writh Yohan and later I opill sperl Kellar is snyious th t youglns snouldstiy on after Sentemer but if pressed me would nat mind his remaining for another year. Mo should have to mnike it clear hovevr that we could not cive himn a pernunent contract on the grcunus that had scthinat to affor nim gt head cffice. 250 Alec and I called on vir George Gater at his request to discuss the White Paper for Pealestine. Gater w&s prassing hard for the disclosure cf and unless documen- tary evicelce was found in Palestine which would satisfy the House that the hagena had been engaged in sabotege with the connivinee of the agency and that the Agency at least hac a certain hold over the Irgun. It seemed to us that the P.M. hed connitted himself the production of documents found in Pal- ine, but that he hed been less definite about the groduetion of documents which had 1d him to decide on the arrest of Various member of the Agency. Gater thought the matter went further then internal folities. He felt that it "ES cf parsmount importance to conv ince the world and particularly he USA that our action haa been fully justified I said tha1 whule D could apprecite this point, I had never bean tole to understand why a Government with 8 large majority could not say to the House that hey were satisfied from inforat tion lived that such and such was the case and that the House would readily understand that the disclosure of inforaticn leading to the uetecticn of the source might vell endagpr the informants! lives. If it were finally decided to publish, I thought that ve ourht to consider on messages wymLcr would give us an excuse for the public tion of certain groups. This would gie the in ression that te had monitored them and had only been sble to decypher on the basis 251 I thought that this avenue wis worth exploring El and had given instructions te Thistle to look into this aspect of the problem vihen he visited Polestine in tie course of the next few days. We agree to Met out two not S,one on the basis of information that could be published and the other on the basis of and IFter this meeting I went over and SAVI from. I exbhined to him what a5 in the wind and told him the arguments that I had put forward. He said tht his great difficulty apart from his reluctance to blow the source was I then suggested to C. that if we were really pressed it might be worth while for 6.2. to put the evidence before the president and ask him to make B statenent to the effect that he nad seen the evidence ana MaS satisfied that tie Britisln wovt. were thoroughly Justified in taking action over it. This would go fsr to allay American criticism. Evan though the President might not be yilline to do this for politics lessons it would at lens to some extent put hin on the spot. C. agreed that this MIS well worth considering July 6th Ine DG has just returned from Brussels were THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED INDEPARTMENT UDIDER UDIDER SECTION SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 ACT 1958 DEC 20o9 252 This caused the 1G to rase une tnoie S2ue of our repre- sentetion broad. He thought that he ought to take it up with C. the P.M. eto. T t Id hii that I had for R long time ben convinced of the logic of the PCO being our first line of defence ard ne turslly snying ith it liaison vrith cur oprosite numbers abrosd. This matter had been nulea cut ana ere now saddled mit the unsatisfctory and ambiguous compromises $5 outined in Findlater Stewartr report. If he proposed tc take the matter up, und personally I thought the cause WAS a sound one, ne snculd benr in mind that he VIaS stirring un real hornet's nest. T had seen this going on for nearly 30 years at varying intervills. Each time a vist amount of mud had than stirited up but without any result,exeept general suspicion on all sides. This he for the moment subsided ana limited amount of progress made in Singapore, and in an aamission by SIS that vte should probably have S man in Americ'i. It would need careful consideration thether the best niove might not be to let things take their course and fight.( cur case on its merits rather than try and bact-peaal indlater Stewart's report S a whole. If he chose the latter course he wouldhave to realise that C. ouid bring in the F.0. and the Chiefs of Staff and that everybody would be inclined to say that this matter has been thoroughly thrashed out by the Govt. within the la ast 6 months and a decision reached. Why therefore was it being raised agn. I said thi t I should like to have time to consider this,hen I wouid speak to him again. 253 July 8th Stevart tells me that the questi.on of the confisoation of ships carrying illegal inmigrunts to Palestine has been decided in our favour. Some five ships altogether have so far been held. This is reallly the only deterrent to illegal immigration. The ships are at present sailing under the British fllag. T discussed with Dick the question ofarr representatior in Passport Control, which the D.G. is anous to raise again. We agreed that the first thing to do was to get Findlater Stewant to call. Disk gave me a recent epcample. THIS IS A OOPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTIMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DEC 20oful 254 THIS IS A COPY. ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC REOORDS ACT 1958 DDEC 2009 Ye have prepared a brief for the Coloniall Office and Prime Minister, which brings together all the information that we have from Top Secret sources and other sources, which tends to show a) that the Jewish Agency is in controll of the HAGANAH and the PATMACH, b) that the HAGANAH and the PALMLACH have been responsible for illegal activities and acts of violence, and c) the association of the HAGANAH and PAIMACH on. the one hand and the IRGUN and STERN Group on the other. It is our intention thatThistlethtaite shall take this out to Palestine and marry it with such dooumental evidence as may have been obtained during the course of the raids. He is to be baok uesday of next week, when ve intend to prepare a statement for our Minister. July 9th T accompanied the D.G. to a meeting called by the P.M. ; to disouss what evidence can be given to the House in support of the Governments action in Palestine. Hall, the Coloninil Those present, Secretary, in accompanied addition to by the Martin, P.M., General Ismay and Co The P.M. appeared somewhat frritated at having been mislead by the Colonial Off( when he made his previous statement to the House. 255 Basing himself on a telegram from the High Comissioner, he had somewhat unfortunately committed himnsellf to the production of documents. He said that he had asked whether he could use the informa'tion in the telegram, and had been given an affirmative reply. This was, of course, true, but it had not been anticipated that he would make the offer to produce docunentary evidence. I think he was more amnoyed with the Collonial Office than with anyone else. He then asked what the evidence was. C. said that it was our aeparcment that had really been working on the material. He therefore passed the buok me. I said that T thought that the three points, whi.ch TI have already enumerated, were amply Droven If it were not, the other evidence consisted of statements made by the Jewish Agency liaison officer to our D.S.O. in Pallestine, which were of a decidedly compromising lcind, and statements made by informants. The state- ments by the Jewi.sh representative might perhaps be denied, and equally the informants' evidence might he oriticised,aut apart from jeopardising the informanta' lives if it was given in any great detail. The P.Me came fairly rapidly to the conclusion that C. pointed out tha't if we did this we might be in the dark, as far as future operations were concerned. It was finally decided, therefore, that the Coloniall Office, assisted by ourselves, should prepare a statement on the existing evidence, including Top Secret sources, to be ready by 6 Po In. on Thursday, when it would be discussed by the P.Ho, the Lord Chancellor, the Lord President, the Coloniall Secretary, Generall Ismay, C. and the D.G. If, in the meantime. it were Possible to cover LID the sources this could be done. The P.M. 256 Telt that he would have to mnaice his statement to the House no later than Wedneaday of next weelc. Jully LOth T attended the, J.I.C.. when the A.0.S.I. gave a tallc on his visit to America. Bxroadly speaking, his experiences had been the same as the D.I's. Hv rybody ws thinking abotit a poBpibLe attack by the Rusatians via the Antarotio. He pointed out to the Canadians hat, for the mbrnent at any rato, the Russians were ingularly in-equipped for such an operation, Since they had not got the right type of adroraft or suffdolent quantities. He drgoussed the future of our Intellldgence relations with the United Statea, when the Combined Chief of State Committee came to an end. Although there a willingness on all sides to continue fly ao-operation, there was clearly about mribiaism from Congresb tthat large mumber's of British officer weza sean in unifor walking in and out of the Peftagon Building, It woulni not be possible to camouflage these officers as attaches, Since that would put them in a category where they could not be given priviliges which were not given to other poers. The J.I.0. are gonsiderir how the exchange of information can go on in future. Harold Caocia then said that he had recently had a visit from a Canadian called CREAT, who was of course Bill OREAN, Who had been with 1s throughout the wary CREAN, wha is at presont doing security with external forges iin Canada is probably the future D Chairman of the Canadian J.I.0. I asked whether this means that the Canadians were going to form their J.I.0. on our model and what the position of the R.O.1.P. would be. He sadd tha't, brpadny, this vas the proposal; although he did not know about the R.C.M.P. He was, however, lunchiing with GREAN and aaked me to some along. Bi7D CHEAN told me that the Commissioner is now a co-opted member of the Chief's of Staff Cormttee in Canada, and that his Departont is to be represented on the local J.I.0. in the same way that Wo are represented in London. This is. certainly a atop forwuri. T was at some 257 pains to explain to him that in the past the R.O.M.P. had been souswhat tinid in their operations, as they never felt that they had the backing of External Forces or of the Services. T hoped that under this new set up they would get the baalcing they required. I also told him that at 138 of the greatest importance to constitute the Intelligence Brahal of the R.C..P. aB a separate organisution vrorking direct to the Comissionir, and not an part of the ordinary Police hierurohy. In my view, far and away the best person to control that branch of the R.OIM.P. was RIVEITCAKNTAO. T heard numours when T vas in Canada that there was some question of posting hin to one of the provinces. I sinceroly hopethat tha on be avoided. He said that he would do anything he possibly could to arrange matters on the linen I had suggested. Harold Caccin talked to me about the poasibllity of constituting IL Security Section in the Foreign Office. He thought that the head of it should be a. Foreign Office man, who should be assisted by a representative of 11.1.5. and one from M.I,6. T gathera,howover, that M.1.5. and M.T.6. were expeoted to pay the officer. I told him that this might present BOA disticulty. E also said that I thought it would be preferablle to have as head of the organi- Nation an officer with considerable experience ot Security Intelligence mtters, and that if neoossary we could provide one. Ho was, I think, inclined to the view that a regular Foreign office officdall wotLld carry more whighiti. Personally, I am doubtful, Es 1s mnuoh more important to have somebody who lown what he is doing. Kellar and I had a alnoussion with Nartin and Mathieson of the Colonial Office on the draft of the Prine llinister'a statement on Palestine. attinded a meeting callled by D. C. c D. to discuss security matters connected with atomio enongy. I said that thought it ought to go a good dhal further than the vetting of personnel and the physical security of establishments. We should ciroulate a ist of Foreign physisiata to all Passport Control ofiicors, so that if any of these people turned UD they would be thoroughl 258 questioned as to the purpose of their visit and the firms or organisations they intend to see. Secondly, we ought to ascertai.n the names of any faotories where equipment was likely to be bought for the setting up of ah atomdc energy plant. These factories should be visited and asked to keep us informed about any requests for such equipment that did not seem to them to have a normall explanation. Lastly, and most important, we should place informants in all laborotories where work on omio energy was going on, such informants should malce it their business to know as much as possible about the.general mode of living and political views of young scientists. It was only in this country that we should be able to deal with potential MAYS. There is to be a meeting to-morrow with the Ministry of Supply, when a certain number of these points may be cleared up. I had a talk with Hirsch, the D.D.M.I. I told him that T aid not feel that it was sufriciently appreciated by the Chiief's of Staff how much the G.O.C. Palestine was going to be in the dark if were bl.own. In such an eventuality they would only have informants to fall bacle on. T said that I had not seen the minutes of the Chief's of Staff me eeting nor the brief's that had been given to them, but it seemed to me that they wore taking the whole thing rather lightly. He took the point 0a subsequently spoke to the D.M.0. who said that he woula-go and see the C.I.Gos. at his home that evening. I then told C. what I ladiddone! CORY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED INDEPARTMENT UNDER ISECTION lIth July4 OF THE PUBLICR LIC RECORDS ACI Hirsah told me that B.M.O. had seen the C.I.G.S. 2009 and 1958 Dec that the latter would be spealcing to the Prime Minister. We had another meeting with the Colonial Office to put the final touches to the draft. 259 T had meeting at Chestertlold Sbrreot with Hasbingo and Doniach, C. being present. Hastings, by Doniach, tools the view that it was necessary to publish since the HAGANAH and the PALMACH, i.n broadcasts by K6L Isreel and in broadsheets, had accepted fulll responsibility for may of the outrager committed in Paleatine. He also said tha't if Shertok were asked he would admit that members of the Exeoutive of the eAgency took part in the meetings of the HAGANIAH. Lastly. he criticise the draft by saying that did not really tie up the IRGUIN and the STERN groups with the HAGANAH and the Agency. I said that we were doing on best to get information fru Palestine, which we hoped might prevent publication. Meanwhile, however, the Prime Minister had ordered that a draft statement should be prepared on the existing evidence: Ve would at this evening' s meetir, press for as much timne nS possible. Ve had allready received a, telegram from Palestine indicating that a certain amount of overt evidence had been obtained. I attended & meeting with the D.G. and Kellar, called by the PolL., to discuss the draft Morrison, Hall, Jowett and Ismy were present. The question of blowing secret sources was discussed, and a telegram which we had received from Palestine was read oute This telegram expressed the aniety of the G.o.C. les't he should find himself entirely deprived of Intelligence sources in what wa.s obviously a crit situation. The Prime Minister seemed reluctant to aisouss the aspect of the problem which affect the security of our troopa. THIS I A COPY ORIGINALI DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPABTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Dec 2009 260 2bo THHIS A COPY ORIGINAL D00UMENT BETAINED IN IDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DEC 2009 All this was of little avail, the Lord Chancellor was instructed go through the evidence wi.th ourselves and to daft tatement. Ve vere to be given a week to obtain evidence from Palestine, which if sufficiently convincing might prove a substitute for The Lord President was sympathetic with ou point of view, but felt that it was of world importance that the statement made should be as convincing as possible. The Spanish Police have arrested a voman named IIsa BARTEL, who had been employed at the Spanish Legation in Berlin during therwar. ther She has admitted having passed on secret Spanish reports to the Gestapo as from the year 1941. She is to be indicted on a charge of espionage. The case of Caspar HASLINGIR has been brought to my notice. Vle got bid of thi.s man tin 1938, on the grounds that he was engaged in espionage. He Yas a member of B yacht club on the east coast and was arly collecting information. When we wrote to the Nevoastle Police, they said that they had been unable to ascertain any information which would inddoatedt that he was interested in any organisation of a subversive nature. Later, after the man had gone and we that that he vras coming back, we asked the Police to Let us lmnow. They said that they had made cohtao'is with two individuals who were personally knovm to HASIINGER, but that these two persons had no idea of the road nature of the enguiry. A later report from our orginal informant stated that two people had visited ona of these individuni.s and show him HASIINTGERI S dossier - So liuch for the vallue of the Dantad 261 July 12tH. T attended a meeting at the Home Office on Travel Control to Ireland, with MaT's. Carew Robinson wa.s in the chair. The meeting was said to be purely excploratory, the object being to see whether dt was possible to relax the present controls, in whole or in part, before the end of 194-7. It was pointed out that the Expiring Laws Continuance Bill would over us after the end of 1947 if necessary, but only subject to considerable fire in Parliament. If possible the Home Office would Dike to make some relaxationibefore the end of this year. The Ministry of Labour said that they had an interest in the entry of aliens, but were not worried about Eire citizens flooding the labour market. Thoy work ready to submi.t to whatever the Home Office considered an adoquate control. The Registrat Generall viewed the relaxation of the present syatera wiith considerable concern, since it Imouked the bot tom out of the whole of the rationing syaten, He was dependent upon the mmigration Officers to provide him with the necessary statistics. If the Irish door was open these statistics. would be valueless. It woula, moreover, be open to people coming from Eire to start an extensive food racket. People could quite easilly get on to the electoral registe at several places under different names. The Treasury were allarmed to find that there vas no control of currency in the oase of peoplle leaving this country for Eire. This has apparently been abandoned for somne months. The difficulty, apparently, is to distinguish betvreen people who are going to Eire within the sterlimg area and those who are going to other destination abroad outside the steriling area, As regards the Security Service views, D said we had always regarded Ireland as the back door into this country. We had put up with this situation before the var, but ve were anxous that the present system should continue, both as regards visas and proper identity documents, to distinguis) 262 the alien from the British subject. The problem was now a far more important one, in view of Foynes having become a most important centre for air travel between the Americas and Europe, lines haveing recently been opened from Foynes to Oslo, Stockcholm and Copenhagen, in addition to the route to Lisbon. It woulld now be an easy mautster for an alien, who could not get a visa for the U.K., to fly from Foynes and enter the U.K. through Holyhead. Moreover, if he were so minded, he need never register. All he would have to do would be to return to Eire when his two months were and come in again. Carew Robinson suggested that we might obtain the co-operation of the Eire authori- ties, and so extend the ringed fence to cover the whole of Ireland. I said that did not tinlc that this was very practical, There were two factors, a) the inability of the Eire authorities, however willing, to control inmigration, owing to a shortage of staff and other reasons, and b) the polibioal factor which might at any moment make further Co-operation impossible. The suggestion would involve our giving our Security Lists to the Eire authorities, and in certain cases this might be highly undesirable. The, only hellpful proposal for getting ott of this diffi oulty vas made by Hilll of the Home Office, who suggested that British subjeots whould be allowed to travel on the green National Registration Identity Card, whi.ch bears a photograph. The Registrar Beneral has undertaken to consider this proposal, whi.ch would considerably relieve the burden of the Dpor't Office. I gathered that the mai.n purpose of the meeting was to ease the strain on the Passport Office, which cannot now issueta passport under a moniths notice. This is due to the flood of applications which always take place during the holiday season. If they vere to obtain an inorgase in staff, they would by the mi.dale of September have nothing to do. Kelllar and I went over to see the Lord Chancellor, to assist him OM matters of detail in the preparation of his draf't. Hastings oane with uso 203 THIS S A GOPY Jully 15th. ORIGINVAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION We have received the Lord Chanoellor'sildrantu RECORDS have been asked to fill in certain gaps and reth it to him this evening, as he wdsires to give it to the P.M. Gilbert Ryle is going out to interrview KLATT. Brian Melland looked in. He is now demobilised. He thinks that if T want to see Robi MENDDRISSOHN (v) the best think to do is to borrow a car and go down to Georgenhof, without saying anything to the Frenche TAR and M.E. have been having a certain amount of difficulty with Wilson about the B.J.C.B. Wilson says that Sigals Security and cipher policy are one and indivisible. His Committee dealls wi'th both, and he does not wish us to sit in on cipher discussions. It lloolcs as if he only intends to co-opt us as and when he thinks necessary. T rang him up on the telephone and pointed out to him that it had been laid dowby the J.I.C. that we should be a member of his Comittee. He said that the letter he had witten to the J.I.C. had been incorrectly drafted, but he fully accepted us as members, provided we only stayed for the disoussion which concerned us, I said that we had no intention of interfering He said that he would be very glad to kceep us infored of matters of that lcind, and that he had appointed Davey (?) as liaison officer for that purpose. I pointed out to him that recently It seemed to mns that a matter of this kind could malte nonsense both of his work and ours He said that he would be very grateful for any information tha't we could give him bearing on this subjeoto I think the ground is now fairly clear. Villson is rather a difficult: customers 264 Kelllar, Chadwiak, Thistle and E tools the Lord Chancellor's proof baak to him, with certain amencnents. We had a long discussion. He WaB extremely friendly And very ready to draft anothez proof- on information received fromrovert sources, if it wore sufficiently strong to prove his points. We told ham that we voulld le't him have the information in the dotrse of the next tyo days. July 16th At the D.G'S mating today it was decided that we shoula paas nmited l1sts of British aubjeots to Wynston Scott, provided he used them dincreetly in the matter of visa control. Adam uoted n Home Offi.co meeting befane the war, where the policy of passing information in this way haa been more or less agreed to, Jaully 17th Morton-Evans tellls mo tthatthe meeting with B.J.C.B. went off guite smoothly, and that we were accepted as full members for the discussions on signailg security. July 18th. Brisooe same to tell 6 that he has DOW been appointed a member of conaultative COtudliEtee under Coclecrart. this is to dsall with the chemi.cal aspeota of Atomlo Energy. He will shortly be proceeding to Canada. T outlined to him what I fol't to be the groper course of action for outrsellves for dealing with the security of Atomio Energy, and in particular T told him that it WaB essential that v/e should first learn whare experimnental vorkc was going on, what new developiponts were in the wind, and then try and get useful contacts in the various llabs. 3 who would now something of the daily 11e and political vewsr of those emglloyed. T seumd to Ie that it was only in this way that we should got to hear about anyone of the type of MAY. He quite agreed and said that he would jceep his eyes open in this ds.rection. 265 Sir Findlater Stewart same to see the D.G. at the Laster's requoste Dick and I were present, The D.G. waS anxous to get Findlater's views on that portion of his report which related to the possibility of our having representation aversens. Pindlater said that he had purpoaely Left the door open and that it V3B up to Ls to talce the matter up with rol, and if necessary with out Ministerial Head. Ho was entirely sympathettio with out views and agreed that it would be desirable, wherevar possible, for our representative to be situated in Passport Control It waS decided that we wolla begin by writing a letter to 'ot, pointing out that this matter had dog to the notice of the D.G. in the coure of hin recent visit to Brussels, and that it waB only on returning here that he had been aoguinted with the baake history of the whole matter. We would make a definite request to for the appointment of our representative in Passport Control, New York, an a test oase. July 19th. The folllowing matters ware dealt with at the J.I.C. this morning Ye were rogueated to aslc SIME for any confirmatlor Or amplification of A report from the Governor at Aden to the effect that a Russian lssion was going to the Yemen. Hirsoh mentioned that there was a report that uraniumm had been discovered in Madagascar, that the French had sent an Atomic expert, and that the Russian Mission was going to Madagagour. I WIS aslced whether there WELB any objeotion to our Canadian espilonage roport, which is to be aembodied as ay Appendix of the J.I.O. report on Russian intentions, being sent to Foreign Office representativos abroad. Caccia thought that it might help them to realise the dangers of penetration, T gaid that mnoat of the information had been published in the Press and that I could see lttle objeotion - T should, however; lke to consult before giving a final opinion, ELmhirst told the meeting that he had discovered that Sovlet New wvas 8ti12 being distributed to 225 units tn the Air Force this 266 wa.s a hangover From the war It was decided that dt should be stopped, 01 the grounds that no propaganda publication of a foreign government should receive offictall distribution within the Forces in peace tim. Kenneth Strong said that he was going into the question of monitoring foreign broadcasts and would be glad to lmow peaples' requirements. I aslced whether he could Let LIS have a list of broadcasts, in it wa.s poasiible to talce, wa could then tell him whi.ch ones would be of value to uso Harold Caccla di.selosed that he had seen, entirely off the record, an extremely glocrty l.etter from the Viceroy about ppeots in India. The Vigeroy anticipated that Constituent Asserbly, which T understand comes into being in August, might conceivably brealc down entirely in the first week, owing to disagreements between Mosilems and Hindus. If this happened what wa.s the Govemnment's pollicy. He said that al.though the British dministration had gradualy been weakened, it would he thought be possible for them to ceassume the zei.ns of Government, but ie this were so it would have to be on a. long-texm basis for, say, twenty years. The allternative seemed to be chaos. Kellar, Thistle, Chadwiok and myself discussed with the Lord Chancellor a very rough diraf't of the paper on Palestine, excluding At the beginning the Chaneelllor toole a favourable view of the docunent, but later became extremely worried about the wealmness of in the of the comunication "Resistance with Movement". K(l Iarael It and wa.s the agreed bringing that youlld try and find some further supporting evidence of tho relations between the Agency and Kol Israello July 20th We attended on the Chancellor again a't o'clock, and outlined to him the new scheme for the paper, which vas set out on the basis of the three main inciden'ta -w those of October, 1945, February, 1946, and Jue, 1946, We began by a statement on the events as reported and the damage done, and this WaS followed by a showing the 267 complicity of the Agency and the DO-ordination of activity by the Agency to include the IRGUN and STERN groups. Ve then quoted the Kol Israel broadcast, with a note to show how Kol sraell wa.s connected with the Agency, and lastly we quoted the claims of HAGANA, IRGUN and STERN from their own papers. Finally, we showed how each o.f these incidents, with the complicity of the Agenoy, had been intended as a warning to the Bri'tish Government of further incidents to come of a widespread kind, and how the last straw had been the lcidnappiing of British officers Faced with thi.s evidence the British Government have no alternative but to ac't. The Chancelllor expressed his approval. of this new schem and We undertook to have the final. aratt complleted by 30 'clook on Saturday nighto He dictated a covering Letter to the Prime Minister in whi.ch T got him to include a phrase to the effeot that he considered this draf't more satisfactory than the original one, and he udertoolc to hand the copies to each of the Cabinet Ministers concerned on Sunday morning, when he would be seeing them They they would then have time to study the documnen't before the meeting Monday evening at 5.30. THIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOQUMVIENT RETAINED July 22nd. IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS The D.G. hela a meeting on Giuriis look It was 209 decided that Hamy Allen, Dick WIte and myself would ea.ch draft a skeleton for a siz-page memorandum, which it VAS felt would be more suitable for D'S of I., Chiefs of Staff, Under Secretartes of State. The general vi.ew was that they would not have time to read anything longer. I said that T thought tha't it was of the greatest importance that they should understnad exactlly what the scope of this office wast and what it had done during the wa, since the ignorance of them allll at the moment was abysmal.. We were all umped together as "those Intelligence people", with the result that the wrong people were generally consulted and papers whi.ch were intended for us went buckoting a10. around the place. Curry' memoranduun vill be kept for instruotlona] purposes for officers Joining Or going out to our Stations abroad. Dcensu THIS COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED 267 INLDEPARTMMENT LINDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIG RECORDS ACT 1958 John Mair came to ses-id tie heerogretruny decided to go into the Control Commission. He falt that he vaa taking a gamblle, but he Just could not afford to live here and bring up his family on the terms that me could offer. The D.G. talled to me aboltt the dispute botween Hollis and Adam over vetting. T told him quite frankly that he would never have any peace so long as Adam remained. He was too old and too namow in his Loolc and took an almnost sadistio delight i.n catching people out on the lotter of some documen't. The only person who coul.a really expreas an opinion as to whether a Oommist should or should not be employed is Hollis, who had been responsiille for malcing file on the individuall and knew precisely how to evalluate the docuinents. If work was done in the Vacuun of things were bound to go wrong. It was in fact on cases of that kind that the office was judged by the outside world, and on all cases of espionage about which they lmew nothing. The D.G. I think tool the point. - Nevts has Just come through that the King David Hotel in Jerrusalem has bean blow um. There have been a tnsideraille number of casualttes, but we do not Imnow yet whia't the extent of the damage is. I saw Fawdry and disoussed with him his various probllema in Gibealltar. He is ataying on untill February of nexcb year July 23rd. Harola Cacoi.a spoke to me this morning about the possibinlty of the Foreign Secretary going to Bgypt, at gome future date unspecifled, to sim the Elypeian 269 Treat. He was apprehensive about a possible attempt on the Forreign Secretary's life and wanted to low our reactions. I said that there would obviously be considerable danger of an attempt on his life, either by Parties opposed to the Treaty or by the Irgun or Stern, and that yihihe the EEyptian authorities would be anxous to prevent any such incident, recent even'ts have show that they might not be ablle to do a great deal. The fact was that if a fanati.c intended to carry out an assassination and Wa.S prepared to disregard his own safety, there would be very little bhat he could do. Arter consulting Ormne Sargent, Caccia. asked if we would get the opinion of Douglas Roberts, pesumably in conjuoti.on with Jenlins, as to whether it was really advisable for the Foreign Secretary to go at allo He was particularly anxious that the ma'tter shouldbe confined to the most limited ciroles possible, as it was of the utmost importance that nothing should get around about a possible visit or that MO were apprehensive about the Foreign Seoretary's safety. Any telegrams sent should, therefore, be of the "for your eyes onlly" variety. I have told Kellar to have a word with Harold Caccta if ahreplyecomes while T am away I have asoertained that the draft paper on Palastine has gone through to the P.M, who refused to take out the words about ISTRLA - referring to their being interpreted. his is a pity,but I dontt think it matters a great deal. A frther wire has come th through From Pallestine about the damage. Our records have apparently been destroyed, the OATS unit is intaot, none of our D.S.0's have been injured. Some of ou Army seoretarial staff have been killed and other wounded. Apparently entry was made by members of the Irgun or Stern group in the guise of Arabs carrying milk cans full of explosives. VESAY, I am sorry to say, is leaving LS on Saturday. T went to a leoture given by General Sinclair, at the Imperial Service College, on the subject of S.I.S. 270 His talk WaS purely historical, showing how S.I.S. had been built up on the outbreak of war and of the diffis oulties that they had encountered. He quoted various reports whi.ch his Department had submitted in advance of the more important moves that the Germans had Subsequently made. Those quoted at the beginning were, I thought, Padghamis reports which of course came through the F.0.0. to Haigh. By D. Day he said that S.I.S. had 27,000 agents in France and the Low Countries. This I felt Was a somewhat extravagant alaim; the imnprossion given was that these agents jad been put into the Countries, whereas of course they wore merely members of local Resistance Movements - although they were of course to some exten't organised through S.I.s. agencies. At the end of his leoture he asked his listeners whether he had given them what they vanted. They sai.d that they would like to have known a bit more about organisation and how the information Was fea to the various department concerned. They were not enlightened. At one point I was drawn into the discussion owing to a question about leakage of information through neutral Embassi.es. TI told the meeting that these Embassies had of course been a source of interest to uB, but ve had in a large measure sugceeded in neutralising the information which they supplied. They did, however, present us with very serious difficulties, since every delegation or mission which came to this country from a neutrall country always operated under the aunpioes of its Embassy or Legation - it folllowed that these people provided useful material for Service Attaches to put in their reports, for example, Stookholm and Madrid. One the information reached either of these capitals it almost inevitably ended up in German or Japanese hands. It followed from this that the more pro-Britisl the individual was the more he was likely to learn and unwittingly pass on to the enemy The whole prom ceedings did not strilce me as being too alarming, but I thinle we shall have to prepare the leoture in two parts, one historical and the other organisational. 27 July 21-th - 26th I flew to Nuromburg with Harker. We were met at the other end and taken straight to the Court, where we had a seat in the Strangers Gallery. A German named SEIDEL was winding up the defense of NERATH, FRITSOHE - of the B.N.B. and Propaganda Ministry - and HESS. Tho whole proceedings were highly mechanised; in each seat was a pair of earphones with a dial which enabled tou to switch in to English, German, French or Russilan. The set apeeches wore submitted to the Bench and the interpretors in advance. If approved by the Bench, from the point of view of irrhlevant matter, thoy were read by Counsel and read a few seconds later by the interpreters, who sat behind a glass. screen spealcing into microphones. There was, therefore, a permanent babel of foreign languages which could be heard going on all the time Counsel was spealcing. GOERING was considerably reduced in size and vaS wearing a light and grey-blue brown top uniform boots. without He seemed badges of to be range one or of decorations the few who had much spunke left in him. He would taak and smile at his colleagues in the Doak and would show flashes of anger when he thought that untust acousations were being made against him, When acouised of treachery by Shawaross, he whipped off his glasses and gave him a ferocious Loolc. HESS only appeared for one moning while his defense was being heard; he appeared to be entirely indifferent to the proceedings, RIBBENTROU looks pale, thin and haggard and ocoasionallly shalcea his head. KEITEL was fairly passive, while JODL, his Chief of Staff, was takcing copious notes as if he wore fighting a rearguard action in the Fhola. T doubt whether he has a clue as to what it is all about; he probably think that a gross injustice is being done to himself, a soldier, who has done nothing more than carry out his orders - how could he possibly do other wiseo- even though it was alearly shown that under his instructions the Army had collaborated satisfactorily with the Einsatzlcomando, which had been oongerned with the liquidation of the Jews and others in Fastern Europe. FRANOK, who was a reichstadthalter in Poland, seemed 27 Z baol defiant and at the end of one session turned his on the Bench. ROSENBERG and STREICHER were mainly indicted for their philosphy and racial theories and showed fev reactions. FUNK and SCHACHVT were both acoused of having guilty knowledge of tho mss murders, in that the gold from the teeth of the murdered victims were all melted down and placed at the disposal of the Reichsbank. SCHACHT sat looking like an old owll and it waa difficult to escape the view that he had sat on the fence and Junped down wither side as and when he thought it WaB lilcely to be in his own interests. In the second row sat DOENITZ, who was quite placid; the accusation against him being that he had given the order about sinking ships without waring. The facts are, of course, that in this respect it is probably diffioult to humnanise war, singe by giving warning aubmarines were disastrous likely results. to give their RAEDER, own who position sat next away, to with was present at the meeting in 1937 when Hitler disclosed him, his agreasive plans. Baldur von SCHIRACH was accused of in educating the youth for warlike purposes and anti-Semitio ideas. SATTOKEL, a particularly upleasant loolcing individual, was mainly responsible and for with getting their forced labour from the invaded countries they resided. treatment FRICKE, the in Minister the various of the camps in which clearly had intimate lnowledge of the various Interior, crimes against humanity. SEISS INQUART was responsible for the Anschluss and also for atrogities committed during his Governorship of Holland. NEURATH pleaded that he had resumed office in Czecho-Slovakcia as he had no alternative, and that it had been his intention wherever possible to damp down his instructions. mainly responsible for produotion and of course waB made SPEER, probably one of the ablest in the Doclc, use of aln the labour that SADOKEL could give him, FRITSCHE, of the D.N.B., waS No. 2 to Goebbels and mainly responsible for braadcasting. It was diffloult to avoid the point made by his Counsel that had in Goebbels the not comitted suicide he would hot have been Conspiracy Dock. to wage The main agressive charge, War that - a is conspiracy Count 1 which 273 the Prosecution held began in 1921 with the formation of the Nazi Party. Those in the Dock, therefore, are to some extent a body representing the whole Government and the N.S.D.A.P. Although I did not hear the view alll the that evidence, the conspiracy I find started it difficult in 1921. to accept There is, of course, "Mein Kampf", but the Gormans contend that the primary objective was to get rid of the terms of the Treaty of Versaillles. It is a truiam to say that talking was no good thd that you could only hope far any success if you went into conference with the guns behind you. They say, however, that everything they did up to Munich was condoned by ourselves af Chaberlains's famoun eating with Hitler. Our only answer to that would be that had we lmowm then what we now now we should not have signed on the dotted line, to which I would reply that our Government believed that they had no alternative and would have done so in any case. The first evidence of conspiraay seems to date from the document of May, 1937, when Hitler summoned his Chiefs of Staff and Ninisters and told them to prepare for operations against Ozecho- SLovalcia and Poland, which he envisaged might well involve Germany in war with Franoe and England. The they Counsel meetings say, for are cannot the not Defence conspire evidence argued with of a himself,an conspiracy that this and anyway one subsequent man he is dead. The Ministers merely attended the meeting to receive their orders. Count 4, which is concerned with crimes against humanity, seems to me to be on much stronger gfound, There is no doubt that every man in the Doak must have imown of the appalling atrocities and mass murders to the extent of 12,000,000 people, wlthough all of them were not directly concerned The Proseoution say that with this knowledge they should have disassociated themselves with the Government. They, of course, pleaded that to do so would have been tantamount to High Treason, and that they would have Buffered the supreme penalty. Some, of course, such as KAL/TENBRUNNER, have a far more intimate knowledge of what was going on. The feature of the triall is perhaps that most of the accused have at one time or another tried to pass thh buok either to those who are dead or to each other, and in so doing have to a considerable extent, condermed either themselves or 274 othersi the Doolc. The two Russian Judges sit placidly in the dark(?) and one cannot escape the feeling that most of the things of which the 21 are accused of having done over a period of 1 years, the Russians have done over a period of 28 years. This adds considerably to the somewhat phoney atmosphere of the whole proceedi.ngs and leads me to the point which in a way worries mne most, namely, that the Court ds one of Viotore who have framed their Oi Charter, their own procedure and their own rules of evidence in order to deal with the van- silished. It is not a Court of world opinion sitting Judgement upon the Germans - doubtless the answer that if it had been the prooeedings would hever have got on their feet at all. One cannot help feeling, however, that a dangerous precedent in being created. Those in Nuromburg lavyers and officials - dismiss this point rather lightly, they say "Oh, we have got over that long ago". I think to some eoctent because they are so steeped in atrooities and also because they think that any aggressive power will deal with its enemi.es ufainly in any case. They also put forward the argument of the Common Law being built up on case history, but thin T snot feel is A very good analogy. During one of the sessions I visited the prison,whioh is very like Wortiwood Sorubs. A1D the prisoners have been in solitary confienment since last November. They are watched night and day by a "snowdrop". Aa soon as they get back to their oollB their belts, tiea and any thing with which they might conceivably commit suicide me talcen away from them. They have to clean their own ella. There are a number of Germans performing dial taslcs who have undertaken to remain prisoners until the end of the trial. There is a olinio with a dootor and a dentist, both ermans,supervised by Americans. The dootor was an oldish man and stood at attention while we inapeatod his alinio; he striclo me as being generally distressed and I wondersd what was paasing through his mind - he ms't have a pretty frightful Job. The prisoners receive 2,000 calortes a day; it was explained to 11s by the American conducting officers that this treatment,which differed from the other Germans, was merely for the purpose of getting the best out of them. The prinonera have an hour to two hours exercise in the morning and the afternoon and they are not allowed to pick up anything off the ground, in 215 case it mnight be an object with which they could commit suicide. In an adjacent prison there are a nuber of Nazis who are giving evidence for the Prosecution or for the Defence. Thoy have a greater measure of freedom, in that they are allowed to walk about in the prison and converse with eaoh other. The 21, on the otherhand, oan only speak to their Counsel thro ugh a grille or to each other in the Doalc during the intervals. I was also shown the exxhihite which consist of the most revolting photographs of Nazis smiling while they torture or execute their victims. Soap mde from human bodies, human hai packed in bales for use in stuffing furniture, dr human alins used for every possible purpose - all ae came from the factory which exploited human bodies, and there is a maSS of documentary evidence showing exotly what the factory tured out and what ite capacity was, etc., eto. From these somewhat grim proceedings you go to the Grand Hotel which is about the only one standing the crowd there is completely cosmopolitan and includes even neutrals. There is Large dance hall with a huge Jjazz band and a German cabaret thinly disguised as Cxechs. I walked out in the evening into the old town with its l3th Century Church and the wholething is Just a sheil, the rubblle being piled up on either side of the Btreet. Dure'e house has not gone completely and is being repaired. An old night watohman outside ofb of the Churches to whom I spoke said that he kee that this would happen sooner or later and that/one thing that tho Germans cared about was heing able to earn suffic money to keep thoiselves and their wives and children, The only monuinent which appears to be intact is the Nuremburg Stadiu with its Greco-Germanic golunns and arena. I believe that indue course it is bo be blowa up. Other visitors were Rebeoca West and Louis Golding, also a very tiresome woman called Mrs. Bowles, who told me that she was a barrister, or haa been one -A I do not think that she could have been a very suocessfl one. II anned with Lord Justice Lawrence at his villla outside Nuremburg - nobody could have been nicer. T had a talk with him and also with his wife and with Fzanois Biddle, the American Attorney Generall and principal Amerioan epresentative on the Benah. He was a great friend of Hoover's about withom 276 we had tali. John Phipps was there and also a German called Brau, a lawyer who was apparently a refugee in this country and is helping the Prosecution. Passes are very much the order of the day in Nuremburg; t is extremely difficult to get into the Court and once you are in you have to show your pass about every other minute. You cannot even get into your hotel without shoving a pass. I heard off the record from John Phippa that although Lawcence had handled the Russians extremelly well and had got over all difficulties up to the present, there were many matters which had taken a long timne to settle. He gave me two rather ammsing incidents. a3 Russians had objected to the witnesses for the Defenoe being alowed to give evidence on oath; they said if they gave evidence on oath everybody willll believe them! They then became extremely worried about the witnesses for the Prosecution and the witnesses for the Defence giving their evidence from the same stand; they ovidently thought that this would place them on a lcind of equal basis from the point of view of credulity. This was finally settled by shifting the witness stand to a position exactly mid-way between the Prosecuting and Defending Counsel. Katyn had caused a certain amount of trouble. The Russians had insisted on including it in their indictment, but they were hotly opposed to the matter being raised by any of the witnesses for the Defense. Lawrence pointed out that it wa.sS they who had raised the question and that he therefore had no option but to allow the Defence to have their say, in fact as things turned out the Russians same rather badly out of the whole incident. Lastly, there was double over the secret protocol to the Russo-Geman allliance in 1939. The Defense put forward witnesses who stated quite categoricaily and convincingly that such a protocol had existed and that it related to the partitid of Poland betvreen Germany and Russia. The Russians have not apparently disputed the existence of the protocol but refused to produce a copy of it - whioh must of course be in the archives in Moscow The German copy could not be found. July 29th. It has been arranged writh Courtney Young that he will visit Australian Security on his return to Singapore, The object is to find out something about the organi- sation and the reliability of those in charge. We can 27 then consider whether the moment has arrived when we should asl them to supply a Liaison Officer to S.I.F.E. July B0th Corin came in to tell me that he had more or less wound up his affairs here, but that he would be at the disposal of the office at any time. He said that in the oourse he of thought his business would he be ocoaBionally of interest to came us. on matters which Burt came in to see me. I discussed with him an Interesting report that he had submitted relating to a rather dubious Jewish Banking concern in London. T told him that we had recently had a report that a man, thought to be connected with illegal inigration, in Italy, had been ringing up Landy, one of the principals of this Bank in London. Burt told me that it wa.s possible that proceedings might be taken against the Banlo under the Gurrengy Regulations, and that in view which he would keep me informed. of this there would be Further communications concerning Kellar tellls me that there has been something of a whispering campaign going on by S.I.s., suggeating that M.I.5. had rather let the side down over the publication of ISTRIA in the White Paper. Travis, who had spoken to Kellar, suggested that if S.I.S. had had their representative in Pallestine it might makce a lot of difference. Eddie Hastings had apparently been talking either in the Foreign Office or in the Colonial office to the effect tat it was really worse to have blown, ISTRIA than OATS.. This is, of course, entirely contradictory to what he told the Lord Changellor and ourselves at the many meetings which we attended. I have told Kellar to get out a note showing the whole sequence of events which led ultimately to the publication of tho White Paper, I shall then speak to 'c' and tell him should that wel.come if members a post-mortem of his staff on the have whole any doubta, incident. we Eoold Ghaes a inni cdkoxp disrexasakon irg fs not staff matteece andasbout thex ugptsty. 2 7 July 31st. I have Just read Gilbert Ryle's extremely interesting analysis of the KLATT case with particular reference to MAX and MORITZ. Ryle had been out to the American Zone where he had interviewed KLATT but had not been able to see LANG. Gilbort's thesis is that for a long time the White Russian General TURKUL has been operating in the interests of the N.K.V.D. and that his principal isistant in this matter has been LANG. He thinks vr at some during the later stages of the war, KLT may have become aware that he was dealing not with theilhite Russians but with the N.K.V.D. Henoo the desire of the Russians to lcidnap him owing to his guilty lmowledge, which he might have thought fit to impart to the Allies. The primary objeotive of TURKUL'S organisation was to penetrate all White Russian organisations in Europe and to control themn in Soviet Russian interests. His attompt to get a controlling position in VLASOV'S Army and his sending of White Russians to fight with the German troops, were two incidents which he thought might help him in his task. The primary objeot of his penetration of tho German Service and of the MAX messages was to blow himself up in the eyes of the Germans. The information supplied to him for this purpose was true information of great value to the German High Command and probably led to a very considerable loss to Soviet troops in particular D a convoy. Gilbert thinks that this is Just the kind of hing the N.K.V.D. would hav done quite oynically and probably without informing the Army since human life in Soviet Russia was never of much account when big objectives were at stake. There is a good deal of evidence to show that the MORITZ messages were purely fabriasted and passed to Mussolini on a fairly high lovel. The object of this was to obtain funds and presumably also to penetrate the Italian Service. Ther is evidence of this, when he sayi it was know that two of the MORITZ reports reached the Abwehr in almost identical terms, both from the Italians and from KLATT. An enquiry was held but the matter was ultimately dropped. Further proof is TURKUL'E anxiety to get out 279 of Italy when Mussollini callppsed. A feature of the whole case ha.s been the reluctance of LANG to allow any investigation by the Germans into his organisation. This position was accepted by the Germans owing to the high order of information they were receiving from Soviet Russia. It is probable that the MAX reports were sent "blind". This would account for their never having been picked up by RSS. It is quite clear that there was no element of deception in the MAX reports. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL. DOGUTENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 DEC oooi THISIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOQUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION 8(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DEC Doos I told Charles Butler that T had had a long digoussion with the D.G. about staff matters and about the pistry. I have also discussed with him our relatons with the Treasury and a]l difficulties and dangers that exist in trying to get this Department iin any way on a Civil Service or Police basis. A department such as this was constantly expanding and contracting in accordance vrith the nature of the work. If, therefore, you established grades, particularly intermediary grades, you were certain sooner or later to get into difficulties. I said there were simillar difficulties in comneotion with finance. 'c' obtained a lump sum, and it was nobody's business whether he spent it on himself, his officers, motor cars, or his agents! If the Government were not satisfied with the information he supplied, their remedy lay in getting bid of him - they couiba not interfere in his internal business. Nevre unfortunately not in this happy position but I was cetain that the more we could approximate to it the better of S.I.S. came over at iny request to discuss the possibility of sending FOs, with a roving commission, to Europe to follow up illegal Jewish immigration and traffic in ars. I told that we had had very disquieting reports both from Seager, who had been out to investigate the ars dunp at Bordeauc, and also entirely off the record from General Morgan, who had told the D.M.I. that UNRRA and Jewish welfare organisations were positively engaged in these activities - the whole thing was going on under his eyes but he was powerless to do anything. I felt certain, therefore that unless an officer were detailed to make a whole time job of this question, with freedom to travel roud, wb should never get anywhere. 281 He said that he would put the matter up. Later I spoke to 'C', who appeared to be quite sympathetic. August 1st. Lethbridge came to see me about illegal immigration and also about"Tin-Eye! I told him about our plans to send ancofficer out to investigate illegal immigration and traffic in arms. He said that I had talcen the words out of his mouth and that he was extremely glad to hear that this was being done. He undertook to give our officer alll the support he needed in the British Zone. As regards "Tin-Eye", he was anxious to keep him on and to give him a contraot for 7 years. He said, however, that he was doubtful whether he would keep tiin at his present rank - he vas going to do his bes't but he wondered, in the event of failure, whether there vould be any possibility of our subsidising his pay. I said that I doubted whether this would be possible but I would mention it to our Administrative Branch. I also told him that I felt it was in "Tin-Eye's" interest to accept the offer, since we should find it extremely diffioult to fit him into our organisation here. in a position which would give him the scope that he needed; It seemed to me that he is admirable in his present Job and that nobogy could have served us better. I told him too tha't we should het be able to guarantee him employment here when his seven years were up, as we might not have suitable work for him to do; he would therefore have to take into account that he had oo pletely severed his relations with this office. A suggestion has been made that we should send a counter-sabotage officer out to Pabestine to trair personnel in eountersabotage work and to look into the security of the U.P.S. Victor has suggested KIRBY GREEN and as a second choice Colonel RHEAM. KIRBY GREEN would, of course, be ideal, but I do not think we can take him away from the Caribbean. August 2nd. Courtney. Young and Margot Huggins are leaving for Singapore on Tuesday morning. 282 At the J.I.0. to-day THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DC 2009 Sir John Shaw also spoke to the J.I.C. pon the situation in Palestine. He was obviously hsiderably moved by his recent experience. The principal point in his statement wa.s his oonviotion that the Pallestine Arabs would prove entirely intransigent: He thought that we were. lucky to have got over the funeral.s of the Arab victims in the King David Hotel without any serious incident. He thought that it was quite on the cards that, although the Arabs knew that in al street fight with the Jews they could not hope to win, they might at any moment commit some outrage which would cause things to flare up. It might even lead to a Holy Var. There is no doubt that Shaw is the man who really runa Palestine, since he lmnows the situationinside out and is not 238 afraid of spealing his mind Sir John Sha came round to see Kellar and we had a further general talk. I think he i.s very appreciativ of all the work that Kellar and his officers have done. I had a talk with the brothers HESKETH, who seemed to agree with ny views about Nuremburg. August 6th Dicl has come back from leave to attend the meetir about reorganisation to-day. I went through Hortooks' reoeganisation chart with Dick and Holl when we suggested a nuber of amendments. The D.G. said that he wanted to deal to-day with B. Division. We put forward our amendments, which were generally accepted, and the inevitable position of CURRY came up. It vas decided that he would not be suitable for the job of the Secretariat,and indeed that at this stage the Secretardat was scarcely advisable. lt was thought better o.start perhaps with a P.Ao Personally T think that a Secretariat, properly staffed,coul perform a. useful function - it would, however, be dependent uponal J.I.C. and Chief's of Staff papers being dealt with there rather than in D. Division. I then raised the question of ranks. I thought that it would be a goo thing to abolish the ranks of Deputy and Assistant, since such ranks tended to make the organisation Ge inflexible; it would, I thought, be preferable to talk about Senior Officers and Section Officer This wa.s agreed. The I.G. asked me to see Curry and makce him a definite offer of B.2. I undertool to do this. August 7th. I talked to Foukes about the Job I wanted him to do in connection with illegal immigration. He expresser his willlingess to take it ono 294 44 J attended an extremely dreary meeting at the Cabinet Offices on the future of Intelligence in India. It was pointed out that there were a variety of contingencies, the period of the Interim Government and the possibility of Dominion status, Eire status, the possibility of complete independence and a kind of half and half chaoti period when Congress might control certain States and thi British Government other States. At any moment we mighi be faced with an Indian D.I.B. and an Indian War Ministe} through whom any communications on Intelligence matters might pass. It seemed that in such an eventuality the only sure link would be through the Viceroy. What struck me, although I did not think it appropriate to bay at that meeting, was that me should anticipate the the worst, namely, a completely chaotic situation over a period of months if not years when aln communi- cations would have bfoken down and the Government here would have very little idea about what was going on. I did, however, say that if India had a Dominion or Eire status we might have a Liaison officer for the purposes of an exchange of information with the Indian authorities. We might do this even if the Indians had complete independence. Maxwell Knight has asked whether he can come into S.J. as he was nowa part of B.4 I told him to disouss the matter with T.A.R. Hirsch rang me up about Hewish illegal immigration. I told him of our plans to send out Foulkes. He seemed quite satisfied with this arrangement. 299 I saw Curry and told him of the D.G.'g decision about the Secretariat, and the offer to him to take over B.2. THIS IS A GOPY ORIGINAL DOCUUENII RETAINED INDEPARTMENI UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE FOBLIC RECORDS ACT1958 DEC 20o9 Auust 8th The D.G. held another meeting on reorganisation,when we considered C. Division. Very considerable amendments were made. We all felt that it would be wrong to set up a Military, Naval and Air liaison Section, since this created a wrong impression. It would be entirely wrong to suggest that this section should be a bottle neck to the 3 Services. It has always been our policy to let sections deal direct with whatever section in the various Service Ministries they were concerned. The most that a Diaison section could offer to do would be to act a.s a lcind of directory to nev officers in the Service Ministries -e thin, however was not a job in itself. It seemed, therefore, that these functions should be carried by the officers in 0.2. who are concerned principally with munitions security. Meanwhile Furnival Jones will tontinue to do his present work in relation: to all three Services. I guggested thi it might work properly, at any rate in BO far as tha were J.I.C. brought and Chiefs down to of Staff the D.G. papers It were was decided, concerned however, if they that for the time being matters should remain as they are. I said that in view of that decision T doubted whether there was any point in the D.G. having a B.A. Colonel Jaokson and Colonel Kingham Douglas called to make their number with the D.G. At the B.meeting to-day I tried to impress upon everybody that Briscoe must be consultee when anything that bears on scientific ma'tters pomes to thenas Veryioften people are SO carried away in pursuing a.n individuall that they forget the soientifio aspect of his work, in whi.ch case it is only by accident that Briscoe hears about it atlall. He does hold certain highly technical files which are not gent to the Regiatry as they would not lmnow how or where to card them. Sections, therefore, must be relied upon to pass the information on to him. Names are carded in the Registry, irerever possible. I said that I would probably bring this up at every meeting for some time to come. I told the meeting about my tallc with regarding the present lay-out of the Frenoh Intelligence Organisations and asked Irvine to and get the picture absolutely clear when in casual conversation with The question of re-opening liaison with D.A,F.L., which had been put bp by Archer at the D. meeting, It was decided that contact should be resestablished through Archer. Bennett said that he receives reports from factories shipyards ara Admiralty establishments every month, and ad hoc, giving the names, etc., of all foreign visitors. It was agreed that these lists should be sent to T.A.R. and that he should circ late them and then return them to D.2 There is to be a meeting with Potter on this subject which is to be attended by T.A.R. T.A.R. referred to an extraot Bfoy letter from firyfabout alrequest from the Surrey Police regarding the notifi.cation of changes of address for people who were on Suspect List and aliens on the List to be interned in invasion. I said that I thought this was largely an F. Division matter and T.A.R. said he would put it up to Mitchell. I thought that t people concerned had declined considerably in importance and doubted if the notifications of address would now be necessary, except in the case of an individual which vas being investigated. All aliens would be traceable on account of their registration I suggested that the Suspect List should be oirculated to the seotions concerned in order that they may have a loolc at ito Morton Evans then raised the question of Monomarks. It was decided that in future T.A.R. should deal with this matter and that he would find out each section's needs and then abarngo and see Mr. Robson. I mentioned the abolition of visas, which came up before the Cabinet las't week and wa.S 287 THISISA( COPY potponed until the Autui - which RELAINED fives space. Us a bredthing August 9th OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AUT 1958 DEC 2c0f I attended the J.I.C. with the D.G. Frankie Roberts, the Councillor from Moscow,gav a short talk. He said that in White Russia practically nothing was being done from the point of view of reconstruction; a certain amount was being done in the Ukraine, but as a production centre he thought it wa:s on the decline. Urals. he centre This of is gravity for industry had moved to the of Russian experiences clearly during a defence the measure Althought in the light travel is supposed to be free, every war. possible staff wherever they go. There appears to be a certain obstruction is put in the way of members of the Embassy amount of feeling in the Kharkov area that the Germans were not nearly so bad as they were painted, and that some of the population a't any rate preferred their seems regime lit to le the Russian. As regards the Amy, there probably on account aif his not having been able to doubt that ZHUKOV is in Oaessa in disgrace, maintain sufficient discipline within his Forces. Russia Genorals are becoming a discredited class and the ten- deny is to regard they as war profiteers; it was bring back a great deal of lloot in order that the suggested that the Soviet Government have allowed them even t local population may be induced to malce invidious comparisons. It is noteworthy that none of the Generals is a member of the Polit Bureau (?). BULGANIN new controls the Forces; he is not a real General but Seems to be the principal official under Stalin who Cormissara into the Army has been re-introduced. a strong Party man. The system of introducing carried out in Dominions and Colonies was raised. to question of giving assistance in Security measures The be said that if the Ministry of Supply policed an area I in Australia security measures we could give them advice on their internal The would have to rest and with that the local the responsibility security.authorities. security. authorities. outside they Americans want this have information asked us in for case the they BEACH Intelligenco; upon to recapture the U.K. from some hypothetical may be called enemy. 238 M.E. talked to me about a meeting of the SIGINT Board nert week to which he and the D.G. are going. The Board want our support for resources in equipment and personnel to cover our demands. This results from an enquiry which has been made by A/M Ebill into the whole workings of L.S.I.C. Ebill seems to have done a good Job, ably assisted by our old friend Drew. THIISIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMIENT WINDER SEOTION 3(4) OF THEE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DDEC 2009 I me't 'o' and General Sinclair at the Club. I raised with them the question.o India - I said that I thought a concrete plan ought to be formlated now between ourselves, S.I.S. and D.I.B. for running an Intelligence organisation in India with clandestine wiroless communications, in anticipation of the worst that might happen. It seemed to mne quite on the cards that almost at any momen't we may beacur be faced with a cor pletely chaotio condition when all conmtnications had 89 broken down, including the Viceroy's. The Government would then be completely in the air. It seemed to me that they were considerably perturbed and decided there and then that this was the right course to adopt. I told them that I should be meeting Vibian and Bamford next weelc, when I should put similar views to them. I had not put them to Colonel Holman's (?) meeting as I did not think that it would be appropriate./ I also told that from certain remarks which had reached me from other offices and also from a conversation between Kelllar and Travis that there was a certain amount of feeling that N.I.5. had let the party down over the White Paper, I thought that if this feeling reallly existed it would be a good thing to have a post-mortem as I vas quite sure that I could convince him and his officers that circuunstances had been forced upon us by the P.M.'s offer in the House to lay papers, and that we had fought the best rearguard action that we could. I said, moreover, that ve had endeavoured to keep his officers informed of every move; this had not always been easy since Edaie Hastings was extremely elusive, he was either at Chesterfield Gardens,Eastcot or Broadway - and '01 added "at the races", with which I concurred. We had had a most frightfully strenuous time and I should regret to feel that he or any of his people thought that we had not done all that we possibl; could to save 'C! said that he himself had heard certain rumblings that in faot a suggestion had been made to him by Travis that he should have his officer in Palestine. He had, however, turned this down. He thoroughly appreciated our difficulties and the causes of all the trouble and he did not intend to allter the procedure which was at present in ford which seemed to him satisfactory. He would, however, have a tall to Travis and Eadie Hastings about what I had said. He entirely agreed with me that to pay an officer E80O a year to sit in Jerusalem,ir order that he might protest once a month about the use of or to the G.O.c.. would be a waste of money Audust lOth SCOTT came to see me. He said that the most that M.I.L. could offer him was a Captain's Job. T said that I would, if he though't it advisablle, speak to Colonel Ramsay bit that I would thinle the matter over He BaLo 290 that he was extremely happy in his preaent Job, Binge Tavine had taken over, He obviously had a high opinion of Irvine, who in his viow was a peraon with a definite ideaaa to what he wanted to do and how it should be organised. Augus't 12th. I lunched to-day with a man called Reg. Denison, who is an Australian and former member of Australian Security in New Zealand. He is a friend of Ogilvie who came ovor here during the war. Ogilvie was at he H.Q. of Australian Security, but in private life runs a chain of broadcasting atations. Denison ts also conneoted with broadcasting, his firm being the Maquarie Broadoasting Company of Syaney. He is going to America and returning here at the end of eptember, I aaled him how Australian Seourity was now organised. I said that as far as I knew a man. called BROWNN was ruling it. He said that would be Rowley BROWN, who was an Inspector in the Commonvrealth Investigation Branch. He regards him as a mere pedestrian Policeman - not really fitted to oarry on E Job of this kind. In his view, a far better man would have been Bob WAKE, who runds the office of the Counonwealth Investigation Branch in Queensland; He say that, generaly speaking security in Australia has gone very mich dowmhinll and that its importange is not sufriciently realised, He thinks that the only man who could put it right, if he had the time and inalinationy would be EVATT. Ho suggeated that if we could got hold of EVATT it would e a good thing. He said that, generally apeaking, Australia, athough enjoying a considerable measure of independenoe, was fundamentally loyal, and that this feeling had been considerably inoreaned by the various interferences by the Americans, who wore carrying out a fairly extensive propaganda and mascliing in wherever they could. They have a large Embassy staff and entertain lavishly. He think that we ought to do more on these lines than we are doing at present. The Governor General. has not definitely put his foot in it, but has, as we al know, very little persorsality; tho Anstralians find hiimn rather a dead weight - gertainly his wit is heavy like that of most of the family. The Duchess, on the other hand, is very much likced and has 29 generally been a great suocesa. Denison thinks that by far and away the moat appropriate sucoessor would be Mountbatten; he has made a great impression on the Australlans, both by his appeurance, his bravery,an by his charm of manner and uquestionable ability 60 saying the right thing at the right moment Dick CASEY may stand at the next election as a Liberal, but Denison thinlca that the Party, as a whole, has little change of muocess as long as Mengies is at the head ot it. Mensies appears to be generally dialiked. Drew came to see me. He has been worlcing with Air Marshal Ebilll on the enquiry into LaS.1.C. He seemed to he little bit doubtful how far the organisttion was getting vallue for money; ne thought, too, that they were perhaps putting too many eggs into the vrrong basket. I said that I could not really express an opinion, as T only S8W proportion of the work done. We did, however, think that more attention might be given to general security; I sugges ed that Drew should have a talk with Morton Evns. I then tallkced to Drew about the means by which we should receive Governmen't papers - it often happened that the lower ranks of Ministries wanted to discuss such paper with us, and it caused diffi- cultles when we had not seen them. Apart from that, there vas an instance of a Cabinet paper on the abolition of the visa which came up for disoussion without our getting any previous warning. Drew said that he entirely saw the point ard that he thought that he himself could look after our needs on the oivin side, cand that on the military side he would speak to Cornwall Jones, Secretary to the Chiefs of Staff. Ourry came to sea me,t tell me that he had decided to take on B.2. and had So informed the D.G. He seemed depressed, but T think that once he settled down to the. idea he willl probably make it work. T SaW Soott and told him that we should be prepared. to keep him on for a year, but that I could give him no guarantee of permanent employment. If, in the meanwhilo, a Job turned up which he felt was to his advantage, we would not stand in his vay. T said that I would see what could be done about his pas, T BO informed Charlen and Horrocl. 29? Our old friend Hans Christian PIECK has turned up again ab the Hague. It seems that he has made contact with some member of the Embassy, although with what objeot we do not know. We are going to try to oultivate these relations. M.E. tells me that WAlson of the Cipher Secuzsity Board was much impresaed by our enquirdes at Gibraltar into the physical security of ciphers - so much so that he has Buggeated that our D.S.0.8 abroad should carry a mandate from the Oipher Seourl ty Boand to carry out similar periodical enquimies in other arean. This I think is a great step forward. Later on we might tackle the question of ciphers in H.M. Enbassies. According to one, Werner BRAUNE, who was head of the Reichstudentenfuhrung from January, 1943, until January, 1945, that organisution and the Austauschdierst for the exchange of atudenta, was used by Amt. 6 of theR.S.H.A. for espionage purposes. The students were speoially selected during a five day course by an Amt. 6 representative before they went abroad, I have seen an extremely interesting report by the Joint Technical Warfare Comuittee, dated July 26th, which deals with the effeot of the diacovery of the atomio bomb on any future war. It is considered that atomio energy developont and development in biological warfare are likely to be the two most important factors The vulnerability of thas country is strongly stressed by comparison with that in the United States or in the U.S.S.R. The old methods of defence with every modern improvement will have to go on and the High Performance Interceptor Fighter willl be of imnense importance, backed up, of course, by RADAR and radio counter-measures. Manned airoraf't are likely to continue for ten years and may then be replaced by supexsonio (?) pilotless aircraft and/or rookets. The policy of dispersal, both of industry and bases, is connidered highly desirable. The use of deception as a deterrent to agreasion: ds advocated. The question of placing important bottle-nocics under ground if also to be considered and, in addition, extensive deep dugouta for the civil population. This 293 i.s apparently the only protection against the atomic bomb. It is felt that 30 to 120 such Bombs could cause the collapse of this country without invasion, but that several hundreds would be required to deal could with the probably U.S.S.R. aocumLate. Within five sufficient to ten years atorto the bombs U.S. to devastate a large proportion of the U.S.S.R.. if the Latter started a war of aggressiop. The U.S.S.R. itself could probably prroduoe enough bomibs in six to ten years to devastate the United Kingdom. August 13th. have told Patterson to get into touch. with Piggot formerly a S.0.0., who is now P.A. to Lord Knollys. He will try and find out whether there is any oentrd] body to which WE can apply to obtain information about air traffic. Horrooks tallced to ine about a suggestion by the D.G. that he should accompany the latter to the Middle East and Far East. He said that he had told theD.G. that vhilat there might be a certain number of administration matters on which he could be of assistance, he could not cover the B. interests and suggested that if he con- templated such a visit he should take Disk White with hin. T said that I entirely agreed but that T hoped that the D.G. would not go to the Midale East until Kellar Was in position at the end of the year or early in the Spring. What is really nechsaary in that the D.G. should aoquire a very considerable icnow ledge about these areas from the Intelligenge point of view, before he goes out there. Otherwise he is likely to be faced with many awloward questions to which he will not Imnow the answer. I discussed with Dick our representation in East Africa. We both agreed that it would be necessary to maintain a situation thero for several reasons, amongst others,that the route to the East might well be across the Afrioan Continent if the Suez Canal vere blocked. It was also poasible, although not likely, that Middle What H.Q. might move to Kerya. We both thought it iportant that our offiloer should be accredited to the Governor's Conference, as this would Give him a more important stance. 294 Philby came to see me about two ex-S.0.E Danes, now incorporated into the British Army and proceeding shortly to Palestine. While on leave in Denmark they had been approached by some Jews who wanted them to give instruetion in sabotage. methods. They are apparently of a pretty tough variety, although one of them likes Bach and the other Nietsche. August Lth. I attended the J.I.C. to-day when O'Brien, D.M.I. India, gave a short off-the-record talk. The point stressed more than any other was that the question a.s to whether or not there would be a clashin India depended more on the policy of the British Government than anything else. If it were not possible to obtain. some form of agreement by which the Moslems were a party to the forming of the Constitution and represented in the Constituent Assembly, NEHRU might try and tale matters into his own hands and govern without them. It seemed that this wa.s a situation to which H.M. Government could not possibly agree, in which case there was bound to be trouble, even if they did agree there would be trouble from the Moslems. It seemed, however, that there would be a certain breathing space owing to the renewed attempts by the Viceroy to bring NEHRU and JINNAH together. O'Brien did not seem to think that the Lef't Wing of the Congress movement was likely to get the upper hand, in fact the Communists were already going to ground as they expected that they would be suppressed. As ards the reliability of the Arny, O'Brien said it depended entirely upon the officers. It was, he thought, doubtful whether, if they thought that they wore going to be ultimately handed over; to Indian rule, they would feel prepared to fight under the British Raj. Had a Paddy Bamford at Broadwaysor the subject of the future meeting with Vivian, Cohen, Maltby, Dick and talld of Intelligence from India. After a good deal of it was agreed that we had to prepare for the worst; that Maltby should proceed straight away to try and recruit some Suitable wireless operators, who 2a6 could if necessary train other; that S.I.S. should send someone out for consultation wi.th the D.I.B. about the lay-out of any future organisation and the measure of assistance that they could expect from D.I.B. officers and agents if the wors't came to the worst; that Bamford should obtain from the D.I.B. a panel of suitable officers fram all the Provinces; that S.I.S. should appoint an officer who would contro] the organisation from the outside in the event of crisis; and that we should selecthone or two officers who, if oiroumstanges permitted, would aot in the capacity of D.S.0.8 in liaison with D.I.B. uder Indian rule. It was, I think, generally agreed that, except under the most favourable circunstanceu S.I.S. woul.d almost certainly have to operate in India, even though there might be Dominion status. It was pointed out that under an Indian D.I.B. only a very small percentage of the information now supplied by D.I.B. would be available, partly because there would be no vrillingness to impart it and partly because D.I.B. would be employed on different tasks. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN 3(4) DEPARTMENI OF THE PUBLIC UNDER RECORDS SECTION ACT 1958 DGC 2009 Hunt, who is going back to Burme, came to see me. Generally speaking, the organisation seems to be settlir down and all the authorities, both here and locally, appear to welcome the presence of a D.S.O. organisation. 2 296 6 The D.G. saw the P.M. this morning about a request by Heotor McNeil for certain information relating to SEMPILL, and also his namesake, Sir Heator MoNtHAL. The P.M. ruled that the information should not be supplied. The P.M. appeared to be particularly interested in Russian activities here. TheD.G. raised the question of the abolition of the visa and explained our point of view. The P.M. rapped the table and said that he had shelved the whole matter, at any rate for the time being, and tha't he was fully cognizant of its dangers, The D.G. then went on to disousa our position vis a vis Passport Control and the desira- ility of our having afflcers posted abroad for overt liaison purposes in certain countries where this might be profitable. The P.M. agreed with this view and said that if we met wi.th difficulties he would discuss it with 'o' and the D.G. T told the D.G. that I thought we had to be a little careful in matters of this ldind not to incur the displeasure of Bermanent Under Secretaries of State or other Ministers. In this 08aO; for example, we vere wiritng a letter to 'c' to which we might get an unfavourable reply. The next step should be to take the matter up with Sir Orme Sargent and only if we failed on this level should ve go to the P.M. for a finall decision. If 1or gave us a favourable reply in the firat instance he would undoubtedly brief Orme Sargenti, who would brief Bevin and they would both resent it if we went over their heads direot to the P.M. The D.G. aaw thia point and thought that the line of action proposed was the right one. The only other point that the P.M. raised was Pallestine and measures to prevent terrorista from entering the U.K. He seemed particularly concerned about this. September l1th. I dined in Hublin with McKENNA, ARCHER, DAN and DOO. The meeting wus extremely cordiat and we discussed many matters of a general kind. After dinner I had a private talk with MoKENNA, when I asked him how the attendance of Eire Service personnel at Staff courses WaB going. He said that in general things were going extremely well, apart from one or two minor hitohes. Staff courses for Naval representatives had been arrange 207 but the question of the officer to comnand the Irish Navy had not been finally settled. It had almost been decided that they should have a Lt.Cmdr. called SYNNOT, but at the last minute the Admiralty decided to send SYNNOT elsewhere. They had, however, another candidate in view whom McKenna thought would probably be satisfao- tory. The only other slight hitoh was with the Air Ministry although the Air Attache in Dublin was extremely helpful and ooroperative, McKenna sensed some slight obstruation in the Air Ministry to the Air Force in Ere beinggiven the same faailities for Staff courses as was being given by the Army and the Navy; he had, therefore made no direot request for such facilities as he did not wish to get A refusal. He WaS not andous at the moment to press the matter in any ways he thought the bes't polioy Was to wait, aa he wa.s confident that things would some right in the end. I said that if he really got vorried he should let me imnow, through Dan, and T would see whether there was anything to be done. The Navy are buying three more Corvettes as they seem to be very pleased with their earlier purchases. The question of setting up R Small arms factory in Eire had recently been under discussion with, I imagine, the Ministry of Supply or the War Office. Mckenna had been given to understand that it would be as well to hold this matter in. abeyance at the moment, since the question of the British Army going over to .30, the Amerioan callibre, was now under cOn sideration. McKenna entirely agreed, as his one desire is to have the Eire Force on such a footing that in times of emergency they could be quite easily integrated with the British Forces. He wants a1l their equipment and training to be entirely on Britir lines - in this matter there is, T gather, certain amount of political opposition, which McKenna is trying to circuavent. Those individualls who were hostile to the U.K. are anxious that Eire should take her oue from the Amcrioans; Mckenna is therefore pleased that we are going over to 30 as this will deprive the opposition of quite D foraible argument. September 12th. The next day I had a talk with Dan. He raised the question of the interned spies. He told me that Mrs, UNLAND had been pressing hard for them to be released on parole and that the Government are finding themselves in rather a wealc position, owing to the unsatisfactory quarters in vihich the prisoners were housed, and had felt bound to acquiese - the result was that GOERIZ Le Co. were alll out on parole during the day. Dan felt this was unsatisfactory, particularly as regards GOERTZ and UNLAND - GOERTZ, he said, had been considering going to South America; meanwhile he was trying to make contact with various I.R.A. personalities with whom he imagined he was in touch while he was in prison d that so far as I knew the Dominions Office had cuinmunicated to Sir John Maffey the terms on which the Controll Commissi.on were prepared to receive the prisoner ba.clc in Germany; I aid not low what these ters were. Dan tried twice, unsuccessfully, to get into touch with Freddie Boland, the Minister for Internal Affairs, but said that he would probe the matter further. We then discussed the question of travel control. I explained to Dan that BO long as the Registrar General's office continued to perform Its present functions there would be bound to be some cheok on people arriving in this country from Eire - it would otherwise be impossible for the Reglstrar General to keep his statistics accurate. Ultimately, however, I indicated that there would be a strong move to get all travel restrictions abolished; T hoped, however, that we should be able to resist this to the extent of insisting that some sort of identity document should be carried by all travellers. Dan Was very despondant about the mbility of the garda and the Immigration authorities to exercise any adequate supervision over the entry of allens. He said that, generally spealcing, their attitude was to let the whole thing to hang; apart from that they were not well equipped to handle delioate cases of the kcind in which we might both be interested unfortunately he had neither the funds nor the staff to put a man at eaah of the principle points of entry. He referred to the practice that had existed before the war by which he notified the Home Office, Aliens Dept., whenever an alien landea with the intenti of proceeding to the U.K. - this arrangement had been reoiprocal, but in praotice it had not worlced out $99 particularly well, singe on many oocasions alliens arrived saying that they intended to reside in the country, and subsequently crossed the Trish Sea. There wa.s, therefore, no prospeot of putting up any adequate ringed fence round Great Britain and Ireland which would result in our being advised concerning the arrival of allens. I said that there was always an inherent difficulty in olrculating lists of suspects while we might be quite prepared to let him know about individual oases and leave it to his disoretion to handle the matter, we were chary about putting names on lists when the information about the individual oongerned had core from delicate sources. He sala that he vas in exR.otly the same position THISISACOPY ACOPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENI RETAINED DEPARTMENT SECTON 3(4) OF THE POBLIC RECORDS March 13th. 1958 DEc 209 I went to Belfast where T sa.w Roger Moore and Pym, of the U.I.G. They were both extremely friendly and ready to help in any way they could, although at the moment there did not seem to be very much of common interest. I gather that the I.R.A. were showing slight signs of activity, although nothing serious wa.s anticipated at the moment. Both Roger Moore and Pym tallced to me about BODDINGTON'S visit. I enquired whether they had been previously informed and asked whether everything had gone all right. They said that the local Inspector up in 'Derry had been impressed by the vay BODDINGTON had handle the ratings(?) on the other hand, it Wa.S made quite to me that BODDINGTON'S presence in Northern Ireland vas not entirely welcome and that his past there had not been mdocsiy forgotten. So far as I could gather, he had been employed under Wicigham during the bad times and the suggestion was that he had "planted" certain information on an I.R.A. suspect. This had been discovered and Wiclcham had sacked him. Pym also spoke to me about BODDINGTON'! visit to Yalta with the P.M. during the var; he had apparently had the whole staff up on the ship several times and given them somewhat; tedious Leoture on security, which had not 300 altogether gone with a sving, particularly smnongst senior officers and people like General Ismay. Apart from this, he had done fairly well. Pym felt that he was the kind of person who ought not to be let out alone. Pym asked me how long I thought it would be before the North and South were united; he evidently thinks that the border ought to go as a beginning. It wa.s ourdous to me tha't he should even envisage such a. possibility - I said that while everybody would, of course, welcome solution to the present rather ridiculous situation, I thought it was difficult to get over the defence question, since one unificatior had taken place we should be entirely at the meroy of the Irish in any future conflict, unless we were ared to re-oocuply all the ports by force and sO drive them off their own I returned from Eire by air on the l4th. September l6th. I found the new ohart, showing the new organisation in its reconstituted form,wh: had recently been issued. My position as D.D.G. has been clearly defined. Horrocks has been made Director of Establishments and Administration, and Charles Director of Finance. Personally, I do not feel too happy about this, since it overveighs the administra- tive side of the office, Although he mentioned the matter to mne before I went away as being in his mind, the D.G. has not said anything to me since T returned on the subjeot. I told him then that T thought it was undesirable, both on personal and organisational gmaunds. F. Division is amalgamated with B.Division. September 17th Charles returned to-day from his holiday in Sweden. He accepts the position of being Director of Finance but quite franidly does not like it at all and told the D.G. so in front of Horroakso T talked to Roger about the syuatters. Apparently neither ourselver nor S.B. had any olue as to their 30 I action before the event. This is curious, but may be accounted for by the fact that we had no obser- vation on the London District H.Q. Roger does not take the whole business very seriously, nor does he think it was directly instigated by Moscow. He takes it as a normal attempt by tho C.P. to cash in on any genuine grievance. The effect of it has been that within the last three or four days the looal authorities have wakened up to their responsibilities and have housed something like 50,000 people who were on their waiting lists. Gilbert Ryle came to see me. He is going to interview TURKUL and LANGE, the two Russians in the KLATT case who have been brought over here by the Americans for interrogation. We have, of course, been told for months that LANGE was so il1 he could not possibe be seen by anyone; this wa.a merely a. somewhat trans parent ruse by Generall Seibert, who was in charge of G-2 in the area and thought he lmnew more about the oase than we did. Seibert has now gone to Washington, so we now have a chance of really getting to the bottom of the matter. September 18th. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETATNE IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEC 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DEC 2009 30 2 THIS IS A COPY OBIGINAL DOGUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 2c09 I spoke to James Robertson about sabotage in Palestine. It seemed to me that as KIRBY-GREEN wa.s coming bacle for a short period on leave, we might get him to go out to Pallestine and try and put countersabotage on a proper footing. A request has come from Palestine tor the services of WRIGHT, ex-D.I.B. officer, whose se:bes way have been trying to get from the Indian Governent. So far we have had no reply from India. Harry is rather worried about Jo ARCHER not having been made a Senior Officer. He has raised the point but has been tola that our establishment does not alow any Further appointuant of the kind. Personally, I thought that the whole purpose of getting rid of Deputy Direotor wa.S to makce us more flexible, but uviderfly an establishe ment for Senior Officers has now been obtained from the Treasury whi.ch puts us back more or less wthere we started. 302 Brigadier Shoosmith, from the Control Comnission, came to see me and beought with him a report on Russian aotivities in the British Zone, which he sad were considerable, although much of the information that they were seeking vas of a somewhat trivial kind. He thought, however, that under a Soreen of low-grade agents there ini.ght well be others of higher calibre who were being bedded down on a long-term basis. He wa.s very anxioug to have any information that we could give him whi.ch woulld show the form Russian espionage was taking and alll details rabout the Russian organisatio in any part of the world. He was particularly anxious to have a copy of the report of the Royal Commission on the CORBY case. He would also like criticism of his own report. I said that we would anything we could for him in this line. I aslced him about MASON, who is now woricing for us in East Africa and had .wanted to join the Control Comission. He said that he would be glad to have MASON at any time, if ve considered him a good officer - his experience of M.I.5. officers had been 8O good that he would take anyone on our recommendation. September 19th. I attended a meeting of the Railway PBlioe,a which thore vas present a representative of the Ministry of War Transport. It was generally agreed that, with the exception of a few pieces of seoret equipment and the location of waLT time controls, there was nothing that could reasonably be kept from any foreign delegations. I pointed out that spies were very inclined, when they were hard up for money, to buil their mnasters up with any information which could easily be obtained, even though it came from the news- papers or technical journals. This, however, did not mean that they would not engage in other more important matters - it waB therefore possible that delegations might oontain certain individuals of this type,an that anyting that would He done by the conduoting officer to test their bona fides would be of the greatest value. I mentioned in particular people who appeared to have musoled in to the delegation and were not 304 properly accredited, or people sho had Joined the delegation in this country from one of the Enbassies or from some private business conoerne We on our part agreed to vet the names of any delegations submitted by the Railway Companies to their own Poli.ce. Colonel Archdale, a Marine, who is the new S.0.I. for the Eastern Mediterranean, came to see me. He had been doing a tour of the office. I explained to him something about our vork and about S.I.M..] and introduced him to Perfect, who was home on leave. A he B. meeting to-day M.E. said he and Martin had been to a meeting regarding the THISI A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 DLC 209 M.I.5. requirements are already on this Watch List, but M.E. said that any further requirements should be sent in to him (he emphasised the necessity for keeping the list dow as much as possible) and he would sent them to Phinby, who was. the central point for receiving them. I said that in a case where anyone has a good line, 3it is worth while consulting Allan regarding any mail or censorship problem, a.s he will probably be able to say whether there is any way of getting round it. said that at the Military Attaches Conference D.D.M.I(T) gave a talllc on Intelligence requirements and laid particular stress on directing attention to Russian activities, i.e. expansion of arms, strategy, vehicle markings, battle order, eto. He also included the countries supported by Russia, eapeciallly the Balkans. Strong told us that Adam had had a query from the H.o. regarding a request foom foreign airlines to have their offices at airports in this country. It was agreed that as the matter was linked up with reciprocity Do objection could be sustained. I 306 agreed wiith this view. Archer asked vtho lialsed vrith airports. I said it was the job of the A.1.o. and that I would bring the matter up at the A.L.0's meeting next week. Miss Chenhalls said that TURKUL had arrived and that he vas in the process of being interrogated. Ryle feels that even if TURKUL is not broken the interro- gation will have been worth while. IRA (LANGE) the more important character, is at present on hunger strike in the American Zone, but it is hoped that he will be brought over here in due course. I gave the e'meeting a brief account of the KLATT oa.se. I told the meeting about the conference with the Railway Police. M.E. said that the security of ha been rd-emphasised in a new pamphlet published by L.S.I.5. which willl come into force shortly. The general principle of it is that anyone who knows about this material or has to deal with it should be redootrinated as to what it is; They will then have to sign a form to that effect. M.E. said that there is already a list of officers who deal. with this material and there will have to be a list of secretar les and registrars who handle it. He said he would go round to sections concerned and aada to the existing list. The D.G; is rather worried about MASON's position in East Afrioa. He intends to appoint PERFEOT as our D.S.0. and it is thought possible that MASON might stay on as his assistant. If not, MASON should come baak as soon as possible and take yp his job in the Control Commission. I said that T thought that whatever the Colonhall Office had to by we should appoint a D.S.0. and an Assistant D.S.0. to East Africa, who would oover the Wes't Coast as welll. It seemed to me tha't the area might become important if there were any trouble in the future, since our ttain route of supply to the east would be by air across the African continente The Suex canal might well be out of action. If wS had a D.S.0., it was essential that he should have the full baclcing of the Governors! and of the Governors! Conference. The D.G. has written to Gater in this sense. THISIS COPY 306 ORIGINAL DOGUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT LINDER SECTION 3(4) OF THELPUBLIC RECORDS September 20the5: DEC 00oo I talked to James Robertson and to Stewart about the case of three ships in Plymouth, which it is thought are being purchased by some Greeks for the purpose of illegal mmigration into Palestine. It seemed to me on reading the file that ther were a. good many lines of investigation about whioh new officers were,not unnaturally, ignorant. We had, for example, the opportunity of getting incoming and outgoing telegrams, HOWs that. could be put on, and there was an Inurance field which might well be covered through Lloyds. I later saw T.A.R. and told him to try and work up the necessary machinery to cover these fields, in particular through Lloyds. In the old days we had a very good line and they were in a position to obtain details about the movements of any ship. We allso had a check on Insurance Companies We ought to have alll tha't machinery at our diaposal. I had a meeting with Harker, Charles and Harry about the future title of the office, We wore alll agreed that it would be dfficult for us to call ourselves Ministry of Defence, Security, as there was in fact no Ministry of Defence but only a Defence Minister in tho person of the P.M. Apart from this, the title was rather a clumsy one. A futther difficulty is that by virtue gtur ur title of M.I.5., even thought it doesn't camry any organic connection with the War Office, we have continued for many years to obtain War Office services, i.e. office equipment, cars, etc. This servide now amlunts to something li1ce E.00,00o a, year. The arrange- ment vas also convenient, seeing that provision was made for expansion in war time. Apart from 6his, it seemed almost impossible to throw off the name "M,I.5" entirely. The meeting was inconclusive, but the general feeling was that the lesser evil was to continue as we are. Ther is one rather obvious anag, namely, that in so far a.s departments like the Office of Vpoks are concerned we are M.I.5. - our coke is delivered to the War Office, M.I.5., and files have already been 307 opened about moving M.I.5. to another building. This is, of course, unfortunate, since M.I.5. i/s BO bound up in the public mind with catching spies. Meanwhile, it has been made quite clear by the D.M.I. to alll his minions that we are not part of his Directorate, althou we are closely assodiated with it. M.I. must, there- fore, express its own views on Security matters, even though they may differ from those of the Security Service. LtCol. SPRUNT called on me this morning on the recommendation of Sir Findlater Stewart, who describes him as a friend of his for whom he can vouch as to straightness and kceenness. SPRUNT is at present employed in the London office of the Control Comisson on recruiting personnel for the British zone. He finds this work rather boring and would much prefer to do something more interesting and more in the line of his past experience. Although his Comnanding Officer may not be anxious to release him,h he sees no real Justification for his retention since somebody could easily be found to do his present Job. He could of course, return to his Regiment, but this he regards as something of a dead end since Just at the moment when he would be coming up for a Comand post he would be classified as too old - his present age is 44e At the present time he could not be released from the Army altogethe and on the whole would prefer to remain in t Service and be attached for any Job which we might have to offer him Ultimately he would like, if possible, when his service comes to an end, to be taken on to the permanent staff of M.I.5. He is married and has a daughter of right, and, provided he oan take tham with him, he would be prepared to go abroad. He has a strong preference for the Middle Eas which he knows, and would, I think, like to go to Traw if there was a job. Although he has visited that cou ntry, as his curriculun vitae shows, he would not be regarded there by the local authorities as an Intelligence Officer. He knows Douglas Roberte and also, I think, Jenkins. I told SPRUNT that the people who were most intimately concerned with the Middle Eastern area were away on leave at the moment but would be back at the end of next veekc, when T would consult with them and let him know a's soon as posaible if there 30f8. was any opening. He is a. quiet kind of fellow and quite pleasant to tallle to, although perhaps not a striking personality. It is, I think, very much in his favour that Findlater Stewart recommends him a.s being entirely straight and keeno I asked Burt about protection for various Ministers against terrorism He said that; apart from protection for Cabinet Ministers, he had an Inspector and four officers at the Lanoaster House 6onference. We both agreed that the protection of Ministers was a matter for the Ministries themselves. The War Office have tichtened up their internal security and we propose Favise the Home Office and the Colonial Office. to do the same. Patterson has established a oonneotion with B.O.A.C. through a friend of his called Henry. He tells me that Vinterbotlam has a Communist Party secretary named Mis Maolurg. Vinterbotham, however, does not seem particularly perturbed about this. September 23rd. General Festing. came to see the D.G. He wa.s extremely pleasant and tallted quite a lot about his area. He is to be suoceeded iin November by General Erskine, who is at present on tho Control Commission in Berlin. Festing said that there vas a Defence Committee, on which we were represented, but that he thought this acxsomewhat august body was not very praotical from the point of view of settling Intelligence matters. He thought that the Intalligence Committee, which was a Service Committee which included Roger, was a much better organisation, since disoussion of confidential matters gould be much freer. He gave the alightest 3o4. hint that Stables was not altogether an easy character. He thought, however, that he wa.s a good Staff officer. He said that if Roger met with any difficulties with the Governor, he thought that he personally could probably help him.- he saw the Governor frequently and had his confidence. He will be glad to see Roger at any time. He took ap poor view of the forces of law and order. Before the war. the Police force had consisted mainly of Sikhs, many of them had turned out to be renegades > and the Europeans who were controlling them had become apatheti.c and, to sone extent, carrupt. Most of them had marmied Chinese wives. The resul't was that the military were performing a large nunber of Police duties; this, however, would not last vee long and the prospects of getting an efficient Police force were not bright. He evidently thought that the present lot ought to be cleared out look stock and barrel. Sansom, the Chief of Pollice, was B decent fellow but a bit old and obviously working against heavy odds. In other ways, however, the Island was extremely prosperous, since it was even more a haven of those who wanted to preserve their funds and do genuire(?business. It was one of the few places in China where people felt safe- many were therefore pouring into the country. He did not know what the future of Hong Kong would be, but the present intention appeared to be to hold on to it. The only effective measure that the Chinese could take would be to boycott British goods, but he doubted whether they would do this for some time. It had been proposed to replace the present troops with native troops of some kind or another. Festing had strongly opposed this and, in fact, this was th principal reason why he had come home; he thinles tut he has won his point and that a White Brigade wi.ll be maintained, although probably on a reduced strength. THIS THISISAG GOPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENI RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT WIJDeR SECTION 3(4) OF THE Pure RECORDS ACT 1958 Ec20o 110. THISI A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 DEc 2509 had a talk with WRIGHT, WRIGHT,eX-D.I.B. officer, who is going out as No. 2 to Magan, D.S.O. in Palestine. YIRGHT, who oomes to us with strong recommendations from Bamford and others, seemed to me, to be an extremely good type. He knows Magan well and the two should work together well. He is going to be in the office for about twelve days and will then take up his appointment. September 21.th. I talked to the A.L.O' to-day about cultivating immigration Officers. I said that I thought they should get to lenow the lower graded and encourage them to talk about people who pass through their hands. We want thein all to feel that they are, in a sense, part of our office. It was only by discussing their cases with them that we should at more detailed knowledge about undesirable people coming and going; they should have a great deal d information under their hata which they would not dream of putting in any of their reports to the Home Office. I found that nobody wa.s covering the London area - this had arisen because there vas. no hottle-neclc fbr the liaison with Special Branch. It seemed to me desirable that somebody should over the Gravesend and also London airports. A.L.0's are covering the airports in other districts. I warned them that foreign Companies would be establishing offices on our various airports and 31 3 that it might be A good thing to learn as much about the personnel as we oould. We had the prewar experience of Luft-Hansa, whose repre- sentative, SCHMIDT REX, was now proven to have been a German agent. At the D.G's meeting Adam produced a memorandup, addressed by Bevin to his Cabinet colleagues, on the question of the abolition of the visa. He recommended as a first step the abolition of the visa in France, and went on to refer to the International Conference under U.N.E.S.0.0. which is to deal with the subject on a much wider soale. He deprecated the attitude that his colleagues adopted at a meeting held early in August, at which it had been decided to leave the whole question in abeyanoe, mainly on security grounds. He put forward all the usual arguments about the importance of promoting good relations by trade and tourist traffio. He thought these "advantages" fully outweighed any seourity risls, which could be covered by the norma procedure of Immigration, Police registration, eto. We have replied, making it clear that the various spokes he suggests are more apparent than real, and that the reall remedy for the present situation is to provide adequate staff for the Passport Contral of the Aliens Department in the Home Officee By abolising visas he will not get over the man- power question because the burden will be trans- ferred to the Immigration staff and to the Police; an inorease in the Aliens Department will also be necessary in vievr of the enormous nuber of applications for extensions that wi.lll result the free admission of all aliens to this country. There will also be the problem of getting people out when their visas expire. This will throw an additional burden on the Pobice. Bevin also suggested that the security diffioullties could be overcome by a alose liaison with the French author- ities concerned. It was pointed out to him that allthough the Police might see eye to eye with regard to orimninals, an e change of information between themselves and seourity authorities would depend entirely on the political situation It was made clea.f that our main preocoupation was 312 lussia, and that the Russians used the Conmunist Parties of all foreign powers for their purpose. Lastlly, it was once more explained tha't any advantage in good relations that might accrue a.t the outset from free travel woald be more than offset if the individuals were turned baokc at the port, after having paid the expenses of their Journey. Colonel BLAIR-CUNNENGHAM, who has taken over what were formerly R.S.S. functions at L.S.I.0. has been paying a visit to our office and has made the acquaintance of most people in B. Division. T gave him as clear a picture as I would about our main rests. September 25th The first meeting of the reconstituted XX Comittee has taken place. The three Services,s. Wingate, of the Controller's Office,an Drew on the civil side are members and T.A.R. was in the chair. They have considered the various channels which are open to them, but at the moment these are confined largely to the British 2one and to Ankara. At present there is no definite policy, or at any rate it is not been made know to the XX Comittee. T tallked to M.E. about the Registry, of which he has a good deal. He things that by and large it is a good Registry, but he is concerned about the policy filing, which seems to be in a bad mess. He saya that the first thing to decide is what a policy fille is - on this he could not get any guidance. from anyone in the Registry or even from Horrocks. The whole matter is largely a question of analysis. M.E. has, I think, managed to get his own files straight, but it is clearly necessary to get the whole office on to the same footing. M.E. feels, too, that some- thing more might be done in the direction of getting lool-ups made on a more individual basis. While look-ups are not bad, they are stil in some degree mechani.cal. 912 We are malcing arrangements for the D.G's visit to the Middle East. He leaves on the "ORONTES" on October 5th. We are arranging for his Egyptian visa here, but suggesting that if he wants to go to Irag and Syria he should get his visas in Cairo. We had some difficullty in deciding whether he should go as "Sir Percy Sillitoe' or "Mr. Sillitoe". This uestion has not arisen before as all our visitors have been in uniform. We decided in the and that it was better that there should be no mystery and that he should go as "Sir Peroy Sillitoe, Government offiotaln. In the application for the visa, however, he will be described as coming from the War Office. Although this is a bore, it is probably better, in view of the publication in the Press some time ago about his appointmento THIS 1SA 19 A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENI RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT LINDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBtie REGORDS ACT 1958 DEC 2009 1 tpt L letine mecltes tn A ehayu H H at MIUA VIO T I uimin anie an t 111 POPMAWTIDTHP DTP[0m