AThe National Archives(c) crown copyrightCatalogue Reference:kv/4/472Image Reference:1POL F53-24-90SAV19LIDDELL DIARIESILE CLOSES Form 924SEE ALSO LIST INSIDE COVERStarStarStarSeria NoDesignationDateSerial No DesignationDateSerial NoDesignationDatetertaeS. 960 Edn2POL F 53-24-90FILASV1s2FhiMsttyS4R1.1950.1st January.Tommy Harnis has remained in Mallorca, SO I did not attend his annuallparty.It is difficult to say whether 1949 has brought us to a lower ebb than1948, since the effect of the devaluation gamble cannot really be estimatedorrknown for Some time.We are on the eve of a General Election and nobody can really Bay whatthe outcome will be. The atatisticians calculate, on the basis of the turn-over on by-elections, that if these figure are maintained throughout thecountry the Conservative rerbound to get a majority. On the other hand,the older politicians, who act on intuition and hunches, believe one weekthat they wil keep a majority and the next week that Labour will get back.On the whole, the wage-earners have perhaps a little less to complain of thanthey had last year. Although the T.U.0. have agreed to a wage-freeze, whichcannot be very popular, there is full employment and a tolerable existence.As long as these conditions prevail and the working man can buy ten cigarettesa day and a pint of beer which is not over-watered, he is not likely toreact very fonrcibly either one way or the other, but this is pure speculationand you really never know what is in his mind,ant that of his wire, untilPollingDay. I have great faith in his long-term basic common sense andhe will probably do the night thing for the wrong reason after a good dealof auffering.During the year considerable progress has been made with Western Union,which is now backed by the Atlantic Paat, and there are certainly signsof economic recovery, particularly in Holland and Belgium. In Francethe Central (?) Government has been hollding on, often somewhat precariously,and the Communiats have not recovered from their major defeat in the Frenchminer's stike last year. On the Right Wing less seems to be heard about thepossibility of de Gauille coming into power. In Italy the position isperhapslesssatisfactory,buttherearenosignsofaCommunistrevolt.C.P. (I) haB, I think, on the whole lost a certain amount of ground. TheBcandinavian countries have made progress. Norway and Denmark have comeinto the Atlantic Part and Sweden is ab close to the other Scandinaviancountries as she dares she also has fairly close unofficiall liaison withthis country. In Finlandith Communists have certainly had a setback, whichis causing Russia some anxiety.In the Eastern Zone of Germany the Bereitshafter have been built upto a considerable degree, it was thought,preparatory to a suggestion by theRussians that a0l Allied forces should withdraw, but things have clearly notaltogether gone according to plan and Bo far the RusBians have postponedelections which might be to their disadvantage. The position in Berlinis not too bad and for the moment the Ruasians do not appear inclined toageravate it: they still want to keep the guaaripartite door open. In thet,Adenaeur'sGovernmenthasbeenBetupandplansforitaSecurityServicesare well advanced. There will be a steady relaxation of control, whichwithin a year will not amount to very much. The question of a German Armyis in abeyance and a proposal has been made that at some future date theGermans might be armed by the Western Powers and makce a contribution toWestern Union defence. Adenaeur makes a grea show of saying that he doesnot want an Army, at any fate for the present; this Ofuceurse, a great2.advantage to Germany: it saves them a good many millions and gives themtheir young men to work on the land and i.n the factories. The effect ofthis has already been considerable; the land is cultivated to the last inchand the shops are full of manufactured goods which are being sold both tothe East and to the West. What I rather fear is that now that theGermans are on their feet, there will come the moment when they willconsider which side their bread is buttered. They must have two mainobjectives: (1) to get pid of the occupation forces, and (ii) to recoveras much of their lost territory as they can.WhentheyfindthattheFrench are not prepared to give up the Saar, and that the Ruhr Authority18 to continue, they may be open to an offer from the Russians, who mightSuggest a readjustmer nt of the Oder-Neise line. This would be particularlytempting to the Germans who might by then have certain elements of the oldNazi Party in their Government.Matters inthe Far East have been moving fairly fast and we have nowrecognised the Commuristeovernment in China. This was presumabily inevitablesooner or later, but it is bound to have a very considerable effeat on thesituation in S.E. Asia, where the Chinese hold dominant position inn manycountries. There have been no demands so far for the return of Hong Kong,although this is bound to come sooner or later. At the moment it has beenleft out of any of the fulminations of MAO-TSE--TUNG and his minions,probably because the present Government in China finds, for economic reasons,that it is essential to maintain contact with the West. This position maycontinue for a period of five to ten years, but the moment the Chinese findit profitable to liquidate Hong Kong, there seems little doubt tha't by non-co-operation, strikes, boycott, etc. they could very soon reduce theColony to impotence.In Malaya the position 18 far from satisfactory. A large numbertroops are being maintained there at a considerable cost, and there Brestill no signs of the position being satisfactorily cleared up. One of themain deficiencies is an inadequate knowledge of the Drder of battle of thoseagainst whom our operations have been directed. Unthlrrecentydays thereappeared to be a conviction, at any rate in the mind of Harding the G.0.0..that without this knowledge random operation in the jungle are hot likelyto lead to any positive results. It is really the Police who are largelyat fault, although we are doing our beat in S.I.F.E. to stimulate them tothe right kind of activity.The situation in Indi-China is, to say the laast, precarious, and thingsare none too good in Siam. In Burma the position is chaotic, with theKarens fighting for independence,an the Communists fighting for controlagainst a weak Government are now heartened by Chinese Comunist forces ontheir borders.In Indonesia, where a Treaty has now been signed with the Dutch, theposition is far from being under control, Perhaps the only bright spotsin the area are Nev Zealand and, to some extent, Australia, who have broughtin a Conservative Government prepared to take a strong line againat theCommunists. Unfortunately, however, their machinery is somewhat inaduate.New Zealand has no Security Service and Australia, under considerable pain,having only just given birth to one; the infant is a bit rickety!The United States seem to be prepared under the Atlantic Pact tosuppiby arms and equipment to member countries, Bubjeot fo securityprecautions. In this connection, the COSMIC system has come into beingas a result of a Security Conference held in Washington, where Roger Hollistook the Chair.3.The event of the year has been the exxplosion of an atomic bomb inRussia, Which has thrown everyone's calculations out of date and willneceskitate the revision of all former J.I.C. assessments. There is stillsome doubt as to whether this was an experimental bomb or the first one offthe line. It is, however, clear that by 1957 at any rate the Russians shouldhave sufficient Atomic bombs to blot this country out entirely.2nd January.Sir John Shaw has arrived and attended his first Directors meeting.We discussed a proposal that Hambllen should attend the meeting in Floridawith the F.B.I., where Caribbean affairs were to be discussed. Shaw saidthat as we were already sending three representatives, he did not feell thatsuch a journey could possibly be justifled in the present circumstances. Hedid not think that Dur Security Officers had really had time to settle down:when they had, he woulld like to visit them himself as he had some doubts as tohow far there was really a job for them to do.We discussed also the question of Bell's return for a three month's coursein Overseas Division, and who was to replace him during that period. Shawsaid he doubted whether it was necessary for him to come home at all in viewof his past experience; there was nothing that Overseas could tell him aboutKenya that he did not. already know. He felt that an occasional visit ofa month,t to get the latest information in his of fice, might be useful.Generaly speaking, Shaw thought that our overseas officers requiredknowledge not of the country to which they were going but of the principlesand methods of working in this office.I saw the P.M. to-day. I remninded him of the origins of the FUCHS case,the conclusions we had reached by a careful process of elimination, and thefinal decision, after consultation with D. AtEn., that FUCHS shal beinterrogated. I explained to him that FUCHS had given us an opening byreporting to the Security Officer at Harwell that his father was now residingin the Soviet Zone of Germany, and that FUCHS had been informed that thisin itself raised grave security issues which might Jeopardise his continuedemployment at Harwelll. This issue was under consideration by the atomicEnergy authorities. The suggestion that FUCHS had been engaged inespionage was kept as a matter entirely between FUCHS and the interrogatorI gave the P.M. a Yough outline of the course of the interrogation, andtold him that what FUCHS had said was really consistent either with his guiltor with his innocence. We had, however, reviewed allll the evidence in thelight of this interrogation in conjunction with Lord Portal, Mr. Perrin, andSir John Cockcroft. Lord Portal seemed to take the view - although no finaldecision hadyet been reached - that the security risk of maintaining FUCHSatHarwellcouldnotbeaccepted,andthatsomepostshouldthereforebefoundfor him at One of the Universities. We should be holding a further meetingwith Lord Portal before any action was taken.The Prime Minister said that he presumed Lord Portal Would be informinghim of his final decision,The P.M. asked me whether I had heard anything about the recent troublewith the staff of groundnuts. I said that we had heard through Mr. Wall,h.the Establishment Officer of the Ministry of Food, about an alleged plot,of which a selentist named BUNTING was said to be the focal point. Wehad been promised details but had 80 far received none.The P.M. sadd the matter was certainly a serious one, and there wasno doubt that BUNTING was at the bottom of the trouble. I then asked haprecisely what the trouble was - had BUNTING been trying to stir up troubleamong the natives? He said that there was no question of that, butBUNTING had remarked to somebody that he was trying to "wreck thisImperialist scheme" and that he had become a focal point for the grievancesofthe European staff. I said that we lmew something of BUNTING' history,that he was a Communist, and it Seemed natural, therefore, to us that if therewere any grievances going he would obviously be the kind of person who wouldsupport them.The P.M. seemed to agree with this viev. I had the impression thatStrachey had convinced him that there was more in the whole business thanmerely the voicing of petty grievances. He told me that BUNTING was nowin this country on leave for six months, but gave no indication as towhether his contract would be cancelled and made no Bugeestion that weshould keep him under observation.I told the P.M. about the recent trend in the Communist Party whichseemed to indicate a more revolutionary turn of mind: the word "revolution"vias being used where it had never been used before. At the same time, inspite of their indignatior about the wage freeze and neakin'e removal ofnine Communists from the T. &: G.W.U. they ere still telling their Partymembers in the T.Us to behave properly. Foulkes,0 the Electrical TradesUhions, had in fact denounced the unofficial strike. Meanwhile, we hadheard that the Daily Worker was in extremelly low water.AB regards the Fascists, there was nothing very much to report, exceptthe formation of the National Labour Congress, which was intended to recruitinthe T.U. movement. It was advocating full employment, a moreexpeditious method of settling disputes, and a share by workers in themanagement - in fact everything that the Labour Party asradvocating,alhtough I did not say so:The P.M. was his usuall self and did not react very much to anythingTI said. After a panse, bundled himself out of his chair in the usuallfashion when I left!At the D.G's meeting to-day, at which I toot the Chair, Dick said wehad been asked By I.R.D. to extend our defector policy to three Russianswho are to be brought over from Germany for broadcasting purposes, theobject being to encourageothers to defect. Itiwas agreed that as theseRussians did not really fall into the defector category but rather intothe refugee category, we could nottake on this commitntht. It was decidedthat the Foreign office should be told that our paper on the suggestedadministration of defenctors had not yet been taken by the J.I.0. and wecoulld not, therefore, cope with a flow of them which the broadcasts mightproduce. I said, however, that Chief Oonstablee should be informed ofthe movements of these people.Dick said that at the last meeting of the Deputy Directors 0. &: S.ithad been announced that the D.M.I was pressing for a joint paperby M.I.5 and M.I.6 on the possibility of a revival of the German I.8.5.It vas agreed that it was inevitable that the G.I.S. would revivewhen the Germans were ready for it, and that it would be our norralresponsibility to detect it as soon as possible. Dick said he woulldspeak to S.I.S. and ask them to cover Int. Div. Germany, in conjunctionwith whom they could write a basic paper which could then be submittedto us for any necessary additionsDick then spoke about the difficulties of liaison with the French.He said that matters have taken a possible turn for the better. in thatHe said the question of whetherwe should set up a direct liaison with the suretewas novunder discussion. It was thought thatmightimprove our relatins with the Surete, although it would probablyworsen them with S.D.E.C.E.I then mentioned hetquestion of sendingsomeone from here to look into Surete records of membe-s of the RoteKappelle. It was agreed that this should be discussed with S.I.S.Dick told the meeting about the Home Office, against our advice,having naturalised Carol STRAUSS, a known Czech agent. He said hedid not know what had gone wrong here, but could not do anything untilwe saw the H.O. file.Malcom Currming said he was not quite clear what the position wasHe wondered whether we should pay a formal part as alink with the Canadians. I said that we havein R.C.M.P. HQ. at Ottawa, and that everything is co-ordina t inWashington. Provided, therefore, that S,.L.O. Washington is satisfiedthat he is being kept fully informed of what is going on, there shouldbeno cnuse for worry on our part. Malcolm saii he had discussedthis matter with MeClellan of the 8.C.M.P. and he thought the matterwas now tied up.I said I thought we should be informed when people from the R.C.M.P.visited this country on courses, but I felt this could be adjusted inWashingtonMalcolin also referred to the increasing extent of S.l.3. direettouch with U.K. Govt. Depts. on, e.g. the subject of defectons.Alec Kellar said he had also observed this tendency.Furnival Jones told the meeting about the case of a German who ischief designer to Fokker-Wulf. We had informed the Ministry of Supplythat although this man was a specialist in transonic and supersonicspheres, we thought it unwise to put him into guided weapons. Thereis no doubt, however, F.J. said, that this man will be put into guidedveapons here and, indeed, that he will probably run it.I suggestedthat this might have some bearing on American projects, namely, thatthey woulld be reluctant to pass their information to us. F.J. said,however, that this would not be the case since the Americans had alreadyoffered the man employment on very good terms. It was finally agreedthat WHenhie know exactly what job this man is to go to,V shouldtry and get him aturalised SO that in future if it were necessary totalce proceedings against him the course would be made easier.Perfect said that the new arrangement for S.B. meetings to takeplace on a C.P. District basis wes now in force, but it Would mean thatour officers would have torpay more visits owing to the fact that therewere 18 C.P. Districts in all.6.Perfeet also mentioned the case of a woman Communist who had beremployed in the C.I.D. office of the of the Police Forces. He saidefforts were being made to encourage the Police to make their S.B.S secure,including their typing staff.I told the meeting of a visit I had had fromandon the question of the vetting of immigrants to the U.S.A.said he would let us have the figures in due Course of Britishimmigrants.I asked Strong to think this over.I told the meeting about my talk with the P.N regard BUNTINGand the groundnuts scheme.BETAINEDDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSLth January.ACT 1958. Aril 2o1oWe had a preliminary meeting to discuss the line for Portal' meetingLuth January (conta.)At the J.LuCs to-day we discussed the question of three Rusaiandefectors whom I.R.D. wished to bring to this country from Germany. Isaid that this was a new clause which did not come into the normaldefinition. and that there was a limit to what we could do in the matterheof looking after and housing people of this type. I, of course, understothe value of such people; at the same time it had to be borne in mind thardtheir taak while here would really be to encourage more defeotors and thatmeanwhile nothing had been done to implement our proposals that properarrangements should be made for the rehabilitation of Russians. It wasstated that these particular individuals were getting browned off in aD.P. camp in Germany. I had suggested that they should do their broad-casting from Germany by means of records, and pointed ouf that if they werbrowned off in Germany they were just as likely to get browned off here.Enquiries are to be made before anything is settled, as to whether it isreally necessary for them to come.Dur convictio that we have the right man in FUCHS. Meanwnite, We aLeto receive the raw material over here So that G.C.H.Q. can world on it.This information has been explained to Perrin and Portal.I attended a meeting to-day, called by Lord Portal, at whichRowlands, Perrin, and Cockcroft were present. It was agreed that inthe light of all the evidence it was impossible to retain the servicesofFUCHS at Harvell. The procedure is to be as follows:1. Cockcroft will speak to Skinner, which he is more or less boundto do in any case since FUCHS is serving under him. He will tellSkinner that as FUCHS' father has accepted a position in the Eastern Zoneit is impossible to retain him at Harwell, and that the Securityauthorities are quit adamant on this point. He will then ask Skinnerwhether he can find any opening for FUCHS, and he confidently expectsthat the answer will be in the affirmative. He will be told to keepthe reason for FUCHS' departure to himself, as once a job has been securedit will be possible to say quite openly that FUCHS has got a better andmore lucrative appointment. and that employees at Harwell ane always atliberty to leave and take on other work if they wish to do So. Nothingwill be said to the University beyond the fact that FUCHS is lookingfor other employment.2. Cockeroft will then speak to FUCHS and will tell him that owingto the fact that his father is employed in the Eastern sone, he very much6.Perfect also mentioned the case of a woman Communist who had bernemployed in the C.I.D. office of the of the Police Forces. He saidefforts were being mede to encourage the Police to make their S.B.S secure,including their typing staff.I told the meeting of a visit I had had fromandon the question of the vetting of immigrants to the U.S.A.said he would let us have the figures in due course of Britishimmigrants. I asked Strong to think this over.I told the meeting about my talk with the P.N BUNTINGand the groundnuts acheme.ORIGINAL BETAINEDDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS4th January.ACT1958Aerl2010We had a preliminary meeting to discuss the line for Portal's meetingon the FUCHS case, which has been called for to-morrow.5th Januany.We had an extra Directors meeting in order to clear up our viewson what should be said to 'C' in regard to the provisional agreement reacheon the integration of S.I.M.E. and S.I.F.E.We all feel that theproposals should be accepted, subject fo financial considerations in regardto Moascar, to reservations about the new status of our representativein Iraa, and to an expression of opinion that Ceylon should remain underHead Offiee, although continuing lateral communication with S.I.F.E. Wealso thought that it should be made clear that the agreement was on trialand that the appointment of S.I.S. representatives to the hands of B.Division in the Middle East and Far East should be regarded as purelya question of merit.Some fresh information has come in from Washington about the FUCHScase clearing up corrupt passages. On the whole it itends to confirmour convictio that we have the right man in FUCHS. Meanwhile, we areto receive the raw material over here so that G.C.H.Q. can work on it.This information has been explained to Perrin and Portal.I attended a meeting to-day, called by Lord Portal, at whi(Rowlands, Perrin, and Cockcroft were present. It was agreed that inthe light of all the evidence it was impossible to retain the servicesofFUCHSatHanvell. The procedure is to be as follows:1. Cockcroft will speak to Skinner, which he is more or less boundto do in any case since FUCHS is serving under him. He vill tellSkinner that as FUCHS' father has accepted position in the Eastern Zoneit is impossible to retain him at Harwell, and that the Securityauthorities are quite adamant on this point. He will then ask Skinnerwhether he can find any opening for FUCHS, and he confidently expectsthat the answer will be in the affirmative. He will be told to keepthe reason for FUCHS' departure to himself, as once a job has been securedit will be possible to say quite openly that FUCHS has got a better andmore lucrative appointment, and that employees at Harwell are always atlibentytoleaveandtakeonotherworkiftheywishtodoS0.Nothingwill be said to the University beyond the fact that FUCHS is lookingfor other employment.2. Cockeroft will then speak to FUCHS and will tell him that, owingto the fact that his father is emplloyed in the Eastern Lone, he very much7.regrets that it will no longer be possible to retain his services atHarwell. He will then say that the Security Service are adamant on thispoint, and that he does not know whether there 18 anything else behind theirdecision.3. FUCHS. is to be allowed to remain at Harwell and carry outthe ordinary hand-over. This may take some weeks, and it is quitepossible that he will not leave until the end of March, when Skinnerhimself goes.Rowlands and Perrin were prepared to accept this risk, which, franklyI do not think amounts to very much. FUCHS will not know more in sixweeks time than he knows now, and it woulld be little short of madness onhis part to attempt to extract any documents. As long as he is alive,the possibility of his transmitting to the Russians all that he knows upto date will remain, whether he does it here or elsewhere.4.The point was discussed as to whether it was possible ordesirable for anybody to give FUCHS one more chance to come clean, bysuggesting to him that he had up to now been reluctant to do S0 in view ofhis sister being implicated. This might be followed by a guarantee thatanything he told ts would not be passed to the Americans.There were doubts as to whether this would produce anyuseful result, and it was made clear that of course the Americansknew already and that nothing we could do could stop them from pursuingtheir enguiries and, if they had the evidence, from prosecuting thesister.5.One further argument was put forward as a possible indicationthat FUCHS may not have been active since 1944. The information thathepassed to the Russians at that time, and any information of a similar kind,should have been of considerable assistance to them if they were workingon the Isotope theory.Perrin said, in aP rather guarded way, that information receivedfrom various sources tended to show that the Russians had made little orno progress in this field.ORIGNAT. DOGUMENT RETAINEDNDERARTNENT JNDEER SECTION3(40 TEPUBLC RECORDSACT 1958 April 20106.We now have to consider what further security checks shouldcontinue to operate, at any rate until FUCHS leaves Harwell.6th Januany.The D.G. has returned. T saw him for a minute and he seemed pleasedwith the results of his visit and was astonished to hear that we had not theseen copies of his despatches to the P.M. which were passed throughoRnixsitkxx O.R.O.9th January.At the Directors meeting to-day we considered a note which should formthe basis of a letter from the D.G. to 'o' on the White/Easton agreement.The terms were agreed and the D.G. instructed D.0.S. to draft a letter forhis signature. D.8.0. instructed Kellar and Kelllar asked Dick White8.George Bishop, Strachey': secretary, rang me up about BUNTING, havinghad a tip to do 80 from Victor. I said that I understood he had got allhe wanted from Graham Mitchell and that there was no particullar point in ourdiscussing the matter until ve had seen the documents which he hadpromised to send to us. He said that these would be sent over.Humphrey Legge, C.0. of Berks. looked in. He had seen the D.G.and was worried about his respohsibilities in regard to Harwell. He told meabouttherecentincidentofthethreemenwhotriedtobreakintoHarwelllin order to steal a consignment of lead, which they were proposing to sellat E175 a ton. Apparently the Oxford Police had got the information froman old lag, who had not told them where the burglary was to take place. Thiinformation had been passed on tD Berkshire who had alerted Harwell and otherplaces. It was in this way that the W.D.C. were lying in wait. Thepresent proposal is to charge the three, including the informant, withconspiracy, although I gather that the evidence is somewhat thin.loth January.At the D.G. meeting to-day. Dick told us that he had seen MurrieoftheHormeOfficeaboutthenaturalisation68CarolSTRAUSS..theCzechagent. Apparently our letter did not reach Hamieson of the NaturalisationBranch, although a receipt was received here for the actual envelope. TheTop Secret receipt, however for amieson's signature has never been returnedand it can only be assumed that the letter is lost somewhere in the HomeOffice. We did put a minute on the Home Office file, but this was gnoredby the officer d caling with the case and the naturalhisation went through.Dick said tha: Jamieson claimed to have heand nothing of the case untilhe, Dick, spoke to Murrie.I said that this raised the whole question of keeping a check oftop secret receipts. I asked Potter to devise a scheme for ensuring thata check could be made on these receipts.As regards STRAUSS, I said I thought the Home Office shoulld be toldthat they cannot do anything untill we have considered ways and means ofdealling with the matter.Dick spoke about the question of setting up Local Intelligence Committeethroughout the Commonwealth, about which J.I.B. have written a paper for theJ.I.C. After a good deal of discussion, I said I thought ve shouad have toconsider very carefully where these Committees would serve a useful purposeand where they would not. I asked Allec to study the problem and let mehave his comments.Furnival Jones said that Sir Daril Watson, of the Railway Executive,was anxious for some guidance on the question of a delegation of Russianrailwaymen isiting this country in order to inspect our radlway system.The difficulty was that in 1946 a delegation from the N.U.R. had visitedRussia, and the Russians had nov asked to come over here for a return visit.It was decided that Furnival Jones should speak to the repregentntiveof the Ministry of Transport on the Committee for the Security of Economicand Industrial Information, in view fthe fact that that body had justreached a decision that certain types of information of an economic andindustrial nature should neither be published nor disclosed. It mustalsobe discovered from the N.U.R. exactly what their delegation saw when they9.visited Russia,, and allso if possible what the Russians wish to be shown whenthey come here. The J.I.C. should be informed at the 0. & S. meeting onThursday, when the views of J.I.B. Bhould be obtained. F.J. said he Wouldnform J.I.B. in advance.Graham Mitchell told the meeting about Operation MLancashire Hotpot"He explained the case for the benefit of those who were not au fait with itand said that his section is now working on the documnents which were provingto be of vital interest. He said that a close liaison is being kept withthe Lancashire Police.Graham then told the meeting about the BUNTING.CA when it was agreedthat the latter'e machination seemed to amount to no more than his being afocal point for the grievances - some of them wellfounded - of the groundnutistaff.Alee Kellar said thatthe new C.I.A. representativehere, has written about the setting up of C.I.A./T stations in Hong Kongand Ceylon. He said he felt this problem should be discussed With Dickand Shaw. He added that the Hong Kong Government had now agreed to setup stations there, provided it was essential for intelligence purposes.I said, with regard to Ceylon, that there is a Y station there and it isnot known whether G.O.H.Q. would be worried if the Americans put up a stationbeside it. I said I thought wer should get their views when we knewdefinitely what the Ame ican proposition for Ceylon vaB.I spoke about a proposal for an S.0. organisation for Hong Kong.The Governor does not apparently want It, since he feels that in a projectofthis kind it would not be possible not to recruit Chinese agents, in whichcase he thought there would undoubtedly be lealages. He is, however,repared to agree to the training of about a dozen Europeans. DI saidthat there had been a Chiefs of Staff meeting on this matter on Monday last,which we had not attended ag we were at this stage not concerned. The onlyway we could poanibly be concerned would be to get our B.L.0. in Hong Kongto screen the people concerned.T lunched ith-Carey-Robinson. He tells me that he has finished hi.smemorandum for the Home Office on 18B procedure during the war, and has saidthat if any future planning is to be done on it we should be consulted.De COUROY told us that a Russian atomic bomb Was to go off or thenight of the 5th-oth. He also informed the American press and 'o'.If the bomb goes off he wins: if it does not go off he will say that,owing to the press publlicity 'Uncle Joet changed his mind. In fact, asfar as ve know, the bomb has not bone off and there is, to my mind, quitea possibility Df provocation - the Russians wishing to impress us withtheir progress wiith regard to the manufacture of the bombs.llth Januany.Tspoke tD Juxon Barton to-day at the J.I.0. abont the:case. He told me that the Secretary of State had novI ruledcandidates vere to be selected from the Oxford Delegacy, andhe that has no asked more that we may be officially informed of his decision.10.I lunched with Lloyd, C.C. Mid-ales, who seems a very Co-operative sort of person and thoroughly satisfied with his liaisonwith us. He was full of complaints about the Home Office and theirshort-sightedness with regard to Police matters, particularly pay andallowances.ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDVDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 195812th January.Aprd20L0Pat Reilly came over to see us on taking over as Chairman of theJ.I.6. He had talks with various officer's here. I explained to himthe layout of the office and also told him about our discussions withS.I.S. on the integration that is proposed in the Middle East and FarEast. I then spoke to him about a matter which had been worrying usfor some time, namely, the lnrge number of organisations with varyinginterest in Cornunism Which were writing papers on the subject. It seemeto me that there ought to be a focal point somewhere for clearing suchpapers. Reilly said that he had already noticed that this twas going onand that he intended to do something about it.I had a word with Battersby about the S.0.E. Club, of which he andare members.It did not seem to me that there was any reason why Battersby andshould not continue their membership, provided they did notdiscuss their business with other members of the club, and let us knowif anybody appeared tD be unduly inguisitive about their work.]4th January.I have been reading the documents in the casi of Dr. Richard. SORE,which Packard, the late D.M.I. obtained from G-2 through his pers onalcontact, General Irvine, the Amnerican D.M.I.We heard very briefly of the arrest of Dr. SORGE and his colleaguesin Tokyo in 1941, but nd details were then available. Some months agowhen Hollis was in Australia. he read an account of this case which wasa press release by G-2. Since then we have been trying to get somedocuments, but had always been warned off by the Americans. The factistha all intelligence coming from Japan has been more or less a cllosedbook to the Britisi. G-2 have regarded it as one of their preserves,and I should doubt whether any other American service knows more aboutthe matter than they have read in the press. SORGE' case is one ofthe most remarkable thet I have come across in all the annals ofespionage.SORGE was born of middle class parents in Germany. His Grandfatherhaving been Secretary of the Dinst International founded by Karll Marx,his father was on the whole bourgeois and raactionary. At schoolSORGE was morose and naughty. He joined the army in the first worldVary was wounded three times and during his convalescence made a close11.study of socidlogy and political movement. When disintegrationto Bet in in 1918, he joined in the movement and later became an active beganrevolutionary in Hamburg. He was quite well-known in the movement up till1924, when after a meeting with certain prominent members of the ThirdagentInternational at Frankfurt, he was asked to go to Moscow and work as anKUUSINEN and MANUILSKY. He viaited Scandinavia for the Comintern andfor the Comintern. He vas a close personal. friend of PIATNITSKY,was in England working on behalf of its 6rganisation Bureau in 1929.When he returned from England, ne vas aarigned to the Ministry of Warin China.and given an important espionage mission on behalf of the 4th DepartmentHe built up a considerable network and worked in Shanghai,as a representative of the Sozlalogische Magazine, until 1932 when hereturned to Moscow. His mission vas separate from that of NOULLENSPaul RUEGG, who was subsequently arrested as Head of the Far EasternBureau of the Comintern. In 1933 he was ordered to set up a Bimilar-network in Tokyo, when he transferred to the Comintern to the War Departmentbefore going to China. He still remained for Party purposes a member ofwhat he described as "the secret department of the Central ExecutiveCommitte of the R.0.P." to whom he always reported on his return.While he was in the field, however, the wholle of his work was controlledby the Lth Department.Before going to Tolyo, SORGE returned to Germany and in the fnatflush of the Revolution in 1933 succeeded in obtaining membership of theNazi Party without, check by the Gestapo on his past record.He also obtained, probably through Agnes SMEDLEY, a representation inTokyo for the Frankfurter Zeitung (SMEDLEY represented the FrankfurterHeitung in China). Armed with these credentials he settled doun inTokyo and began to build up his network. He WaB joined from Paris bya Yugoslav, VOUKELITCH. who had cover From the Frenoh film paper "La Vue"and also from "Politica", a Yugoslav daily.SORGE'S other principal atnochates were OSAKI, the Japanese expertin Chinese affairs who was a representative of Asahi Shinbun and waBlater associated with the running of the South Manchurian Railway.MIYAGI, a Japanese Amerdcan from Los AngeleB, who was an artist.Max KLAUSEN. German, who acted as SORGE'S wireless operator both inChina and in Japan. KALUSEN eventually billetted himself Dn a WhiteRussian of Finnish origin calle Anna WAILENIUS., who had escaped fromRussia with her husband at the time of the Revolutio and hated the Sovietregime which had deprived her of everything The had. It was not longbefore she fell in love vith KLAUSEN, with whom she lived for two on threeyeans before the Soviet Government would aalow KLAUSEN to marny her.During this period she was kept in ignorance of what KLAUSEN was doing.When she became inquisitive about his nightly excursions, he told herthat he was working for an anti-Nazi organisation. She finallydiscovered that the H.Q. of the anti-Nazi organisatior vas in Moscow.Although she stuck to KLAUSEN even after his release from priaon by theAmericans in 1945. and returned to Russia with him after his Chinenemission was ended, went again with him to Tokyo and is believed ultimatelyto have returned with him to Russia, she neven became reconciled to thework that he was doing or the Governnent that he was serving. She reufeedto have a child by Soviet spy and she frequently thre it up against himthat he had merely used her a8 a cover for hin nefarious activities. Hetold the court at the time Df his trial that she had been hela by threatafrom Moscow and by the money and good living which he had been able togive her aG a result of his highiy successful Mbusinessl for the Droduotionof presses used in bllueprinting and fluorescent plates. This businessW8s., in fact, used for the transmission of funds from abroad, tainiy, Ithink, through the branch of the Hong Kong Shanghai Bank in Shanghai.At12,first KLAUSEN had used the cover of an import and export business, whichhad not been successful.Other collaborators of SORGE were Gunther STEIN, a British subje jectDT German origin who Subsequently became a naturalised American. Heseems to have operated principally in China, but he did onas deputy for SORGE. He too was a journalist, representing the"Berliner Tageblatt" and in 1936 the MBritish Financial News". STEINmnete woman with whom he was intimately associated in Hong Kong, althoughwhether he actually married here seems Doubtful: her name was MargitGATENBERG. Agnes SMEDLEY, of whom we have many recorde, Played at onetime an extremely important part in getting the network established inChina, although the had little to do with SORGE when he was in Tokyo.It seems probable that it was through her assooistion with the FrankfurterZeitung that SORGE got his eredentials from that paper in 1933. Shegave SORGE 8 great deal of assistance an the recruiting for his Chinesenetwork. Both OSAKI and MDYAGI employed a large number of sub-agenta,some conscious and some unconscious. OSAKIs ramifications extended atane time into KONOYE'E Cabinet.SORGE'S great strength was his immense knowledge of affairs in Chinaand Japan. He had made it his business to study not only current affairsbutChinese and Japanese history. He refused to be merely a post-boxand, in the light of his knowledge and that of OSAKT with whom he hadfrequent discussions - he was able to make an accurate assessment of bothovert and covert nformation. More valluabile 8till was the entry Which hissuperior knowledge gave him to the German Embassy, who came to rely on himmore and more. He had already been friendly with the wife of General OTT,the Ambassador, when she win the wife of an architect in Munich, and thereare atrong grounds for thinking that he requently Blept with Frau OTT.General OTT had a great respect for SORGE'E knowledge; showed him tele-grams and memoranda from Berlin, and asked his assistance in replying tothem. Finally, he made him his Press Attache, and when he was arrested dideverything he could to get him released. He also kne well the MilitaryAttache and the local head of the Geatapo. His downfall came in October,1941, owing to a chan of circumsitances which he could not have foreseen.There had been Communist activities in the offices of the South ManchurianRailway, and the Japanese decided to have a round up. Among thosearrested was RITSU, now a Communiat member of the Japanese Diet. Underpressure, without any knowledge of SORGE'S network, he made a statementthata woman riamed KATABAYOSHI, who had formerly lived in LoS Angeles, wasa Cormunist. This woman han been on fairly intimate terms ith MTYAGIwhen he was in the S.A.and,under under pressure, she disclosed tha t MIYAGIalso was a Communist, although she knew little of what he WaB doing.Observation on MIYAGI connected him with OSAKI and observation on OSAKIconneoting him with SORGE, KLAUSEN, and VOUKELITCH. Before this disastertheworkhadbecomeincreasinglydifficuitowingtoargeneraltighteningup in security due to war donditiona. The practice of ending couriersto Shanghai had ceased and wireless communications were less frequent,It had, in faet, been found necessary to make contact with the SoviatEmbassy Oonsulate for the transmission of information and funds.Thesyater was tlor KLAUSEN to receive.f himself and his wife, two ticketsfor the theatre or cinema and pase the microfilma to the man on his rightand dollars in exchange. The Rus:ian emplloyed by the Consulatewas ZAITSEV.Befove the network was closed down, SORGE had transmitted threevitall pieces. of i formation to the Russians. Firstly, he told there of therefusal of Japan to make a military alliance with Germany in 1939 againstRussia and Ergland, It is claimed that this was a deciding factor incausing the Russians to make their non-aggression pact with the Germans.13.Seconaly, he warned the Rusians that the Gexmans were mobilising 170Divisions against Russialg western front a month before the attack tookplace. Thirdly, he was in a position to assure the Rusaians that theJTopanese mobilisation in 1941 was direeted not against their eastern front,but against the British and the Americans in a southwand movement.SORGE and OSAKI were hanged on the 7th November, 1914. VOUKELITCHand MIYAGI died in prison - or may well have been murdered, KLAUSENescaped the death penalty through fairly full disclosures of the part he hadplayed,ofhiswirelenstechniqueandofhiscodes,whichmusthaveenabledthe Japanese, who had monitored certain of his coromunications, to decipherthem. He and his wife were released by the Americans and are belleved nowtobeinRussia,iftheyhavenotbeenliquidated.GunthenSITEINisSaidto be in Paris, and Agnes SHEDLEY is in the U.S. Some of the Japaneseconfederates have been released, but others may still be in prison.The most important lesson, to my mind, of this case is that SORGEand his associates could not possibly have carnied out thein assignmentexcept under the cover of journalism. Not only were SORGE, VOUKETITCH,OSAKI. Agnes SMEDLEY and Gunther STEIN working as journalists, but alsoa number of OSAKI'S Japanese confederates. Personally I think that weought to look at some of our high-grade journalists of the type ofFreddie KUH, from thig angle.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED16th January.IDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONOF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958. Ap 2010I spoke to Arthur Martin about the details diseroset B0RGEReport about KLAUSEN' code and wirelens technique. I did not know whetherthis had already beached G.O.H.0.He said he would make enguiriesonhis next visit.has disclosed that a secret courier is visiting South Africaand Ausitralia in onder to establish a line of communication with theC.T.G.F. in the event of the Communist Parties in South Africe andAustralia being proscribed. So th Africn and Australlia are beinginformed.17th January.At the D.Gis meeting to-day, Dick said that no steps can yet be takento get Karel STRAUSS denaturalised, since the whole of our documentaryevidence cannot be put before a tribunal without jeopardising aur source,He said that abjeet apologieshave been received from the Home Office for having naturalised this managainst our advice, and Mnrrie has given his assurance that such a thingwill not happen again.D. said this might make the denaturalisation ofSTRAUSS easier, but hothing could b e done for the moment.Dick told the meeting about the>iho ie now over here and has been interrogated by S.I.S. TVio major issueswhich he has reported ane:(i) that from taegrams he sent from Paris to Marsay, he iscertain thet the Polish Intelligence in France have an agent at a highlevell on the French General Staff, who appears to be in contact with theAmerioans at Fontainebleau and who has given Pollish Intelligence the entire14.air derence plans for Vestein Union. Owing, however, to the faot thatthe Poles are suspicipus of telegraphic communication,was unableto get mone than a reference to the matter and could not get the name ofthe man concerned,asthe former willl have to carry out the investigations.THisIs A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 Apr 2010I saw Nichoils, who is I understand to take over the S.B. inMalaya.He has been in the country a good many years both before andsince the war. He 1s fairly young, keen, and enthusiastic, and has agood deal of practical experience. He is perhaps not of sufficientlyhith calibre to take on the job in hand - indeed, he himself seemed to berather astonished that he WaR selected; he fet that with his languagequalifications and his practical experience he could be more use tosomebody with longer and wider experience in organisetion than he woulld beif he were put down to a desk at the head of the organisation. Herealised, however, that there wag a great shortage of people With the rightking of experience, and that he would have to do his best. T told himwhat T thought, was necessany on the Intelligenee side, and that it wasdifficlllit to bring the operations in Malaya to a successful conclusionunles intelligence could produce a relllable order of battle.Meanwhile, there has been talk of getting someone of a highercalibile. Gray approached Morton and suggested either Maffey-Smith, la'teof D.I.B. or Wace, "George" Jenkin. There is, however, a reluotancehere to make suggestions to the Coronial Office on the Police side.Personally T think the matter is 8O importantant that we should do alll wecan to get the right man into the job. If "Geongell Jenkin would takeit, it would be admirable. I gather that he is fed up with the C.R.O.and had made up his mind to resign on February 24th if the Labour Governmentare returned to power.Dr. Matts, the excplocives expert in the Home Office, came tosee me on the recommendation of Burt. He said that during the wan shipshad been llowed to load and unload explosives in harbour. Formerlyexplosives were taken off in barges at sea in order to avoid the possibilityof really big explosion. The wartime practice had continued andWhich were of an extremely sensitive type. If a consignment of and woulbeexplosives werii in fact, being loaded at places like Liverpool, many 500 tons ofextremely serious. Vinat worried him more, however, wag thewent up the damage would have a radius of something like a the mile fact that15.Americans were doing the same thing in order to supply their Air Foreeunits in this country. He wondered whether there wa's a chance of elementsin the U.K., who disliked the presence of American troops here, committingany aot of sabotage. I said that if he was thinking in terms of the C.P.was fairly condident that there Executive Committee would not countenanceany act of the kind. This idnot entirely preclude the possibility thatsome disgruntled individual with Communist sympathies might not attemptsuch an act. but on the whole I thought it was unlikely. He said thathe had put in a report to the Home Office, advising that in future allexplosives should be landed at some suitable port in Seotland where therevas no population in the vicinity 01 the harbour. I then talked to himabout explosives in coal. He said that pieces of gelignite were still beingfound in coal, and that there were on an average three incidents a week.I asked him if he knew what the basic cause of the troublle was. He toldmethat the suggestion had been made at one time that Scotland Yard should carryout an investigation, but that this had been turned down by the Coal Board.He felt fairly confident that the basic reason for the trouble wasationalisation. The incident had Comenced then and had inoludedsabotage to fire-fighting equipment electric cables, etc. He said he hadnever known anything like it since 1925, at the time of the miners' strike.He thought that the workers had believed that nationalisation meant thatthey would manage the mines and get very large increases in wages, S,&proceedsof sume formerly dealt out to Directors, mine-owners, ete. This had beena disappointment to there and they were registering their disapprovalby acts which could in the long run only damage themselves.Therewasapossibility that the present arrangement, by which shot-firers did not payfor their shots and consequently did not require reimbursement for thosethattheydidnotuse,hadcausedthemattheendofthedayjusttothrowthem down anywhere in order to avoid the trouble of taking them back to theffice. There are apparently quite a number of court actions,brought byPeoplewhohavehadexplosionsintheirfireplaces,againsttheCoalBoard,and attempts are made to bring Dr. Watts in as an expert witness.18th January.At the J.I.C. to-day, Sir Ralph Murray came to discuss his proposalthat the fighting Services should give reassuring propagandamaterial which could be given to our repeesentatives abroad for counteringdefeatist propaganda, particularly in France, which suggested that therewas little that could be done against the enormous strength of the Russianforces if they were to attempt to invade Europe.The Army said that they could not provide much comfort; the facts werethat the Russiand had 172 Divisions mobilised and we could only put twoDivisions in the filed at the end of a month - and that with some difficulty.They had, however, noticed that in manoeuvres the Russians had B greatmany breakdowns and occasionally there was a shortage of petrol, but theycould not make any useful comparison with simillar incidents which probablyoccurred during our own manoeuvees.The Air Force said that their picture was equally gloomy; the factswere that the Russian Air Force was 16 times as big as the British Air Force,that the Russian jet fighter at present in production was superior to any-thing we had got - although, of course, we had some very important rOjectsoming along - that the Russians had a number of long-distance bombers ofthe B.29 type, whereas attempts by ourselves to obtainsome of these fromthe Americans had failed.The Navy did not really come into the picture, since although theymight be able to bottle up the Russian Fleet pretty successfully, this would16.provide no cause for optimism by the French, who were thinking in terms ofinvasion by huge land armies.The discussion then turned to the possibility of disclosing somethingabout our research and development in scientific veapons, which wouldcompensate for the deficiency in manpower. It was agreed that an approachshould be made to the Research Policy Committee, but the general feeling wasthat they would be reluctant to disclose information of the kind to WesternUnion countries.An espionage case of some magnitude has blown up in Tripoli. TheItalian representative died suddenly and an inspection of his premises,in order to discover the cause of death, which was understood to be suicide,led to the discovery of vast quantities of documents and details regardinga network of Arab spies throughout Tripoli. The Italians here had evidertlyheard about the incident and a demarche had already been made to the ForeignOffice, imploring them,i the interests of Anglo-Italian relations,n toraid his offices. This, however, is going to be done.I have read a paper on a discussion with the J.I.C. about possibleRussian indications in regard to the use of atomic weapons. The view seemsto be held that on the whole it would not be in the Russians' interest - atany rate for the next few years - to start atomic war, but that they might doSo to get in first if they thought that it was our policy to use atomicweapons. The Americans are estimating that the Russians will have s omethingbetween 120 or 200 bombs by 1953, but we think that this probably may begrossly exaggerated, and that in any case sufficient evidence is not yetavailable to show how far the Russians have progressed; nobody yet knowswhether the explosion a few weeks ago was from an experimental bomb or fromthe first bomb off the line. Everyone, however, is agreed that if atomicwarfare does start, the primary target of the Russians will be the U.K.19th January.Viv,came over to discuss the case of HOOPERto-dayeA notice appeared in the papers a few days ago, that HOOPER'E expensesin regard to a legal action for the custody of his twins financed byWilhelm PIECK. the former Soviet agent who recruited KING of the ForeignOffice.RETAINEDRECORDSACT1958.Apal0010I said that we here had considered this matter and had comtet theconclusion that, in the light of HOOPER'S previous conduct, it was impossiblefor us to employ him any more, although we realised his capabilities andhad turned the ddea down with some reluctance. As we saw the position,HOOPER would be quite capable of stringing up along indefinitely about. PIECKin order that we might pay his business expenses in going to Holland, whichwould certainly be considerable. He would probably keep our appetites whettewith regard to PIECK in order that we might continue to pay him, and we shouldnever know the real truth. Apart from that, if he ever had the opportunityof selling us and it was to his advantage to do so, we could not place theslightest reliance on his integrity.we would certainly give them every assistance in checking HOOPERE1Icorrespondence between this country and Holland. Meanwhile, therewas an answer required by the Board of Trade in connection with a proposafor various exhibitions in this country which would be partly run andfinanced by PIECK, with HOOPER acting as his agent. The Board of Tradehad evidently heard from the Commercial Attache at The Hague thatHOOPER was not a reliable person and were seeking our advice.ORIGINAL DOCUMENTNDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONRECORDSAprit R0/DWe had a meeting of the Appointments Board to-day, when weselected a promising looking engineer, a Yorkshireman, slightly tough,but seemingly an excellent fellow, for C.2 Sab. I do not know whetherhe will be able to run the section, but he should certainly know hisstuff in regard to machinery, particularly on the marine side. MeanwhilI have heard from Sinclair, who would consider giving usif thlatter were prepared to come, in nine months time.I raised at the meeting the question of minutes. Joe Spencerwill giveuus a careful minute of the Board's proceedings to-day, butthere remained the question of minuebes of the Directors' meetings.I thought personally that there ought to be an agenda, and that when amatter of policy was decided, or the D.G. gave instructions for anyaction,i should be recorded and circulated to the Directors. On thewhole I was inclined to think that this work should be undertaken byone of the Directors. Shaw wan very much in favour of something ofthe kind. I explained to him afterwards that I had raised this matterseveral years ago, but that the D.G. had said that he did not want anymore paper circulated. We might, however, perhaps reopen the question.20th January.a Dutchman, formerly employed by.came to see me.Heis now Security Officer at Fokkers, which Company is half owned bythe Dutch Govenment. He receives his pay from the Company. Paynterhas been having discussions with him and is taking him over Vickersaircraft factory, where he will be shown the various security arrange:ments.He told me that security at Fokkers was practically non-existentThere were no ordinary prophylactic security measures in force, and therewere a considerable number of known Communists employed. He hoped toget all this straightened out in due course, but clearly his task was noan easy one. He mentioned to me that he had leftowirto a disagreement, but that he still had the support of the organisationin his work at Fokkers.late of the Marines and formerly A.D.N.I.during the war, came to see me about his s.on-in-law, one Captainat present working in the A.G's department of the War office.did not see much chance of promotion even if he passed theStaff College and was looking elsewhere. I did not think that hesounded very promising as a candidate, and I made it very clear to hisfather-in-law what the limitations of this organisation were. Nevertheless, as a matter of courtesy I said that I would seeBoddington came to talk to me about Northern Ireland. He wonderedwhether the Northern Ireland Police should be a commitment of P.L.C.18.In view of his past connections with the Northern Ireland Police, hesaid he thought he could effect a very considerable liaison.I told him that I felt it difficult to separate the South andthe North, in spite of partition. There appeared to be little goingin the North with regard to Communism, due of course to the majorpreoccupation,orange and Green. There would certainly be no chanceof bringing them into any of our .B. schemes, and I thought, therefore,that things had better remain as they were. I knew Roger Moorepersonally and he always came to see me when he was in this country.As a matter of fact it would be unwise, I think, for Boddingtonto handle this laison, since there was some incident there during theperiod of the Black and Tans which resulted in Wickham, the InspectorGeneral, having Boddington thrown out of the country. This incidentis certainly still present in the mind of Roger Moore, whatever the otherPolice Officers in the R.U.C. may think. I do not in the least knowwhat the facts of this issue were.23rd January.I saw Newsam to-day. Firstly, I talked to him about the case ofthree Russians who ane to come over from Germany to broadcast for theB.B.C. for propaganda purposes. He agreed to these people beingallowed to come. I explained tha't we had gone into the matter ascarefully as we could, and that it also had the approval of the J.I.C.We could, of course, give no guarantee as to how the people concernedwere likely to turn out, but on the whole the case seemed to be areasonably straightforward one and justified on the facts.Newsam then told me that a meeting had been held last week todiscuss the defectors paper and the recommendations about rehabilitation,etc, but that he did not know the outcome. He understood that wehad been represented at this meeting. He himsellf had nominated Hutsonand Wheeler to look after these matters in future, and said that unlessthe circumstances were very exceptional, they would be empowered to dealwith any future cases.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONTHE EPUBLIC RECORDSACT1008old19.This IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDACT 3 DEPARTMENT (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS SECTION1958Carey Foster came to see me about Guy BURGESS. He is speakingtoAshley-Clarke, who is now head of the Personnel Dept. having succeededHarold Caccia (the latter has gone as Minister in Vienna). He wantedtoknow my views. Hill had told him that a prosecutionnunder the OfficialSecrets Act would lie against Guy BURGEES, but that for various reasonsit would be undesirable to proceed. I said that he could be quite surethat Hill would be right on his facts; it would be undesirable to proceed,for two reasons. Firstly, that one would not wish any further publicityin regard to S.I.S' affairs, and secondly, that Counsel for the Defencewould be able to say, for example,Althougha teonnca orTence was commiutea, we never llked to prosecute in cases ofthis kind. My own view was that Guy BURGESS was not the sort of personwhowoulddeliberatelypassconfidentialinformationtounauthorisedpartieshe was, however, extremely keen and enthusiastic in matters which interestedhim and would be easily induced by a man like Freddie KUH to say more thanhe ought to. So far as his drinking was concerned, I had gained theimpression that owing to a severe warning from a doctor, he had more or lessgoneon the wagon. I did not think that he often got wholly out of controlbut there was no doubt that drink loosened his tongue. Personally I shouldhave thought that a severe reprimand from somebody he respected might bethe answer to the present situation.At the D.G'S meeting to-day we discussed, t this request, the questionof Aubrey going to the Middle East. It seemed that Bill Magan had madea request for this visit some time ago; this had been postponed untilAubrey became thoroughly acquainted with the work here. Magan had, aslateas December, expressed a wish that Aubrey should visit Fayid, BaghdadandCyprus. It was more the ciphering procedure that he was going to lookinto than the routes of communication, which might in future be throughS.I.S.. to a greater degree than at present.I told the D.G. about confidential waster from Mrs. Grist's departmentwhich had been put into the incinerator and had blown clean up the chimney,when bits of the material were found on the roof, in the street, and else-where in fact one bit had blown into Malcom Cumming' window. Searchparties have been sent out and it is hoped that all wa's recovered.. In vievof this incident, somebody from the 6th floor is personally supervisingthe burning of the material.This has raised the question of a shreddirmachine, which cuts paper up into pieces the size of a pin head. Thisis,I think, the real answer. Everything in the Gristery should be shreddedbefore it leaves the 6th floor. Ittmay be that certain of our otherconfidential waste should also be shredded. The D.G. has asked me to lookinto this.20.I also spoke about the case of Elyell, who is going to Jugo-Slaviafor a holiday to stay with Charles Peake. The D.G. agreed to his going,provided his documents were satisfactory and provided, if he wereinterrogated at the frontier, he told the same story as Charles Peakewhen the application for his visa is made in Belgrade.I had a short talk with Walter Bell. He is evidently very interestedin Kenya and thinks there is a lot to be done, particularly in the way ofmoving about and seeing people, not only in Kenya but in the adjacentcountries. He thinks that the organisation is at present too much rootedto its desk.Holmes talked to me about Detective Officers' Conferences. He thinksthat we should say something to them about the general lines on which weare working with the S.Bs. Things have rather changed in the Police Forcelately, owing to the build up that we have given to the S.Bs. They areno longer the Cinderellas, but the Glamour Boys of the C.I.D. feel slightlyhurt at being left out of the picture. The answer is, I think, to talkto them on general lines, but to keep them off the B.1:A. leotures.Sir John Shaw, Kellar and Bamford came to discuss the transmissionof information to Pakistan.has arranged for the passing ofinformation about Pakistanis between the two countries. This is notwholly satisfactory, but there is little that we can do. We want toavoid, if possible, creating a precedent for passing information to thePakistan High Commissioner here in London.2lth January.I discussed the case of Aubrey with Spencer again,an subsequentlytold the D.G. that I thought on the whole there was a case for Aubreygoing to the Middle East. The D.G. accepted this and Aubrey is to go.I also arranged with Spencer to get shredding machines, if thisdid not involve too much expense. He thought that we should probably getther for nothing.I then mentioned the case of the keys. He said he thought theproposal was quite feasible and that he would get out a chart for thenight duty officer to check against the board when it was locked up.I took the D.G's meeting to-day. Graham said there had been acertain amount of Right Wing subversive activity. The Union Movementhad announced that they did ot intend to contest the General Electionsince they considered themselves too realistic a party to do so! OneMosleyite is, however, standing as an Independent. He is one, Symington,of soup fame.MOSLEY has been planning a further round of foreignvisits. He and Lady Mosley were intending to leave for South Americain the near future, but this has now been postponed owing to the non-receipt of a message from Madrid. B.1 said the reason for these tripsabroad, which were becoming more and more frequent, was somewha t obscure.It was thought probable that the visit to South America might be inconnection with the recruiting of former Nazis. Graham went on to sayI that asked he him thought about this the R.W. Fascist activity National should Congress be kept of more Labour, in mind which than appears hithert tc21.be a movement to recruit people from the Trade Unions. Grahamsaid he did not think this had very much significance at the moment.I asked how the case was progressing. John Marriott saidthatwas still under interrogation by S.I.S. but it seemed tobe going at rather a leisurely pace. The Surete have now been told, butSo far there have been no reactions. John said that the S.I.S.had been approached by an English newspapercorrespondent and askedif there was any truth in the story about thePolish Vice Consul at Lille, in whose office were found documentswhich indicated a leak from Fontainebleau.Thecorrespondenthadbeentold that copies of the doouments had been handed to the British Embassyin Paris. This was not in fact true,was told by Wibot that the documents had been "planted" on the PolishIn spite of this, however.the man is to be tried. T then asked what the outcome of thecase was vis a vis the French and the Americans. John said it isnotknown who the American is who may have unwittingly divulged the WesternUnion defence plansrt the member of the French General Staff concerned,whose identity has not yet been discovered. Roger said that as theplans concerned were Western Union ones, the French would be bound to saysomething about the matter. It was agreed that as this matter was oneof some urgency, SVI.S. should he urged to speed up their interrogatiorofHill said he had attended a meeting at the Home Office about the J.I.Cpaper on defectors. The Home Office have now agreed the paper. Theywere apparently worried about t he security risk of bringing a larger flowof defectors to this country. They have rather changed their tune itseems, since they had brought vast numbers of D.Ps over here in thepast, which would seem to constitute a far greater security risk.Dick asked under whose authority it rested to encourage defectors tocome over here. Serpell said that the Chiefs of Staff have agreed withthe thesis that defectors provide the most productive source ofintelligence at the moment. I said that Newsam had ruled that thesecases should in future go direct to Mr. Hutson and Mr. Weiler, unless theywere exceptional - in which case he himself should be consulted.Perfect said that the general opinion of the Police was that thethe new scheme for holding the meetings on a C.P. area basis washighly satisfactory. I asked Mann how things were going in Scotlandinthisrespect.Hesaidthatthesystemhadbeenworkingupthereforsome time now, since there was in fact only one Communist area.Perfect said that it had now been arranged that theere should be aninterchange between Police Forces of 0.2 lists of Category B. firms.Perfect said he had had a meeting with General Watson and Mr. Richardsof the Railway Executive regarding their future liaison with this office.It had been agreeit that their S.B. officers, who had been hand-picked, shoulattendtheordinary Police S.B. conferences. As they are t,however,very well versed in Communist matters, it was agreed that they shouldcome here forrinstruction. Perfect said that Mitchelll had agreed to thisFurnival-Jones spoke about the Americans placing secret contracts withfirms in this country, and in particular with Flight Refuelling Ltd.He said this latte arrangement was made direct by Washington through the theAssistant Air Attache at the American Embassy here.EONDER SECTON RECORDSSECTION2cic22.latter's suggestion that Air Cormodore Paynter vent down to discuss thesecurity of the contract. The As istant Air Attache is now going backto Washington, his mission having been completed, but when saying good-bye it emerged that the Americans are going to but a number of techniciansand emonstrators into the Ministry of Supply to work there as art of thatMinistry. This will mean a good deal of placing of secret Americanworia, particularly in connection with the aircraft industry.It was agreed that this new contingency would have considerablerepercussio on C.2., but that the Security side of the matter must bedealt with by us and not the Americans.Furnival-Jones spoke about the recent visit to this office ofconversation now with that the security of defence projects in industrySecurity Officer at Fokkers in Holland. He said it had emerged inin Holland was non-existent. He said he felt that we should possibly haveto report this fact to S.I.S and the J.I.C.Roger said that this question was tho be raised at the next meetingconnection with the firm of Phillips: He said that aof the Military Security Committeeofg Treaty Powers, is inpaperbeingprepared in this office, but he felt that we shouldalso ask for contributions from the other members of the Committee.ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE SLICRECORDSACT 19582010Furnival-Jones spoke about a very interesting report obtained fromHone Kong on an investigation,carri carried out by undoubted the Supemntendent of sabotageregardingcasethere to a ship which was sunk in the harbour as a result of a home-made ombandaGovenmentchemist,anplaced on board. The culprits were apparently twib northern Chinesebut it was thought that it would probably be impossible to identify them.He said he was going further into the matter and hoped to get details ofthe mechanism of the bomb.Kellar said that a telegram had been received frorn the Governor ofHong Kong to the effect that if there should be a blockade arrived. of the Islandhe opinion could of the meeting seemed to be that he would find this difficultdealwiththesituationuntilreinforcementeThe generalif the Chinese population adopted a policy of non-co-operation.Potter said that the Chief Constable of Pembrokeshire had askedwe could not create a precedent b taking on this commitment, and thatthis office to vet a candidate for his Police Force. We all agreed that theC.C.! hould be told that he would get a far better answer if he appliedto the C.C. of the area frorn which the man came. It was agreed that D.C.should deal with this matter.Roger told the meeting that a new officer had been found for the sabotagesection, namely Mr. Fenton, who is a trained engineer and is bb join theoffice on February 6th.Peter Reid came to lunch with me and returned to the office, when he sla(the D.G., Dick and Rogen. He seemed to find this useful.23.I sawat the request ofhisfather-in-law.a Marine, was A.D.N.I. in the early stages of the war.is going up for the Staff College, but even if he gets in heys that there are about sixty or seventy other Captains senior to himselfWho have also passed the Staff College, and that he does not consider hisprospects in the Army to be particularly bright.I told him that we were always reluctant to dig people out of a pensionabcareer, and I impressed on him the limitations that there were to promotionin an organisation such as ours: the field was small and highly agmpetitativas far as the higher grades were concerned. Apart from this, if he failedto make the grade during his probabionary period of two years, he might findhimse in serious difficulties. He would clearly like to think all thisover, but on the whole seemed prepared to burn his boats.I cannot say that I found him a very impressive character, althoughthere may be more in him than appears on the surface. His father-in-lawevidently thought highly of him, but I cannot attach any importance to that.His qualifications are not very impressive. He hasvirtually no languages, but it could, I suppose, be said that the entranceexamination to Woolwich is harder than Sandhurst! If attachedofficerswerewanted in S.I.M.E. and S.I.F.E., I thinkwould be keen to go, butit may be that the Army could produce somebody of higher calibre.Skardon went down to Harwell to see FUCHS at the latter's request.He has just telephoned to say that FUCHS has confessed that from 1942to February 1949 he was active as a Soviet agent and had given thessians everything he could, including details about the manufacture ofthe atomic bomb.Dick and I discussed the matter with the D.G. and came to the conclusionthat there was nothing that we could do to-night.We until wehear Skardon's full account.ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDDEPARTMENT25th January.RECORDSSkardon gave an account of his interview with FUCHS to the D.G. Dick,larriott, Robertson and myself. It is difficult to say what the decidingfactor was in FUCHS' mind when he asked for the interview. It is believedthat Cockoroft had said to him,w) he was old tha t he would have to leaveHarwell, that i.t was a pity he had not been frank with the securitySkinner, authorities, his and immediate it was superior also thaught at Harvell. that he had Meanwhile some conversation his somewhat with intimaterelations with Mrs. Skinner had come out. All these factors, coupled wi tha certain amount of erosion due to his earlie r interrogation by Skardon,may have caused him to unburden himself. In the light of what he has said,it is clear that vanity plays a great part. For two hours he tried toexplain his own mental make-up, without saying anything about what he had doneas a result of it. He talked a good deal about his earlier life and his fighangainst the Nazis he had not felt that any country except Russia wasreally sincere in their efforts to defeat them and all that they stood for.He had to some extent been reinforced in this view when he was arrested on theantbreak of war and deported to Canada. He would dHke to have takena moretive share in the efforts of this country. He then made it clear tha t hehad a completely split personality; he believed that there were certainidealogical loyalties which transcended all personal loyalties. Theconsersatio continued in this way untill lunch time without any statement astowhat he had done. Skardon lunched with him and as soon as they had24.finished FUCHS appeared anxious that the interrogation should be continuedimmediately He had considered it a duty to the world that he should passinformation regarding his work on atomic energy to the Russians. He wasanxious to do something to heb them in 1942 and had consulted a friendwhose name he refused under any circumstances to divulge. In thisway he had obtained an introduction to a Russian, whose name he did notknow: he had met him on a number of occasions, and when he went to theU.S. he was contacted there in the usual clandestine way without knowingthe names of any of the individuals. He met people in New York and inBoston and in Santa Fe when he was at Los Alamos. He had begun by passingt e products of his own brain, (this, I think, had obviously eased hisconscience at the outset) but ultimately had passed everyting he could lay hishands on down to details of the atomic bomb. He was asked whether he wassurprised that the Russians had succeeded in letting off the bomb. He saidthat in fact he was, although, of course, he knew that they had the requisitdata to work on but did not think that they would e able to complete theengineering project so quickly. After his return to this country hisconnections became less frequent until February 1949, when they ceased allto-gether. His reasons for cooling off were that although he still thoughtthatCommunism was the thing fon the world. he did not altogether like theRussian Government. In his onversation he made it perfectly plain thatin his view he was quite indespensable at Harwell, that the work must go on,that Cockcroft was no good, and that therefore from the point of view ofthe project and also the welfare of the staff at Harwell, his services shouldhe retained. He evidently thinks that he can, without too much difficulty,persuade the authorities to retain his services. This is, I think, where hisvanity and megalomania come in. He did have to admit under pressure that,inspiteofthefactthathe was a law unto himself; the giving of the atomicbomb to Russia was a bad thing. It occurs to me that he may have beendisillusioned by their attitude on the Atomic Energy Commission. Headmitted having received roughly E10o for his services: he had at firstbeen relluctant to accept any money and this sum had barely covered hisexpenses. He had finally agreed to accept $100 and no more, purely as atoken payment and as an indications of a bond between him and the ideas forwhich the Russians stood.FUCHS is clearly about as good an example of completely muddledthinking that it would be possible to find. Psychologically the case isofvery great interest as showing the type of person we are up against. Hereferred to his previous connection with Skardon, when the latter said to himthat if he had not been engaged in espionage, it must have been his twinbrother. He told Skardon he was right; that his twin brother was theother half of him which enabled him to betray his comrades and the peoplehe was working with for a higher ideal - he, in fact, kept the two thingsentirely apart.Dick and Roger and I have been reviewing this disolosure from thepoint of view of the action that we have taken in this case and in many others.Duringthewar,whenFUCHSwassenttoAmerica,peoplelikeBeaverbrook-and even Winston - all took the view that anti-Nazism was a positive asset.It was in this atmosphere that FUCHS Had been taken on. When he returnedhewasallreadyinHarwellbeforewewereaskedtovethim.Therewasaconsiderable amount of argument and we finally decided that it was our dutyto infom Atomic Energy of what we knew, and to say that in our view it didnot add up to anything positive. All that we did know at the time was thaFUCHS had been associated with some youth movement which was fightingthe Nazis in Germany, and that when he was interned in Canada he hadassociated with the Communist Fritz KAHLE in the camp. This did not seemsurprising, since a large number of the other inmates vere pro-Nazi.It25.wouldllofucourse have been possible for us to have taken a stronger lineabout FUCHS' establishment at Harwell, but I am quite certain that in view ofS past services to atomic energy and the importance of the position heneld in the whole project, it would have got us nowhere. If we always tooka cornpletely rigid line, Government Departments would merely get intocase of this sort down" and ultimately any advice we gave would be dis- athe way of saying: "Oh well, of course the Security Service would turnregarded. On the counter-espionage side, I think there is no doubt thatif we had turned the heat on to FUCHS when he came back to this country, inthe same way that we have been doing in the last six months, we shouldundoubtedly have bowled him out. But it is difficult to see in the lightof the information available why we should have made hrhm the subject ofspecial investigations any more than many others whom we have got on ourbooks. It is quite clear from what FUCHS has said that no agentwould have disclosed to us what he was doing, since with the exceptionof his one friend, who effected the original alintroduction he maintainsthat he has no other Collaborators outside the Russian circle. This leadsoneto a general consideration in regard to P oles and others who areemployed in places like R.A.E. Farnborough; they are all, I think, asecurity risk, and the safe thing would be of course to turn them all outbut I am pretty certain that no Government Department would stand for it.One interesting point that I have forgotten to mention was that FUCHS said,in the course of the interrogation, that one of his reasons for ceasing topass information was that he had come to the conclusion that he liked theway of life in this country. It will be seen how inconsistent FUCHS isin his reasoning: on the one hand he sets himself up as a knd of God andtalks of ideological laws Which transcend all personal loyalties, and on thether he admits his fallibility both in regard to assessing the Russianovernment ad the modd of life for which this country stands.26th January.I saw Perfect and Mann about the Detective Officers Conference whichis to be held in Edinburgh on February I asked Mann to ascertainwhat subjects Edinburgh would like us to talk on. The D.G. has expressedhis willingness to be present.I discussed with Miss Bagot and Kitchin further revisions to thepaper on Communism in Africa. It seemed to me that we had now reachedthe stage where we must make representations to the J.I.C. It seemd fairlyclear that the J.I.S. are not really competent to handle a paper of thiskind unless we and S.I.S. are sitting on their laps. The possible solutionwould be for us to attend a meeting with the J.I.S. when the generalplanning of the paper is discussed, and thereafter to consider the first drafin conference with the J.I.S. team. This might in the end save us a lotof trouble. I have asked that a letter should be prepared, stating whathas happened in this particular case and making proposals.27th January.Max Knight has had a discussion with William Norman EWER, who waspparently quite friendly and ready to disclose his past When he was workingunder cover of the Federated Press for the Russians. I have not seenMax's report yet, but I understand that quite gratuitously EWER issued awarning about Freddie KUH, who certainly had worked for the Russians in the26.past and might well be doing so still.of course, knows more aboutFreddie KUH than anybody else. Ve know of his contact with the Russians,Czechs, and the Poles, but such is the nature of his work that it isimpossible to say, by the ordinary means available.te us when KUH'Swork passed from high-grade journallism to espionage.FUCHS. has made a statement to Skardon which incriminates him fairlywell. This will be supported by statements from Arnold and also fromCockcroft. The difficulty is to avoid any accusation of inducement of atemporal kind, e.g. if he could say that he was told that he could remainat Harwell if he made: a complete confession and that he acted on thatmotive in making his statement both to ourselves and to Arnold, aprosecution would be extremely difficult if not out of the question.If,on the other hand, he was merely urged to get the whole thing off his chestand put himself right with his employers whom he had been deceiving,thecase would be a clear one. In fact, in his tatement he has very muchstressed the morall side, although I should be inclined to think that hismotives may well have been mixed. It could, of course, alwaysbesaidthat if any suggestion were made of his continuing his work at Harwellit only applied to a confession that during the war years he had let hisenthusiasm run away wi th him, and that such activities had ceased when hejoined Harwell. In fact, of course, he now tells us that he was activeup to February, 1949.Irvine came to tell me about his visits to Western Union countrieson the question of a War Room. He has had a farrIy atisfactory answerfrom Belgium, Holland and Luxembourg, and has got some concessions out ofthe French, although the position there cannot be said to be whollysatisfactory.clearly wants to maintain control outside theimmediate zone of the fighting; thiB will not, however, necessarilypreclude a discussion on the lines that we had previously suggested.28th January.T discussed with the D.G. the case ofMay hew, May hew, theUnder Secretary of State at the Foreign Office, when Visiting the I.D.O.the other day noticed an old University acquaintance, onewhomhe described to Admiral Daniel, the Commandant, as a "fellow traveller".When Mitchell called on Mayhrew, he expressed regret at having made thisstatement; he said thathad been a member of the Labour Clubin 1938 and often seemed to take the Communist viewpoint in discussions.His information did not go further than that. He said, however,thathewould like to ring up Dennis Healey, a University friend of his, who hadknownwell. healey said thathad been a memberOf the Communist underground. When Mayhew asked him how he knew he saidthathehadbeenamemberhimself! The Admirall, who is purple at thegills and thheatening to throwout of his establishment neck andcrop, has been aallmed down on the understanding that we will conducta careful investigation.On loolcing uprecords it appears that his real name isand that his father was of Russian origin, naturalisedBritish, and that his mother was nee(a Latvian name).is now employed at the I.D.C., dealling th administratior mattersand seeing mosby abyof the papers that go through the institution.ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINEDNDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONTTHE PUBLIC HECORDSAOT 1958 April Lo1o27.Graham Mitchell has at last received voluminous papers on theactivities of BUNTING and others in the groundnuts scheme. They donot alter our previous views, that Strachey is seeking a cloak to coverup the deficiencies of the Groundnuts Corporation by drawingtth Communistred herring across it.There is no doubt that BUN'TING is a Communist, and there may beothers there. He has consequently become a focal point for grievances,of which there are probably many justifiable ones. The Corporatio couldquite easily refuse to renew his contract, which in any case terminatedon his return on leave to this country. They are, however, trying to getthe Colondial Office, and in particular Cohen, to say that his presencein East Africa is undesirable on Communist grounds. Unfortunately theP.M. has endorsed the recommendations of Strachey - that the SecurityService should carny out a thorough investigation and that carefulconsideration by the Secretary of State for the Colonies shoulld be givento the risk that he may be accepting in BUNTING'E return to East Africa.30th January.Glazebrook arrived to-day and was seen by the D.G. and myself. Heasked for our views about an M.I.5 in Canada. I said that I would notlike to tender views on what should be done in another country withouta great deal of knowledge, which I did not altogether possess. On theother hand, it seemed to me that it would be a mistake to set up an M.I.5in Canada, and that it would be far better to build on the existingresources of the RAC.M..P. to give them powers finterceptionnand generallyenhance the importance of that side of their work.It was fairly evident to me that Glazebrook had more on less reachedthe same conclusion. The D.G. told him about his experiences in Africaand his recomme commendatior that our activities there should be carried withinthe S.B. and the Police.We had an Appointments Board to-day, when we saw.of theForeign Office. We thought that, subject to his Foreign Office referencebeing satisfactory, he would certainly be worth a trial. There were oneor two minor things about his slightly Foreign Office manner that did notaltogether meet with the approval of the Board.buy, further and property authorised in Hong Joe Spencer Kong. to We negotiate decided with the office of Works to onAibethe D.G's meeting, we considered a proposal that it to ould buy be or unwise rent28.the rental, which is about 21,350 a year.31st Januany.I iscussed with Hollis the line we should take about theSecurity Executive at next Wednesday' meeting.At the D.G's meeting to-day Dick White told the meeting aboutthe latest developments in thecase.Dick said he did not think the Suretewoulld have much difficulty in pin-pointing the member 0f the FrenchGeneral Staff concerned, since there were in fact only five Frenchofficers at Fontainbleau and there was other evidence for identification.As regards the Ameidcannin the case.has said that he sent outa message requesting funds for a Frenchman and an American, whichseems to indicate that the American was not acting unwittingly.Heshould be easy to identify since there are only two Americans atFontainebleau.Graham Mitchell said there vias not much more to report in the"Lancashire Hotpot" case. We are in cllose touch with the ChiefConstable through B.1.F.Everything SO far confirms our originalview, that this is a defensive security measure on the part of the C.P.There are continuing indications of contact with the Russians throughchannels at King Street, and there is still some indication that workis going on in onnection with D.Ps, but the position is not yet clear.Graham told the meeting about the documents received in the caseof BUNTING. The Ministry of Food have apparently asked that inaddittoi to handling the case of BUNTING, we should also vet all thewhite members of the groundnuts scheme. It was agreed by the meetingthat we should protest against this latter suggestion.Joe Spencer said that he had had an fficial note from the WarOffice on the irregular disclosure Of official information inside theWar Office, where there had apparently been a number of examples ofintentional and unintentional disclosures of this kind. All staffhave apparently been advised to tighten up their security measures.Perfect said he had had a talk with Mr. Richards of the RailwayPolice, when it had been agreed that the Railway S.B. officers coveringthe six railway regions, should come here for courses in the same wayas the ordinary Police .B. officers. He said the C.0s are to beapproached and asked to invite the Railway S.B. officers to attendtheir S.B. conferences in the various regions.Perfect refereed to a point which was dedided at one of theD.G's meetings in December last, namely, tha P.L.S. should beinformed, for record purposes, when officer of other sections visitedthe various Police Forces. He said this had not altogether borked out,particularly in the case of the Metropolitan Police. I pointedout that the Metropolitan Police, unfortunately did not come in underthe general scheme. I said I had spoken to Howe and Burt about this,who were both in favour of coming in under the scheme, but there wereothers who would not agree.29.Alec Kellar said we had been asked by the Home Office whetherwe had any comment to make regarding the granting of political asylumto personnel of the Chinese Embassy who do not agree with their presentregime. He said we had replied that we had no objection in principle,but that it must be borne in mind that there may be Communistsympathisers amongst them.Roger Hollis ssid we have heard from Washington that Portugaland Italy have agreed to the security check under the Atlantic Pact,and are anxious that it should be carried out as soon as possible.We have, however, as yet had no reactions from the Northern Group.This IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT BETAINEDIN DEPARTMENST UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958. Apn 201030.THIS IS A COPYIN ORIGINAL DEPARTMENT DOCUMENT UNDER RETAINED SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT1958Apal2010Colonel Warren, Chief Constable of Buckinghamshire, camein to pass the time of day. He reminded me of themucaseduring the war - one of the first parachutists who came down inBucks. Just as he had got his aerial up, a pig charged the wholething and crashed it to the ground!came over and I gave hir the story about FUCHS, in thepresence of Dick, John, James, Skardon. and Hill. He realised,perhaps more than anyone else, what the dangers of the confessiongave throrn out on the grounds of inducement, but on learning ofthe full statement he thought thatwe ought to get away with it. He suggested that on Skardon'introduction he might take another statement, but in disoussionwe realised that if it was the kind of statement we wanted, namely,that it was principally his desire to put himself right with hisfriends and to make retribution that had caused him to come clean,there would be considerable advantage in the course proposed.Ifhe refused to male a statement, it would not really matter, butif he accepted the proposal and then said that he had confessed owingto a suggestion made to him that if he di so he might possiblyremain at Harwell, we should be very awkwardly placed indeed.said tha t he would like to talk to Howe, for whoseopinion on matter of law he had a great respect, and that he would comeand see us again in the morning.lat February.At the J.I.C. to-day ve considered only the report on HongKong.had just received a telegram about the recentdisturbances there in connection with the tramway strike. Itappears that a representative of the L.W. Federation of Trade Unionsin Hong Kong had recently been to Canton, and there was a reportto the effect that he had instructions to hot things up. Theresult had been a demonstration and inflammatory speehes, ending insomething of a riot with the use of tear gas; 50 people had beeninjured, but the matter had been successfully handled. Whatseemed significant was that the trouble makers were not employeesof the tramway company, but from other Unions. Several arrestswere made and there are to be deportations. It is possible thatthis may foreshadow the beginning of internal. disturbances in HongKong prior to a demand for the return of the .Colony, but it is earlydays to express any firm opinion.I toldabout the BUNTING case, and he was some-what irritated by the fact that nobouy had said anything to hir inhis own department.31.Burt came over, when we had a further discussion about theFUCHS case. We concluded that the best thing was to hear firstthe views of the D.P.P. If he was not satisfied with the caseas it stood, then we should be very grateful for Burt's offer to takeafurther statement. H1l and Skardon are to see the D.P.P. thisafternoon.Roger and I went over to a ommittee meeting, chaired by Cornish.of the Home Office, to consider the future of the InterdepartmentalCommittee on Security and its shape in wan. We did little beyondhearing up varrious points in the papers already dirculated.I madeitclear that the purpose of the Security Executive, as set out inthe papers, namely, an organisation to deal with all Fifth Columnwas correctly stated, in that in 1940 Lord Swinton had SO describedits functions, having entirely fverlooked the fact that the FifthColumn was the sole raison i'etre of the Security Service. Theresult had been serious confusion and a diversion of energy fromthe things that mattered to trivialities and scare reports. Ultimately,however, the Security Executive had settled down to a useful task inco-ordinating Interdepartmental Security matters, in that it had areall function and would certainlly have a similar function in any futurecrisis.At our next meeting we are to consider the structure of theorganisation and its position in relation to higher authority.We thinkthat the Chairman should be a high-grade Civil Servant who would carryweight with the Cabinet Committee if necessary and should come underthe Minister of Defence, or if he does not exist, the Cabinet. Onlyin this way can Interdepartmental disputen, unresolved as betweenMinisters, be finally and expeditionsly settled.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNOER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLO RECOHDSACT 1958 Aal 20(032.THISIS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDNDEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTIONRECOROSAOT 1958 Aprd 2000Hill and Skardon went over to see the D.P.P. and showed him statementsthat had been obtained from FUCHS. He swept aside all the arguments aboutinducement and expressed himself as confident that a successful prosecutioncould take place. Without even collecting his py jamas he left forCardiff to obtain the Attorney General's fiat.The proposal is that FUCHS should be arrested to-morrow atShell Mex House. Immediately afterwards. his premises at Harwell shouldbe searched. Perrin will summon FUCHS and Burt will make the arrest.2nd February.I saw Newsam about a case of, towhich he readily agreed.Itold him, off the record, about the FUCHS case.We warned theF.B.I. several days ago about FUCHS'E imminent arrest and they are nowsending over a special agent.Dick and I attended a meeting in Roger Makins' room at theForeign Office, at which Perrin was present, to discuss a point made byPortal.Portal had felt that, as a matterof policy which might have far-reaching consequences on Anglo-American co-operatior in the atomic field,it was essential that it should be made clear to the American authoritiesand the public at the outset tha t FUCHS had transmitted information tothe Russians both in the United States and in the U.K. If this were notdone, it was certain that the arrest of FUCHS in the U.K. would cause anoutory against British security, and that even though subsequent discllosureswould make it plain that the major leakage took place from Loe Alamos, agood deal of the original mud was likely to stick.To meet this point two charges have been framed. The firstone, relating to FUCHS' activities in the United States, and the secondone to those in the U.K. We emphasised, from the purely technicalangle, that the Security Service would prefer to see the American chargeomitted, since it might possibly embarrass the F.B.I, in the investigationof the Americ end of the affair.The Foreign Office, while expressing a certain anxiety that theAmerican charge might appear to be dragged in by the heels and to savourof policital maneouvring, agreed that the point made by Portal was anoverriding one.IT was therefore decided to allow the American charge to go in andto send a telegram to Hoyer Millar in Washington in answer to a request, of thebroad through facts Patterson, and of the instructing charges whi ch were being made, but in dealing and could with nothimtoinformtheStateDepartmentthe Press to say merelly that the whole matter sub judice33.therefore, be disclosed.leave fficulty out the with American the D. of P.P. who, for legal reasons, was anxious toOn returning to the office I found that Hill had been having somethat we had just had with the Foreign told Office the D. and of he P.P. subsegnently of the conversations decided tocharge.Ireverse the American the order charge of the charges, putting the British charge first andBritish by the fact that the second charge He thought needed this additional could be proof preperly of FUCHS! explainedsecond.to Boston, Massachusetts, as the place of FUCHS' meeting with the Russiannationality. In the American charge he had omitted the referenceagent and had substituted the words Min the U.S.A".telegram Washington. He told me that he had just seen Sir WilliamI to then spoke to Sir Roger Makins and gave him clearance for hiswho that entirely in the agreed with the proposals, with the exception of one comment; Strang,and the British original charge draft had only charges mentioned we had pin-pointed the U.K. (the Boston, Massachusetts, hadhad been made that to there Skerdon, was no mention of London in the statement reason that FUCHS for thisSir William Strang's although this had waa come met out by the in other exclusion conversations). of Boston,point,however,Massachusetts in the final charges.work here.I gave a talk to some S.B. officers on the general principles or ourOwing to delays in framing the charges against FUCHS, Burt did notarrive at Shell Mex House until 3.45. FUCHS having waited three quarters ofan hour. He was then introduced to Burt and arrested. He subsequentlyasked to see Perrin, to whom he said: "You realise what this means?" PerrinHarwell" said: "I realise it means that we shall be deprived of your services atFUCHS said: "It means more tthan that - Harwell will not be ableto go on". According to what we heard from Burt afterwards, FUCHS was notin any sense in a communicative mood; he seemed stunned by events.3rd Februany.FUCHS appears to be in better shape, but we cannot, of course,approach him unless he makes a request.Newsam asked to see me about H.O.Ws on de COUROY and his associates.He questioned the propriety of using the Home Secratary's Warrantin the case of de COURCY and his associates. He thought that the H.O.W.could only be justified in a case where the Defence of the Realm or thesecurity of the State was involved and that, if our sole interest amountedto curiosity about the sources from which de COURCY obtained his information,the use of the H.O.W. would not be jusitifiable.I explained to him that part of de COURCY'S technique was to tallk toGovernment offbcials and to imply that he himself already knew a great dealowing to his connections with British Intelligence sources. This hadinthe past led to rather serious disclosures and in one case some years agohad involved a high-ranking officer in Court Martial proceedings. Apart34.from this, there was a danger that de COURCY'S gourcee might be usedby he Soviet Government for deception purposes. Further, that theChiefs of Staff had now become SO interested in de COURCY'E "Digeat",due to his probhecy about the atomic bomb explosion in Russia, thatthey were d nclinad to think that his sources might be more valuablethan Government sources. It is, therefore, extremely desirable toascertain precisely what these sources were. There was moreover anadded rigl in that it seemed likely that de COURCY was also impartinghis information to the Americans.Newsam appreciated all these points but stuok to his view thatunless we could satisfy the Secretary of State that the action weproposed was necessary from the point of view of the Defence of the Realm,or the security of the State, he felt that he would be in difficultiesif he asked him to sign the Warrant. I said that we would review theposition and see whether we could justify the Warrants on these grounds.I asked S.L.B. to let me know how he thought we could comply with the S.ofSwishes.Lith February.Cumming came to tell me that PEIERLS had asked to see FUCHS,and S.B. are going to try and install a mike in the waiting roonAs this was clearly a matter between S.B and the Governor, I didnot feel it incumbent upon us to make any approach to Newsam. Weconfined ourselves to saying that if there vere any results we shouldbe interested.6th February.Lish Whitson has arrived and Johnny Cimperman is somewha hurtthat the Bureau has not kept him informed. We have explainedtohimthat it was difficult for us to do SO as this was a matter ofindoctrination We have shown Lish FUCHS' statement, and have had totell him that we cannot give him a copy of the statements as the wholecase is sub judice; we cannot, in fact, at the moment give him any veryuseful intelligence leads.Perfect and Holmes came to talk to me about the Dockyard Police.When alleged acts of sabotage take place in H.M. Dockyards, involvingratings or dockhands there is no officer to whom we can go to get startingpoints. There should really be a properly trained Security Officerin the Dockyard and, outwardly at any rate, a member of the DockyardPolice. Only in t is way Would it ever be possible to get to the bottomof cases of the kind. I said that I would take the matter up witheN.I.D.At the Direetors' meeting to-day we reviewed the new Chart. Isuggested that I should be shown as covering all Divisions, includingFinance, since I was one of those who had to sign cheques in the absenceof .F. The D.G. agreed that this was right.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDNDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT1958Apend201035.This IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDNOEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4 OF THE PUBLIC IC RECORDSACT 1958Aprd(o1o7th February.The wires are red hot. Hoover, finding himself in somethingof a jam, is obviously taking British security for a ride. He hastestified before the Congressional Committe on Atomic Energy and toldthem, off the record, that FUCHS had made a confession. This appearedintheNewYork Times. We have pointed out very forcibly to Lish,and also to Patterson, that if such a thing were published over hereit would be contempt of court and might jeopardise the whole case.We have equally made it plainer than ever to Lish tha't we cannotin the circumstances give him copies of the statements put in inevidence.Hoover's next move wan to go before some other committee andsay that the ritish made a much of the FUCHS case, MEMEDt that Britishlegal procedure was cumbersome, and that British security was nonco--operative. These statements appeared in the Press, when Hooversent for Patterson and denied their authenticity. Vle ane fairlyconfident, however, that Hoover is being somewhat unsorupulous.His position is particularly awlward, since his appropriationsane up before Congress and he is asking for an ino rease of hisgrant.Ve have exxplained to Lish that the doublle charge on activitiesin the U.K. and in Amnerica was necessary, as FUCHS had a dmitted handingover information in both countries. In fact, it was in the U.S.A.thathe handed over the know--hov of the atomic bomb and this nformationV/O uld weigh very heavily with the Judge. The second charge has, ofcourse, increased Hoover's difficulties, since he may well be asked howit was that FUCHS coulld be meeting this Russian agent in Boston, New36.York, and Santa Fe, without the matter being detected. His only answeris that British security cleared FUCHS, and this will clearly be playedup to the full.There have been demands from B.J.S.M. Washington that we shouldgive them details about the security clearance. We are quite determinedthat this would be wrongin principle; we have the support of the ForeignOffice and D. At. En. Meanwhile, the P.M. has asked for a statement onhow the security clearance was given. We have given him a detailedreply, stating that if he wants to know the fuller cincumstances thesecan be supplied. On review of the whole case. we are certain that insimilar circumstances we should act again in precisely the same way, andindeed, nobody would have listened to us if we had not done so.Mrs. PEIERLS has written a first class letter to FUCHS, in which shetells him that the only thing he can do is to assist the authorities inevery way he can. She reproaches him for having deceived her and herhusband and for having let down all his colleagues, both here and inAmerica.Graham has been to see me about the arrival here of a foreigner,believed to be a Czech, who has an urgent message for Harny POLLITTpersonally. It has been arranged that one of the Welsh detectiveand point the man out to the local Pollice. The idea is to house him (?)officers, who is here on a course, should travel on the same trainand establish his identity. Ve do not know the purpose of his visit,except that it is highly secret; he may be carrying election funds forthe Party.Newsam said that we coulld obtain clearance for any visitors toFUCHS direct to Philip Allen of the Home Office.Dick then spoke about the Czech agent, STRAUSS. He said he hadnot got clearance from the Home Office for applying for a search warrant.Special Branch in the near future, when the action to be takn in thisThe man is also to be interrogated We are putting up the evidence to casewill be decided. He said he felt there were ample grounds for takingaction in this case, since we had copies of questionnaires passed to STRAUSSby the Czech Embasry, and also one of his own reports to the Czech EmbassyJT. raised the question ofinforming the Foreign office and S.I.S. of this case. It was agreedthat they should be informed.The D.G. asked Dick to say something about the BUCHS case. Dicksaid that the position had not materially alltered from the reports37.given in the newspapers. Hill said he thought there would be acomital for trial on Friday next, in which tase the trial would probablytake place at the end of February.In this connection, Perfect said that he had been asked for anaccount of the case by O.C. Berkshire. Dick said he thought the C.C.should be told that the case was all in the newspapers and that wecould not give any further information while it was sub judice. Wewould, however, probably be able to let him have a report art the conclusionof the case.I said that Lish Whitson seemed to be far more concerned withfinding out exactly where the offences in Ame erica were committee thananything else. HI wondered if this was perhaps a question of jurisdiction.It'was agreed that as Lish had seen the actual sta tement, and as we did notin fact know the exact location of the meeting places, we could not domore.Roger said he had had conversations with Reilly of the ForeignOffice on the question of the security check of the Atlantic Treaty Powers.He said it is hoped tha Irvinewi go to Rome for this purpose on thel4th of t is month and then on to Portugal. He said there had stillbeen no cllearance for the Scandinavian countries.The D.G. asked Roger what the position was with regard tothe booklet on Interdepartrental Security. Roger siad that this had notbeen generally issued yet, but that he would speak to r.Hewison about it.I told the meeting which Roger and I attended on the shape andform to be taken by the Security Executive in time of war.Gerad dTempler rang up. He was Juet back from the United States,where he seems to have reached a fairly satisfactory agreement about thepassing of information to third Povers. He daid that he was seeingtheChiefs of Staff and would probably want to know the reactions in Amnericato the FUCHS case, I bold him roughly what had happened and impressedupon him the importance of not disclosing anything while the case wassub judice.Dick, Roger, Irvine and I had a discussionabout our attitude to the Western Union'a War Roor. We agreed thepaper, which is to be incorporated in Irvine's memorandum setting outthe views of all the Powers concerned.was slightly embarrassed, as the Clandestine Committeehad apparently been bounced byinto an agreement that C.I.organisation would not be touched on pending a solution of the Frenchninisterial difficulty. For this reason,took exception tosome of the wording.In the end it was decided that Irvine would put up a furtherdraft for clearance with S.I.S. IT seems that the Dutch and Belgiansare not quite So sorupulous as S.I.S. and are quite prepared to talk withone voice at the Clandestine Committee and another at the SIC. COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENI UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECOROSACT 1958. Aprl Qoio38.8th Februany.Dick had a meeting at 10.45 with Roger Makins and Perrin todiscuss replies to Washington telegrams. These drafte were subsequentlyconsidered at a meeting of the Atomic Energy Commission, which Dickand I attended.The first point was the attendance at the trial. It was agreedthat if csible permissions should be obtained for Cimperman to attendthe proceedings and to remain in Court if it were decided to hold partof the trial in camera.Philip Allen, representing the Home Office, raised a typicalNewsam point. Having indicated the dangers of a leakage of thecamera proceedings in the U.8.. he asked what Minister would beresponsible or Questions in Parliament. He thought that eitherthe Foreign Office or the Attorney General should reply. Newsamevidently wanted to protect the Home Secretary against having to"carry the can'!It was decided to refer the matter to the Attorney General.The impossibility of handing over the statements was emphasised,and with regard to the accusation of cumbersome procedure, it was thoughtthat the Americans might be remindad of the HISS case which had just beenconcluded after hearings lasting two years.Brigadier Cornwalll-Jones then piped up on behalf of the Chiefsof Staff. What steps, he said, are being taken to see that this kindof thing does not happen again. All eyes were turned on him. I replierthat ways means of obtaining this sort of thing were under onstantoonsideration, but that in cases where a man was so well-placed as FUCHS,the possibilities of detection were bound to be slight - in fact he wouldnot probably make contact with the Russian agent more than three or fourtimes a year. It was, however, possibly for consideration at a laterstage whether people of alien origin should be employed on projects ofthis kind and whether a more rigid standard of vetting should be under-taken. This matter had also been discussed on s-occasions andthere were many weighty arguments on both sides. This reply seemed tosatisfy the.meeting, except Cornvall-Jones, who came up to me fterwardsand suggested that possibly the D.G. might come and talk to the Chiefsof Staff before the next meeting. I said that 1 would certainly mehtionthe matter, but that in fact I thought the proposal was a bit premature,since the whole matter was sub judice.In one of the telegrams Acheson is to be asked, if a uitableopportunity occurred, whether he was entirely satisfied that his ownhouse was in order, since we had reason to think that it was not.Jim Skardon, at FUCHS.' request and after clearance withFUCHS. solicitor and the D. of P.P. has seen FUCHS who was probablymoved by Mrs. Peierls' letter. He gave a description of the Russianagent who contacted him in the U.S.A.; he has offered to pin-pointthe meeting places in Boston, San Francisco, and New York and has givena map. He has told us that his Russian contact in London is knownby the name of ALEXANDER We believe him to be Alexander KRAMER.He also said that he was told, if he wished for a further meeting, tothron a magasine into a garden in Kew with an indication of therendezvous on page 1o. Z He has refused to give UB the name of the personwho introduced him to the Russian agent in this country; he pleads thatKE See over39.this man is a good fellow at heart and that he did not know thatFUCHS was going to have more than one visit, or that he was going to handover documents that he is now out of the country and that he would notlike to prejudice his chances if at some future date he wanted to enterthis country as a refugee. We think this man may be Engelbert BROWDER, Bourwhe is in Austria.If the meeting was to take place, there would be a chalk markonalocal lamp post. This is interesting as it is the same techniquegiven by to SHAG. Lastly, EUCHS made it fairly clear that hedid not intend to go back on his confession.I spoke to the D.G. about the de COURCY case. He agreed with myproposal to reply to Newsam, informing him that both the P.M. and theMinister of Defence were interested in this matter.Lish Whitson has been given a description of FUCHS' Americar contact.He is believed to be a "firgt generatibn" American. Lish is, T think,relleved at being able to send something to his boss, of whom everybodyin the F.B.I. is terrified!Kellar is having difficulty in keeping Shaw' trays filled up.He sends hir long memoranda, with minutes on files flagged, but they areback again in a matter of five minutes! Shaw is very anxious to presson with the recruitin drive, and in this I am right thetask of getting suitable people is not So easy.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS9th February.ACT 1958 Aeri 2o1oI discussed with D.B. and D.O.S. a note on the D.GIs conversationwith Newsam and Baker some days ago about our relations with the Police.It now appears that Bakcer made a suggestion that Police Officers shouldbe seconded to this department for periods of two years.I said that for many reasons, which I would state at the meetingo-morrow, I thought the course undesirable. If a Police Officer ishere for two years, he must have learned about all our methods; he wouldthen go back to his Force and would necessarily be employed on S.B.work - in any case, he would be going for promotion. At the end oftwo years he might just be starting if he were the right kind ofchap,to be of some use to us. He would then be removed and we should have tostart again with another.Dick thought, however, that there might be something in having oneor two veny carefully selected officers on a permanent basis.lOth February.We have now received the minutes of the meeting which the D.G.had with Newsam and Baker about two weeks go.regarding the secondmentof Police Officers for periods of to years to this department TheD.G. hs asked us to consdier the matter. We therefore had a meeting ofthe Appointments Board.ItT was not clear whether these secondments wene designed toimprove our liaison with the Police, or whother the Police Officers40.were to take over Certain duties here which would rellease officers foroverseas. If the former was proposed, we all felt that if the existingarrangements for liaison with the Police were not satisfactory, there waslittle chance of any improvement through the measures proposed. In fact,however, we had reason to believe that the present arrangments were workingwell.Ve then considered the possibility of such Police Officers beingtaken on to the staff permanently. We were all agreed that they could notreplaceourdeskofficers,butthattheremightpossiblyberoomforoneortwo additional to our present establishment. There might be work of thetype done by Skardon; there might be work in C.2. on sabotage cases, and ifout vatching staff is to be increased, an extra officer might be usefulfor superiisory work. We felt, however, that a good Police Officer mightat a later date suffer from a feeling of frustration, because ve could notsee that he could ever rise to the rank of Senior officer and would have toremain confined to the particular sphere for which his trnining fitted him.We did not like the idea of secondment, involving a complete disclosure of allour work here to a man who would be leaving us after two years.Shaw did not feel that Police Officers Would be any use to him foroverseas work, unless they were exceptional men and had had a considerabletraining here. They could not, therefore, provide any solution to ourpresent staff difficulties.Kelllar and Bamford came to talk about our Lrepresentation in Palcistan,They had been waiting to head whetherHead of D.I.B. was goingto visit us. Bamford thought that f he did not come next month we oughtto consider sending someone out. It was agreed that Bamford should write,asking when we might expect him.Lish Whitson asked me whether there was any bjection to a statementbeing made to the Press that the F.B.I. had a representative over hereAfter consulting Hill, I told him that there was none.ORIGINALDOOUMENTINDEPARTMENT SECTIONOF THE LICRECORDS13th February.ACT 1958 fore 201oAt the Directors meeting to-day, I asked the D.G. what precisely hehad in mind about the employment of Police Officers here or secondmenter Hesaid that this matter had nothing to do with our Police liaison; he merelythought that there might be certain functions here which the Police, byreason of their experience, would be in a better position to carry out. Isaid that we had already had a preliminary meeting and that we would considerthe matter further.Shaw told the meeting that after receiving a ombardment of messagesabout sending staff out to the Far East, he had now received a letter fromHorrocks, saying there was no accommodation, not even for Tollson.We had a meeting withDick and Irvine to decide onthe British view on C.I. Coordination for Western Union in time of war.The fact is that S.I.S. had bleaged themselves at the Clandestine Conmmitteento to discuss C.I. organisational matters outside the Var Room itself,and feel bound by this agreement in the S.I.0. e said that we were notparties to the Clandestine Committee agreement, and that we were against anystatement by the British delegation to the S.1.C. which would the out handsindefinitely owing to a dispute between S.D.E.O.E. and the Surete.We had41.a defindte mandate to consider these matters and we felt that we shouldget on with the job. We finally managed to discover a formulla satisfactoryto S.I.SIrvine is off to Italy to-morrow to look into the security position underAtlantic Treaty Cosmic system.lhth Februany.T spoke to the D.G. about the lack of anybody in the Home Offic withany knowledge of foreign affairs. It seemed to me extremely important thatthe Home Office should appoint a sufficiently high grade officer who wouldknow about Intelligence matters and about defence policy. Only in this waycould we hope that the Home Office would take a sensible view about problemswhich affected uIS on the J.I.C. as a whole. I suggested tha t I should havean informal talk with Pat Reilly, wich which the D.G. agreed.I had a tall with Shaw about the Interrogatior Centre in Hong Kong.ApparentlythereisSomelegaldifficultyaboutsettingitupuntilanemergency arises. I said that I entirely agreed with the War Officepoint of view, that to set up an Interrogation Centre at a time of crisisWould be a hopeless task, as it could not possibly get on its legs for aixmonths. It seemed to me that there was vital need for such a centre noweThe excess of exits over entries was now about 2,000 a week and the Colonyobviously had no idea what it waS getting. I thoughtthat if the Colonyhad the right to refuse entry it would surely have the right to say thatthose coming in must pass through an Interrogation Centre. I further agreedwith Hollis's view, that the idea of sending suspects down to Singapore forAnterrogation was a hopeless one; you could not possibly interrogate a mantisfactorily unless you had all the local records behind you.It was agreed that we woulld ewait the reply to the J.I.C. telegrmonthis subject before taking the matter any further.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDERE SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 April 2010John Marriott spoke about the two former Czechs, now naturalised,STRAUSS-REIDL. He explained thathas nov been recalled to Prague with his family, but hehas resigned and is being given asylum here. It has been possible, there-pare, for Speciall Branch to interrogate STRAUSS and REIDL. STRAUSS con-ssed that he had been spying on his fellow nationals in this country since1945, but in the case of REIDL there was not much success, although Johnsaid he thought there was enough evidence against him to convince the HomeOffice that there was a case for denaturalistion.442.T said I thought it would be a goos move if the Home Secretary were tomake a statement in the House, to the effect that he would not toleratecases of this kind. Ie said T felt that this might aot as a deterrentto others. The D.C. agreed that this might serve a useful purpose.T went on to say that I had recently had a telephone callle from Hutsonof. the Home Office, who was Somewhat perturbed by something he had seenin the papers to the effect that we were reviewing all naturalisation cases.I said that this was not in fact the case, although we probably would,in the light of the FUCHS case, be looking more al osely into these cases.Graham also said that the Foreign Office (I.R.D.) have raised a pointregarding visits to this country of cultural, scientific, etc. delegationsfrom Russia and Satelllite countries. They feel that they are not keptsuffichently informed about these visits and are anxious to know whethersubversive propaganda is put over by these people to British hearers, andif so, what the reactions of the British hearers are. They think thatM.I. should be "stimulated to more intensive activity" to get thisinformation. Graham said a reply to the Foreign Office is now in courseof preparation, putting the matter into wider perspective, and pointingout that our primary interest in thses visits was the danger of leakageof information.I asked if the Home Office had been consulted in this matter, GrahamSaid there was no indication to show that they had been. T said I thoughtthe Foreign Office, when they had obtained our views, should speak toNewsam.Roger said that the J.S.T.I.0. had just put up a note to the J.I.C.saying that they were not anxious for visas to be refused to members ofthese delegations, as they felt they might be able to get information Frommembers of them. I said I thought I.R.D. had raised this matter inconnection with furthering their "cold varl activities.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINEDDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958Apn 2010Roger said he had had a visit from a member of the German TravelSection of the Foreign office recently who had asked whether We had anyobjection to letting German Consulates., which are to be set up over herein the near future, have our Stop List. Roger hxdt said that as ourcontribution to the Stop List consisted of German Communists, Fascists,and German scientists, he had informed the Foreign Office that we did notwish to put our part of the list into the hadns Df German Consuls. He saidhe had allso vritten to General Haydon of Int. Div who supplied ithdrawall the bulk ofof the names oin the list, asking him whether he feit that the wiour names from it voulld embarrass him.43.Grsham tells me thatMCGIBBON is a CommunistThis man was employed by M.I.3 at the Embassy in Washington at thematerial time of the leakage which has been under investigation fornearly a year. MCGIBBON got a Clearance from here, although therewas some slight evidence of interest in Russia.Dick and John Marniott discussed with me the repeated demands ofthe F.B.I. for fuller inforation. They now wanted to know preeiselywhat FUCHS had passed. T said that T thought this must be a matterfor consultation between our'selves, the Foreign Office, and D. At. En.IT was all in favour of atisfying Hoover'e vanity if this wene possible.J. have arranged a meeting with Roger Nakins and Perrin.It seemed to me that if possible FUCHS'E statement ought to bereae in full in open Court. This would get over all the difficultyof camera proceedings and the subsequent ban on the transmission of theconfession to which Hoover appears to attach 60 much importance, eventhough Lish has read it and it contains no further Intelligence leads.15th February.At the J.I.O. to-day, the Colonial Office sent a telegramindicating tha't the situation in Malaya had somewha t deterioratedand that Gurney was asking for more troops. We have embodied thisin our report to the Chiefs of Staff. There was a proposal that weshould get into touch with shipping firms trading to the Far Bastand warn them about Communist penetration by members of the W.F.T.U.We have been asked to approach the Minister of Transport, but beforedoing so we shall have to be clear as to precisely whatsweshipping companies to do.ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONOF RECORDSWe attended a meeting in Sir Roger Makins!Room,at CT106R which Pehinand Philip Allen wend present. Perrin has very much eased thesituation by agreeing that FUCHS: statement can be read out in full--in open Court. This should mean that there willl be no camersproceedings and ensure that the F.B.I. get what they want. TheEmbassy are, however, being varned that they should have a man in Count,since camera proceedings are possible.Ve then considered the passing of mone detailed reports on exactlywhatFUCHShadhandedovertotheRusaians.TheF.B.I.weredemandingthese on the grounds sfxcthexjonidaknyxatt of the MoMahon Act they werethe body charged with the security of Atomic Energy in the U.S. Pebrinsaid that he had received a similar demand from the Atomio Energydection of C.I.A., and he expected to have one from the American AtomicEnergy CommisstoI.We vene anl clear tha t the Americane mus't have the full facts, butit seemed to be for the Americans to say what was the appropriatechannel. It was agreed, therefore, that the Foreign Office shouldtelegreph to Washington, asking them to clarify the position.WeLply.made it clear that if possible we would like to pass to Hoover what hewanted, even if the information went through other channels. Meanwhilewe shall tell Lish that if he does not have a man in Court, he may risknot getting a transcript copy of FUCHS'S statement, and that while we willat the conclusion of the trial give him a copy of Perrin's statement,there will be further and fuller details which ve would like to pass, butconcerning which we must be bound by an American decision as to theappropriate authority. It will, therefore, be up to Hoover to knock onthe door of the State Department, where he should make his case.16th February.any BURGESS. came to see me this morning. He told me that he hadhad two interviews with Middleton of the Foreign Office. At the firstone he was accused, in somewhat general terms, of grave indiscretions inGibraltar and Tangier. He asked for full particulars, and at hissecond interview Middleton read out to him certain more specific charges,of which he had rade a note; they related more particularly to hisindiseretions about S.I.S. although in regard to currency smugglinghe appeared to think that he was accused of referring to the work ofMills, rather than tha t of 1Nothing had been said to himabout his alleged remarks in front of the Princess de ROHAN and Mrs. OLIVERin Gibraltar, and nothing had been said to him aboutincident.I therefore took it upon myself to make these two specific charges.Itold him that, according to our information, he had intimated both tothe Princess de ROHAN and Mrs. OLIVER that Mills was not only DefenceSecurity Officer-COPYORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONOF RECORDSBURGESS said tha t he could not possibly have said 2010 ny'thing of the1958Arilkind to the Princeas de ROHAN or Mrs. OLIVER, as in fact he did not knowuntil I told him that MilllsIt was possible,however, that he had said something which had conveyed such an impressionto Mills. He could not recollect anything, but he could not be positivethat he had not made some remark about Passport Control which had confeyedthe wrong impressionFrom what he said, I do not think that BURGESS regarded thePrincess de ROHAN as being wholly outside the family, in view of the factthat she had been in charge of Swies affairs at the M. of I. during thewar.When I talked to BURGESS aboutIncident, he said heremembered the discussion-wel it had started by the Princess de ROHANsaying to him that she knewto be mutual friend, what an excellllenthe vas, and what splendid work he had done for the Allies during the war,and for her in particular.I then asked BURGESS what his next move was. He said that therewas a serious accusation on his file, which he considered to be 111-founded, and tha't if it stood against him his career in the Foreign Officewould, to say the least, be seriously blighted. He wondered, therefore,whether, in view of his explanations, the whole concerned thing I could ould be not expunged answer for fromthe the Foreign record. Office, I said but that af I Would certainly let them know about thethatfarasIwas15.specific charges which T had made and BURGESS'g replhes.Butler spoke to me about aheandidate for the Travellers Club namedOHMEL, who appears to be af Czech origin. I said tha't I did not feel thatwe could take on the Travellerg Club as an extra vetting commitment,although 1 saw there was a certain security issue due to the large numberof members from the Foreign Office and other Government Departments. Evenif I were to say ve knew anything about him, the Secretary would mentionthe matter at a Committee Meeting and thereby give the impression tomembers that M.I.5 vere consulted. This would be extremely undesirable.I spent the evening with Lish Whitson and Johhny Cimperman. Rathersignificantly, Lish asked me who was going to be the scape-goat here forthe FUCHSraffair. I said that as far as I knew there would be no scapergoat -- in fact, I could see no reason why there should be one . Insimilar circumstances, without previous knowledge, we should probably actin exactly the same way that we have in this case. I referred to all theexcitement that was going on in the U.S.A. and said that I thought it wouldbe a pity if it had any lasting effeot on Anglo-American co-operation.The Russians have gained two victories; one in getting information fromFUCHS, and two, in depriving Atomic Energy of the services of one of itsmost valuable people. It therefore seemed to me a mistake to allow themto gain a third victory by throwing a spanner into the works of Angllo-Americaco-operation. In mentioning a scape-goat, it was quite clear thatLish was thinking about a scape-goat in the U.S. and had concluded tha'tthere would also be one here.17th February.I sav Mills to-day and asked him togive me a brief account of hisassociation with Guy BURGESS, when the latter visited Gibraltar andTangier in November last.Mills said he had neven heard of BURGESS until the latter rang himup late one evening immediatelly on his arrival, introducing himself asa friend of Robin Maugham. Mills could not see him that night as he had aprevious engagement, but called on him the next morning. BURGESS said hewas going on to Tangier and asked about currency. Mills said that he couldtake out up to ELLO in pesetas, although this was, strictly speaking,against the lav. However, everybody in Gibraltar did it because there wassimply no alternative. BURGESS evidently did not wish to run any sortof risk and said he would change his travellers chequest in Tetuan, wherethis could be done quite legally. He then asked Mills where they coulldget aadrink. They went out to a hotel and, while Mills had a Base, BURGESShad three double brandies. Later, Mills took BURGESS and his mother upto the Yacht Club in onder that they might be introduced to various localresidents.A day or two later, BURGESS called on Mills and his vife, when heconsumed quite a lot of whiskey. H told them that he had met Princessde ROHAN and Mrs. OLIVER at the Rock Hotel, after that them. they were As was extremely nicelookpoeple subsequently and he learned Mrs. hoped OLIVER that from MiLIS in Princess their would room, de ROHAN, where BURGESS he got spent very drunk an evening at theirwithherand46.expense. It was apparently on this occasion that the indisoretionstook place, about which the Princess de ROHAN after made a tatement toMills, from his knowledge of the behaviour of alll three, feelsthat it is highly probable that they were all pretty drunk and that none ofthem would have a very clear idea about the indiscretions of the other.Before leaving for Tangier, BURGESS rang up Mills and said he wasnot really sure about de ROHAN 0r Mrs. OLIVER and that they might, in fact,be up to anything.Ten days later, when Mills was in Tangier, he met BURGESS at ahotell where he ivas having a drink with one of his contacts. BURGESS, ina somewhat inebriated state, insisted on joining the party. EventuallyMillls had to tell him to go away. The same thing happened when MillsWas lunching with the American Vice-Consul and his wife. On this occasionhe had to go outside with BURGESS, who apparently resented being asked togo away. BURGESS vas clearly drunk at the time and apollogised later lorhaving been a nuisance. The next occasion on which Mills met him was inoffice. BURGESS had called on her as the result of a letterof introduction that he had fromHe was sitting in her officdrinlng whiskies and sodas. Mills was anxious to conduct his businesswithand eventually they had to ask him to go.It was in Tangier that Mills first met Princess de ROHAN.saw her come into the hotel and suggested that Mills shouldhear from her first-hand about BURGESS'S indiseretions.I had a meeting with D.B., B.1., Thistle andWediscussed "Lancashire Hotpot". andvisit to Lancashire to seeHordern. Horder'n 1s worried not only about "Lancashire Hotpot" but othercases such as that ofwho is employed in one of the atomicenergy establishments. & His great difficulty with surrounding Police Forces.He said, with some bitterness, that for the Hoyal visit it had been arrangedas usual that Lancs County should provde the escort, but one of the BoroughC.Cs had said that he woulld not have a Lanes. County car going through hisBorough.If that was the attitude in a matter of that kind, we coulldimagine what it was in the case of our enquiries. He clearly thought thatif we had an officer who could visit him at least every other week, it mightbe possible to make mot rapid progress. He realised that a lot ofinformation obtained by his officers might mean more to than to them. Apar:from this, there was the difficulty that Dayson is a man who very seldomcormitsanythingtopaper.If,therefore,/M.I.!manWeretheretotalkto him if he had seen an informaht, a good deal mone information taight befortheoming. A further advantage woulld be that when C.0. Lancs got a leadinto some other O.C's area, the M.I.5 officer could take up the runningwith far better prospects than one of his own officers. There isundoubtedly a lot in this and we shall have to consider the matter verycarefully.We considered and amended Hollis's note about the emaplleymen ofPolice Officers here.ORINNAt RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958. Arrol 2010I had a tall with Newsam to-day about de OQUROY. He stiit feiltnervous about the case and was reluctunt to go forward with it until heknew whether there was going to be a change of Home Secretary.47.I argued with him for some time on the wider implications ofthe case, and the importance from the ational point of view of gettingit cleared up, but he continued to revert to his old argunent thatde COURCY had done nothing against the law,and, from the evidenceavailable, had no intentions in that direction; he was merely a high-grade Journalist acting in the same manner as similar people of hiskind.I told Newsam that we should be reluctant to hold up theenguiries until after the Election, since there wan an insistent demandfor further particulars by the Chiefs of Staff about de COUROY'Ssources of information. I therefore suggested to him that we shouldslightly amend the warrant bn de COUROY, and Deave the other warrantonuntil a later date. Newsam agreed the followingformula for the warrant on de COUROY:"I hereby authorise and require you to detain,open and produce for my inspection all postalpackets and telegrams addressed to or emanatingfrombelieved to be intended for or sentby agents of a foreign power."This in fact means that we shall have to open everything inorder to discover who the letter is from or to, and thereafter it vin]be a matter of speculatio a9 to whether it is going to or comingfrom the agent of a foreign power! Tottherefore asked S.L.B. toamend the warrant accordingly and also the caption.T then gave Nevsam a short account of the FUGHG-a pointingouthe immense difficulties in detection and prevention. THIS S A COPYORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINEDDEPARTMENT UINDER SECTION(4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS20th February.ACT 1958 Apn 2010I had a talk with Hollis about the case of onea ompositor (?,in the Stationery Office, who has in my view been somewhat loubtfullycleared by the Three Advisers. We do not know from our files preciselywhat ieind of personis; he was certainly at one time a member ofthe C.P., but has alleged that his recent renewal of membership vas notof his own seeking and, in fact, that his name had been sent in bysomeone else. This may or may not be 80, but assuming the best, do weknow whether if he became disgruntledwould not be prepared tobetray secrets to the C.P.? There is another aspect of this case, namel;what precisely areopportunities We cannot assesstthese withoutseeing the Compositor' office. and acquainting ourselves in detail witha considerablle number of facts. It may be that in 8D doing we couldmake certain recommendations which would at least maketask farmore difficult, if he were minded to become a Communist agent. Wemight also get some idea as to whether his case could he written offor whether it should be periodically reviewed.Holllis seemed to think that this was a matter which should beundertaken by B.1.A. rather than C. Division. I am not wholly convince edabout this. Clearly we must not get ourselves into the position oftaking responsibility for other peoples' security, but other Departmentsare not so acutely aware of the things that may happen to them as weare, and I think that we have somethine of a rolle to play in advice. advisingthem in greater detail, if they are prepared to accept such48.At the D.G'E meeting I tallked to him about our deliberations inconnection with the employment of Polliice Officers. I explained thathaving reviewed the position we thought that there were only three placeswhere they could usefullly be ernployed. Firstly, in P.L.S., where noincrease of staff could be justified; secondly, in B.5, where an extraofficer might be useful if the staff were increased; thirdly, inwhere there might be work for one other officer surplus to establishment.The D.G. then asked about the secondment of officers for a periodof two years or more. I said that we had also gone into this; we did notthink secondment was a good idea because such officers would have to becomeaware of all our methods of investigation. They would then go back toPolice Forces, others would take their places, and 80 knowledge would spread.The D.G. said: "what you are implying is that Police Officers are nottrustworthy" I said that I did not wish to imply this: I should feel justthe same with Army, Navy or Air Force officers, but that I thought thematter ought to be considered on the basis of the "need to know" We verealready doing an immense amount with Police Forces to make them betteracquainted with our work and I do not think that we could usefully do more.The D.G. seemed to be convinced that these officers would go backto their Forces and would themselves give us more assistance and influenceothers to do 60, and he was anxious that we should explore the matter further.Horrocks has returned. He talked about the urgency of givingfurther assistance to S.I.F.E.s but had to admit that the housing problem madethings very difficult. As regards S.I.M.E., he said the new building wouldcost about 830,000 and that five flats would be necessary in Ismailia to housethe staff - the move, therefore, would be pretty extensive.The D.G remarked that, from a paper he had seen, the Egyptianswere insisting that our troops should leave Egypt altogether; he did not,therefore, feel inclined to go forward in building projects or moves untilthis issue had been finally decided.THIS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT FETAINEDINDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958. Apnl poorI had a wond with Perfeot about the Dropoaal L.o second high-raningPolice Officens..1 for a period of two or three months. I frankly could not seewhat we could do with them for more than- week at the outside. He agreedand said he would discuss this point with Holmes.o.I.A have noV come forward and asked for all the statements anddocuments in the case of FUCHS. We can conceive of nothing that willirritate the F.B.I. more! We feel tha't we must suggest to them that theyapply to the ppropriate authorities in the U.S.A., since the case is still andinvestigation.Hoover has been belly-aching over the week-end. Lish hadinstructions yesterday to deliver a message to the D.G. in person, whichwas to the effect that Perrin and Portal had made some statementto representatives of the American Atomic Energy Commissior over hereto the effect that we had a representative in Washington,and that someone49.had been over there on the case in 1949. Further, that one BOSKY.,anAmerican official, had said that we had been making disparaging remarksout the F.B.I. The whole of this of course, is nonsense, and we haveaid s0. We have also added that misleading statements in the U.S.A.attributable to the F.B.I. have caused conbiderable embarrassment to ushere.21st February.I went to see 'c' about the case of SERPETTE, a Frenchman attachedto the Embassy here, who is believed to be an agent of the S.D.E.C.E. Ourreports show that he is rather inquisitive about political matters. Heis clearly doing nothing that one would not expect any ordinary diplomatto be doing but if he is an agent of the S.D.E.C.E. we should have beentold about it. The suggestion is that I should speak to'C'said that he had no objection to this, but he thought there mugnt possiblybe some OOPSEsmaterial which would make it quite clear what the positionwas.'c' told me, completely off the record, that he was by no meansconvinced that the Russians had made an atomic bomb; that it was in factpossible to explode a pile which might have given the same results, and thatthe articilesecollected by the aircraft were to some extent consistent withthis theory. He s.further reinforced in this view by a statement made byFUOHS to Perrin that the Russiansshad made enquiries about a pin in theatomic bomb, which seemed to indicate that they were very wide of the mark.I lunched with George Jenkin.We talked about the proposal thathe should act for uswhere it was thought necessary forsomeone to give advice to a foreign Government on security matters. Casesin point would be the Lebanon, recently visited by Graham Mitchell, orPersia, who had asked for assistance only a few weeks ago. I said thatwhile I thought his help in these matters might be extremely valuable,I doubted whether there would be a sufficient number of cases to keephim occupied.I asked him about the proposal that he should go to Malaya to runthe Special Branch, or to take over the Police as a whole. He did notseen very keen about this, owing to the internal dissensions which areknown to exist; he thought that he might have to say that quite a numberof people should go, and that there might welll be nobody to replace them.He had not, however, entirely dismissed the proposal from his mind. JIsaid that if he were thinking of taking the job on, I thought he ought togo out there and take a preliminary look. There was no doubt in my mindthat there was a big job to be done and that those who were at present incharge had very little idea of how to do it.At the D.G's meeting today, the D.G. asked if there was any furtherinformation or developments in the cases ofand FUCHS.THIsIS COPYORIGINALNDEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION(4) OF THE PUBUC RECORDSACT 1958 Afr 201050..Dick said there was nothing further to re-pont thecase.THISIS A COPYtheyare apparently far too busy over the case of cenetalli Reversy who argcusedWibot of the Surete of being an ex-gaolbird, to payrmuch attention to theeakage from Fonsainebleau.(4) OF E RUBLIO RECORDSDick told the meeting of a rather puzzling caseT.1958 of Aprdlrecently been posted to the Cabinet Office fromn the Ministry of Educationand nov Comes into the secret field for the first time. His wife isaCommunist, but his own sympathies are not known. The Cabinet Officerane,therefore, considering whether or not they can deal with this case on thelines of discipline, since the man did not disolcse the fact that hiswifewasaCommunistbeforebeingtakenon.Wehavewarnedthem,however,that our information is not the kind we can put before the Tribunal, sincethere is nothing against the man himself. They have agreed to refer theandmatter to us before taking any action.Dick said that B.0.A.0. and B.E.A., with whom we have an intelligeneecontact, have now sked for a list of Communists employed by them. Aftera good deal of discussio it was decided that this matter should be clearedwith the Ministry of Civil Aviation before we could give an answer.Perfect talked about courses given to Pollice Officers. He said thatChief Constables are now taking the initiative in asking that their officersshould attend courses. He said he thought this was a good sign, but thatthe me tter should be regulated as the officers here might find that theyhad too many Police Officers to cope with at a time. In this connection,Shaw said that the Colonial Office are issuing a circularto ColonialGovernors, saying that this office would be holding courses for ColonialPolice Officers about once a quarter, which would last about a week,followed by a week at Special Branch. The D.G. said he thought theselatter cour'se should be dovetailed with the courses arranged by Perfect.Shaw and Perfeet said they would discuss the matter.Shaw spoke about the attempted assassination of the Chief Secretaryin Nigeria, Foot. He said nothing had been heard yet as to whether thiswa8 merely an act of a disgruntled African, or whether it waa part of a planfor organised subversion. There had, however, been rumouns in Nigeria ofsuch a plan which, after the recent assassination in Sarawak, was somewhatdisturbing.Roger told the meeting of a discussion at torday's J.I.C. on thedisclosure of classified information to the U.S. and third countries.He said that as a result of Gerald Temder' mission to Washington, theD.M.I. informed the meeting that this country' methods for dealing withthis matter were far behind those of the Americans, who had a series ofcomrittees for clearing every bit of information before pasaing it to athird country. The Templer mission had had considerable success ingetting agreement to the exchange Df information, but that were left inno doubt at all that if there was any further example of insecurity onour part the Americans were going to close down on us completely. Thereis, therefore, to be a new and strict organisational procedure. A highlevel committee, known as the Release of Information Police Commit Committee, iB tobe set up under a Foreign Office chairman; this will decide the policy as tothe exchange of information. There will also be a nevi Exchange of IInformation Sub-Committee at a working level, which will carry out thefully screened before passing it out of this have country. on it representatives of the tteerulse laid dovin by the high-level committee, and all information This latter will commi bewill Ministyy have of an Supply Admiralty and chairman the Foreign and office. will Roger had told the J.1.0. that51.he di.d not think it necessary for this department to be represented,provided we saw all the papers we should see. This, he said, alsoapplied to the J.I.B., S.I.S. and the C.R.O. The Secretariat will havethe task of keeping the registry and records of all information exchangedSo that it will be possible to trace in detail all information which hesgone out and to whom it has been sent.Dick asked if the results of the Templer missic were nowapproved. Roger said he thought so. but he did not know whether theyhad been ratified by the Americans yet. Serpell said that, accoling tothe Chief's of Staff minuees, he did not think this had yet been done.Guy BURGESS telephoned to ask me whether he chould put in hisnote to Middleton. T told him that I should be forwarding my noteonour interview and that I found it a little difficullt to advise him. Ihad no objection to his referring to the discussions with me, to theallegations that Ihad made and to the answers that he had given.22nd February.I had a meeting withand that Vivian andHill would see Carey Foster again.We discussed the note which s going to the P.M. showing thecircumstances under which FLICHS obtained entry into the atomic project.It is merely factal and show that when FUCHS was taken on the evidenceagainst him was rom/Gestapo source, dated 1934, saying that he hadengaged in anti-Nazi activities and had associations with the ComunistParty. This in itsellf was not anything in the nature of fir evidence,since it was known by experience that the Gestapo did not discriminatebetween Communists, Jews, Or Social Democrats. Against this reportthere were Police reports which did not indicate that FUCHS had taken anyactive part in political. activities during his stay here since 1933, andthere were glowing reports from Edinburgh and Bristol University about hisability as a physicist nathematicinn.The Ministry of Supply had accordindecided to take him on. When he returned from the U.S he Was spoken 0fin the highest terms as having made a major contribiition in the atomicenergy field. In spite of this, certain further enquiries had been madeWhich had produced negative results; he had consequently been admitted toHarwell.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDINDEPARTMENT DER SECTION314) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 April 201052.23rd February.We had a Directors meeting to disouss the question of thesecondmentof Police Office.s. This had been at the D.Gis request thatwe should look into this matter further. We all of us felt that no veruseful purpose coulld be served by such secondments, for three reason:8officers would have to start in the lowest grade and could not really getthe hang of things for about six months; they woulla then, presumably, pasto another section. During all this period they would merely be a dragCthe organisation, as they would have to be supernumeraryto establishmentto a considerable extent. They could never fulfill all the functionserformed by other officers in l1aison work with Government Departmentsat all levels. By the time we got them fully trained, they would beleaving us, when we should have to start again with a new lot. From thepoint of view of the man, we did not think that he would appreciate workinin a subordinate position, and that when he went back to his Force hewould not necessarily be employed on 8.B. work and tnight well have lostprourotion. He would probably be told that he was not up to date in hisPolice world. Lastly, from the point of view of the Chief Constable, wecould not see that a Chief Constable would feel happy abcut losing thesevices of one of his best Insiectons for a period of two to three years.The D.G. called a meeting at which he explained about theattachment of Police Officers. He said that his idea was that a fewhigh-ranking Police Officers should become fully acquainted with our workand that they would then go back to their Forces with the right ideas abouM.I.5. and a readiness to assist ls. He envisaged a possibility of theirdoing a period of attachment abroad. After criticising our note in detaihe instructed Horrocks to 8D into the matter with Baker of the Home Officeto find out whether the proposal was a practical proposition.27th February. to lst March.Hollis, Marriott and I went uyo to speak at the annual ScottishDetective Officers' Conference in Edinburgh. The D.G. was going, but askme to take hiE place on account of his attack of lumbago. Both Hollisand John gave exxtremelly good tallks Hollis on protective security, and Johon certain aspects of espionage. A few questions vere asked after themeeting. The talks were, I think, welll received ntthpunsvstpWs H mostcordial one.ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF EPUBLIC RECORDS2nd March.ACT 1958 Apru( 2010Graham han got an avlward case in the Cabinet office. A miancalledhae recently been taken on there from the Ministry of' EducaticHe aas being "groomed" for Norman Brook's P.A. It has no transpiredthat his wife is a member of the Comrnunist Party (Bee 2nd para. on .50)The proposal is that should be interviewed and reprimanded for notteining the authorities about his wife's political leanings. He hins eli8 to be sent back to the Ministry of Education. Peaonally, I fee3 itIdificulit to believe thathimself is not pretty far to the Loft. it heis married to a Communint woman.FUCHS wag tried yesterday and received a sentence of 14 years.53.Owing to the onslaught on this department by the Press, and theBeaverbrook press in particular, a statement has been prepared which theD.G. 18 going to show to the P.M. with a suggestion that the balancemiight be corrected either by a statement to the Press or in Parliament.3rd March.At the J.1.0. to-day it was announced that the French had addresseda request for assiatance in Indo-China to the U.S.A. and the U.K.Therewas a hint that if this could not be given, presumably in arms andequipment, the French might be forced to withdraw.'c: mentioned the PEYRE - REVERS scandall in France, which appearsto be very serious and to penetrate both the S.D.E.C.E. and the Surete.We discussed at some length a J.I.C. paper on Soviet intentionsand the possibility of wal. It was felt that the earliest date-on whichSxxtt aggression could be pegarded as a reasonable risk by Soviet Russiawould be early in 1955, but a more probable date would be sometime in1955 or 1956. It was felt that this information was not firm enough towarrant a recommendation that planning should be advanced to that date.Indeed, it is extremely doubtful whether if such a recommendationwere made, any advance in planning is feasible. one of the factorsisthat even if the Russians have got a stock of atomic bombs, they have notgot the aircraft suitable for their delivery in all weathers. They wouldbe unlikely to risk their delivery in bad weather unless theysha yahad verylarge stocks. It is not anticipated that their Air Force will besudtably equipped for this purpose before 1955. It is estimated that theRuasians must think that we or the Americans are going to use the atomiebomb,i view of the publicity given to this matter in the U.S. and thePresident's determination to continne not only with the manufacture ofatomic bombs, but also of the Hydrogen bomb. It is, therefore, thoughtPossible that at some stage the Russians might try to anticipate such anevent by some form of Pearn Harbour action. This cannot at least beentirely ruled Dut. It is thought, however, that the most likelyeventuality would be that the Russians, feeling themselves strong enoughtoriskamajorvar,mightpresstheirtcolldwartolimitewhichtheAllieswould be bound to resist, unless they were preared to climb down completelyand suffer serious lo88 of face w in other words, a was might arise withthe Russians in much the same way as it did with the Germans.The D.G. Saspr aspthe D.M, at 2.30 to-day, He told us that the P.M.was in clearly fighting form and that he proposed to defend the department;and that the occasion would probably arise during the debate on the King'espeech on Monday next. He had no intention of allowing an enquiny intothe activities of the Security Service and was entirely satisfied with thework of the department.The D.G. left with Ricketts, the P.M.'8 Private Secretary, twocopies of the note we had made out for the P.M., which contained the factualstatement on the caseand certain debating points. Meanwhile, the attackson the Department by the Press are continuing. The D.G mentioned thatthe other sections of the Press heartily disliked the Beaverbrook pressand that. they might perhaps give out statements in our support.About Beven 'clock a reporter from the "Daily Express" called tosee the D.G. and was told that the D.G. waB not in and that he did not giveintervieivs.54.I dined with Tommy Lascelles, who was anxious to know about theFUCHS case, concerning which, he said, the Monarch was somewhat puzzlea)I gave him the story in broad outline, both from the C. Divison and theB. Division side, and I think he fully understood the position.I also spoke to him about "Palace News, appearing in "Timet and"Lifelfand the offer ade by tae correspondent of these papers to a reputablejournalist friend of Battersby's. The offer, which was to supply PalaceNews to an informant, was refused. It seemed that there was probablysomeboay on the Pallace staff who was giving information away. Tommy saidthat he would not be at all surprised, and mentioned to me the lamentableincident of Miss CRATEORD, the Coverness to the two Princesses, who had justwritten a book about them containing somewhat intimate details, for whichshe had got the sum of E26,000 from some American firm. He had heard aboutthis in advance and had spoken to Miss CRAWFORD, who had dissolved intotears. It vas, therefore, a great shock to him when the book came out.The worst feature of it is that it will encourage Dthers to do the same.Lth March.I extraoted from my diary an interview that Victor had with "Beaver"in 1940, in which the latter described us anl as ta bunch of with hunterslI took this over to show Rickettnd case he wanted to use it ab backgroundin the P.M'S statement. He told me that enquiries showed that Beaverbrookwas not concerned with employing FUCHS, since he left his Ministry inMay, 1941. He drey my attention to an article which appeared in theTelegraph, which stated that M.1.5 came directly under the P.M and wascontrolled by the J.I.0., and Other details to the effect that contraryto statements in the Press, there would be no reorganisation of M.1.5.Rickett wanted to know whether we had put this out. I said that we hadnot and that in fact we were not controlllled by the J.I.0.I tools the opportunity of explaining to Riciett all aspeets of theFUCHS case, both on the vetting side and on the investigation side.Ithink he appreeiated the enormous dfficulties that we were up against.Heaaked me whether I thought that, as WaB the case during the war whenSwinton had charge, we would benefit through having a Minister other thanthe P.M. He thought it might enable us to get our requirements met moreeasdlyy since clearly we Would nor wish to bother the B.M. with day-to-daymatters. I said that i.n my opinion t ings were much better-a they were,since Intellligence matters. usually of such complexity that the lessMinisters had to do with them the better. It was far better to get thingssettled, if possible, on a Lower level; Ministers had not really got thetimetogointoallthedetails.If,therefore,theywererequilredtomake a decision, it is as likely ad not that it would be the wrong one:I said, of course, that there were Dccasions when we were attacked byanother department; it was then very convenient to have an appeal to theP.M.6th March.Rickett telephoned to me about a statement which the P.M. is tomake in the House on the FUCHS case. There is really only one point,namelyk should he say positively that the Security Service was responsibledireet to him and not to the Minister of War, or whether he should confinehimself to a general statement to the effect that he accepted fullresponsibility for the work of the Security Service.55.After consulting the D.G. it was agreed tha he should take theibatter course, unless the P.M. late particularly concerned about gettingStrachey out of his difficulty.Dick and I lunched with Philip Vickery, who ds just back from Germany.He has had a very complicated job in trying to cu't down Int. Div. Thefact is that Int. Div. is not only concerned with internal security matters,and political matters, but also with a large commitment for procuringinformation from the Eastern Zone and, indeed, from Russia and the Satellitecountries through the interrogation of line-crossers, returning Ps. of W.,and defeotors. There is an added complication in that Land Commissionerswish to receive political information direct from the local branch ofInt: Div. The dividing line between political intelligence and securityintelligence is very Often a difficult one to define. Robertsonwantsthewhole thing to be under the Land Commissioner rather than under GeneralHaydon. He seems to be afraid of General Hayaon setting up a private army.This is aln rather nonsense: it should be quite easy for General Haydonto control the whole thing, and for his representative in the Land to havea responsibility for the supply of political information to the LandCommissioner, nIthehsamemvaya thattite have a responsibility to the localDefence Committee in the Middle East and Far East.Vickery has got agreement to cuts involving some 150 people, whowene largely engaged in duplicating activities.The D.M.I. came on a visit to this office this afternoon. I wentthrough the Cchabtr with him and expllained our general functions. T alsoexplained to him the difficullities of the FUCHS case.Bur't came to see me: He had a piece of information about the originof Mrs. SKINNER, which in fact waa already on our records. He also hada photograph of Edgar SANDERS as a young man. This individual, who with ison record here for gun-running to Bolivia, ia said to be identical theBurt thought that he was an agent of S.I.5. I tolld him that this wasEdgar SANDERS recently sentenced to 15 years for espionage in Hungary. notthe case. T gave nim my reasons for SANDERS' fantastio confession.56.7th HarchTHIS A COPYORIGINAL POCUMENT RETAINEUNDER SECTIONTHEPUBLIC RECORDSAOT 1958 April 2010The D.G. then referred to the case of MARTINOVITCH, a Jugoslavwho had committed suicide on being refused admission to the U.K. D.C.said that the case had not in fact been referred to us: the man hadarrived here, his papers were found not in order and he was accordinglysent back to Switzerland, whence he had come.The case of Mrs. O'GRADY was referred to by the D.G. This womanhad just been released from prison after serving ten of the fourteenyearsto which she had been sentenced during the war for espionage. She claimedthat her activities were nothing more nor less than exhibitionism and thatshe had never in fact given any information to the Germans. She alsoclaims to have appealed to be Home Office to this effect. The D.G. askedifthe Home Office had informed us of this appeal by Mrs. O'GRADY. Isaid that her behaviour had certainly justified her conviction and thatshe had, in fact, at first been sentenced to death. S.L.B. then said thatthere was a good deal of correspondence on the case between the Home Officeand Brigadier Hinchley Cooke.The cases offormerly of the Ministry of Educatio andlater transferred to the Cabinet Office. and whose wife had een discoveredto have been a Communist for some considerable time, and that ofofthe Imperial Defence College, had both been cleared up. B.1 said that afull report on the latter case is to be sent to the Commandant of the I.D.Cwho intends to show it to the Chiefs Staff. It is being recommendedthatshould be permitted to remain at the I.D.C.the questions of Mr. Haldane Porter's mission to Persia and ofMr. Irvine's security checke in Italy and Portugal on behalf of theAtlantic Treaty., were touched upon, In the latter connection, Mr. Irvinesaid that in Italy the position was fairly satisfactory; but that inItaly there vas virtually no security at alll. He said that it now restedwith the members of the Atlantic Treaty to decide what should be done torectify the position in Portugal. mThe Scandinavian countries are stilloutstanding as regards the security check and, D.C. said, due to aquarrel between the military and civil authorities, the security positiois probably none too good. D.C. hoped that Mr. Irvine would be releaseto represent us on the Atlantic Secure ity Committee. A request for aBritish representative for the South European Planning Group and for theNorth European Planning Group had been made and discussed at the J.I.C.,but up to date there had been no nominations.D.C. then mentioned the trouble the Ministry of Supply had hadin connection with a leakage toabout the new atomicstations set up in the North. Circumstances seemed to show that the leakagecame through Air Commodore Crerar, Assistant Hanaging Direct of the firmhandling the contract for the project. S.L.B. would be consulted as to thebest means of handling the matter.57.gave me lunch today. I expeeted that he mightwant to make some special request, but I was entirely mistaken: itwas merely a friendly tete-a-tete. He mentioned to me that he hadspoken to Dick White a propos of BUCHS, expressing his distress atour being pilloried in the press, and offering, if we thought anyuseful purpose would be served, to present our case, in any formin which we might like to put it forward, to the Nationall Council,C.I.A. I thanked him very much for his kind offer, which we wouldcertainly consider, though I thought that the balance had tosome extent been redressed by the Prime Minister's statement inthe House. For the rest, our conversation was confined togeneralities about Russia and Germany.Barnes stott, who has been in Passport control and is nowemployed I think in the Department of the Custodian of EnemyProperty, came to see me about a job. He is at present employed asa Principal, but he thinks that before long his work will be woundup. He is therefore trying to forestall events. He said that Jeffesof Passport Control would be able to speak to him. I told him thatwe had nothing to offer him at the moment, but if he liked to 1illin a form we would consider his application if a suitable vacancyoccurred. He did not seem to be a bad fellow, but somehow I was notparticularly attracted by him.I went to see Nevsam about certainto alll of whichhe agreed. He handed me a letter from someone in America addressedto FUCHS, which he said we could open clandestinely provided wereturned it to him ithin 21+ hours. I told him that we should wantto see FUCHS' communications and to know about his visitors, andthat we were arranging this through Paice of the Prison Cornmissi ion.He seemed quite satisfied about this.THIS IS A COPY8th MarchORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDNDEPARTMENT SECTIONPUBLIC RECORDSAOT19582010I discussed with Dick, Roger and John Irvine the questinn ofthe latter'g future as Secretary of the S.l.C.. We felt that, if theS.I.C. at the next meeting on March 1lth were not prepared to allowJohn Irvine to act for us in regard to COSMIC security we shouldhave to reserve our right to vithdvaw him and suggest that some othercountry should take on the job. It is abundantly clear that there isnot really a full-time job as S.I.C. Secretary. In fact, for thelast month before the meeting, by which time all papers have beencirculated, he cannot possibly have nything to do; neither has hereally got a full-time job for the first two months between themeetings.At the Directors' meeting we discussed various staff matters.It vras agreed that, in spite of a slightly adverse account fromS.I.F.E., we shoulld see FAY, late of the Singapore Police, who isat present on leave. We also decided that any move to Moascar couldnot be considered until it was clear whether G.H.Q. was going toremain in Egypt or remove to Cyrenaica. Lastly, there was a longdiscussion on whether our overseas stations should receive the airmail "Time s" This apparently costs us about $260 a year. It wasfinally decided to send a circular letter asking the views of overseas stations and telling them to explore whether they can get thepaper locally from any other sources.58.I gave a short talk to the Railway Police officers who had beendoing a course here. One of the points I raised with them was theassistance that they might be able to give us in procuring a lettersent by railway post. The procedure is that the letter is handed into Parcels Office, where the sender need not disclose his identity.Thereafter, the letter goes frorn the Parcels Office to the guard,and from the guard to the Parcels Office at the destination, receiptsbeing taken. The letter is then delivered by a railway official,either to someone who calls for it or actually at the address. A bookis kept which shows the names and addresses of all letters deliveredby railvay post at each station. It occurred to me that it might beof interest to know, for example, the names of the people receivingsuch letters over a period in certain places where there are DistrictParty HQ, or possibly elsewhere. There vas a time when the CommunistParty used this method of communication, but there has been no evidencefor some years that this has continued to be the practice. The RailwayPolice could also shadow a suspect travelling by train ad point himout to one of our watchers, though there might be difficulty aboutdoing this at very short notice. There is no doubt that we now havethe goodwill and co-operation of the Railway Police, who seemed pleasedwith their visit.9th MarchCumming came to talk to me about a project of the Amnericans, whobelleve that they ean cause the defection of six or eight members ofthe Czech skating team Which is about to visit this country. It wasgenerally thought that, if this could be brought about, it woulld havea certain "cold war" propaganda value. The proposal has been endorsedby the J.I.C. The Americans are apparently prepared to put up E15,000to settle these skaters in the United States. We shall clearly have tosay something to the Home Office.I asked Horrocks how he was getting on vith his enquiries aboutthe Police Officers who it is proposed should be seconded. He said hehad seen Baker and had left with him certain points to which he wishedto give further consideration. So far Baker had not replied.I spent a very enjoyable evening at a dinner organised by Ian ViilsonChristopher Harmer and Bill Luke, at which a number of old war-timeB Division officers were present.A.C.A.S.(I - Air Vice Manshal Ogilvie-Forbes - has been round theoffice. He was formerly our Air Attache iIn Moscow. He seems a niceperson who is obviously fairly at sea. Curiously, he suggestedthat it; must be very difficult for us to deal with constantly changingpersonnel in Service Intelligence Dinectorates. I told him that thatquestion was an old war horse of mine and that I had always thoughtthat it would be advantageous if there were quite 8 small permanentcivilian nuclleus in each department to give continuity to the work andto advise incoming officers. I had in fact suggested this on manyoccasions to successive D.M.Is. and D.N.Is, and hadallvays found them in agreement. There appeared, however, to be anuber of snags on the establishment side, bu't I could not feel thatthese were really insuperable. He seemed very convinced that somethingof the kind was necessary.59.l0th MarchThere was quitean interesting discussion with the Planners on the paper entitledLikelihood of War with the Soviet Union and the Date by which theSoviet Leaders might be prepared to risk it". I have already recordedour conclusions one of which was that the date might be advanced from'56/157 to 55/156. There was doubt in the J.I.C. as to whether theyshould recommend the consequent advance in planning or whether thisshould be left to the Joint Planners. The point was somewhat compli-cated by the fact that, whatever anybody recommends, it is extremelydoubtful whether anything can be done to step up production or, moreimportant still, scientific research. The Planners seemed to thinkthat it was their business to consider these points and that theremight well be merit in advocating an increase in the tempo, as thismight at least ensure that '17 did not become '48 or '49. A newpoint of some interest and importance vas introduced. Our paper hadconsidered the likelihood of the Russians starting a major war and hadsuggested that there might come a time when the Soviet leaders wouldconsider themselves strong enough to counter any military action bythe Western Powers, when they might press on wit their plans toextend their influence and control regardless of Western reactions.In these circumstances the Western Poviers might be compelled to go towar to protect their vital interests. Nobody, however, had specified,in respect of different countries, where this lirnit would be reached.For example, what would happen if we voke up one morning to find thatthe TUDEH Party was in power in Persia "by the wi0.l of the people" andthat Persia was therefore virtually another satellite state, that theRussians had been granted 01l concessions in the North and that wewere under notice from the Persian Government to quit Abadan? Wouldthis lead to a world war, if we were in a position to take counteraction? If not, what "cold war" or other measures to prevent such athing happening could be put into force?A new paper has to be written on this subject with terms ofreference as follows:. "Steps short of embarking on a major warwhich the U.S.S.R. might take. which would put it in control ofterritories whose los8 to the Western Allies would criticallyprejudice our ability to fight a war and/or constitute a majordefeat in the cold wan. How could such steps be forestalled Orcountered without precipitating a major war?B.l.A have discovered a Party member in theIrmigration Service at London Docks. He frequently goes aboardSoviet ships to act as an interpreter. His name is Jack HOBBS.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDVDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONACT (4) OF 1958 THE PUBLIC RECORDS201o60.11th MlarchI went to see Newsam about the Czech Ice Hockey players whothe Americans have told us are likely to defect. The Americans wereprepared to put up 015,000 for their rehabilitation in the UnitedStates. Newsam informed Murie about this and seemed quite satisfied.He appreciated that it was purely a cold war point.Graham Mitchell came to discuss with me the case of HOBBS, theImmigration Officer who is a Party member. He will have to go beforethe Purge Committee. I wondered whether there was anything to begainedbygivinghimarun.Grahamthoughtthat,ratherremotely,there might be but that the time and energy involved would mean thatsomething else would have to be dropped. We decided, therefore, toproceed on the basis of liquidation.Lish Whitson came in to say goodbye and I went out to lunch withhim and Johnny Cimperman. I did not touch on the point that he had notbeen allowed to interview EUCHS, but I do not think that there arereally any hard feelings. It is now up to the F.B.I. to get hold ofJoseph ROBBINS, who was FUCHS' contact in the U.S.A. Jim Slardon hadbeen able to get this information out of FUCHS yesterday, identificationhaving been made by photograph. It may of course mean that ultimatelyFUCHS will have to go to the United States as a witness. I discussedone or two old cases. Lish told me that Jacob KIRCHENSTEIN was lastheard of in Paris under the name of KLEGES.S where he is, or was,running an import and export business. He also told me that, sincethe war, FEIERABEND, under some other name, had been unearthed inShanghai. Both these cases are interesting as shoving how old handsactive in the '20s are still going on.13th MarchSir John Shaw discussed with me the draft of a JIC paper onCormunism in the Middle East which is based on a JIC(ME) paper. Thedrat is really fourth-form stuff, whereas the JIC(ME) paper preparedby S.I.M.E. is extremely good. It seems to us all that this is afrightful waste of time.Had a talk wi th Philip Vickery on the possibility of his takingovertheSecretaryshipoftheS.I.C.viceIrvine.Hewouldhavebeenquite willing to do the job, only unfortunately he does not think thathis French is good enough. Roger is very anxious to get Irvine backas he has a lot ot work for him to do. We may have to say to the S.I.C..that one of the other Powers should provide the Secretary, but this isnot likely to go ery welll. One of the main difficulties is that inalmost all the Beneluxx countries there are two distinct camps - one themilitary and the other the Surete. If either party appointed a Secretaryhe would be regardea with suspicion by the other. This is the onlycountry where there is ary semblance of unity between the two Department61.1luth MarchArchie Hordern came in with Thornton. I explained the FUCHScase and also told him what we were doing about Lancashire Hotpot. Hewas as usual extremely pleasant and co-operative. I Viish all C.C'Slooked at Special Branch world in the way that he does.I attended the S. 3.1.0. lunch. The French Surete had only justarrived;there was apparently a strike by the mechanics which had delayedthe 'plane'e departure. Dick White had had to put on a cabaret show onthe FUCHS case to keep things going.who is now Chairman ofthe S.I.C. expressed himself once more very forcibly on the questionof direct lisison with ourselves. He is anxious to raise it when DiclWhite andvisit him next weel.-15th MarchI gave a short talk to Police Officers from Northern Rhodesiaand British Guiana. They are doing a course here.We had a large agenda at the J.I.C. today. I raised thequestion of the wasted effort in the J. J.I.S. re-hashing of the report on.Cormunism in the Middle East prepared by J.I.C(M.E.) Pat Reilly tookthe point and said that he would like to go into the matter morecarefully. Meanwhile, he gave instructions that the J.I.S. were todiscontinue work on the draf't.of the Srete loolced in for a few minutes. He wasinterested in the case of SOUKHCWIINE White Russian in Paris, who hadbeen mentioned by FUCHS. FUCHS, if he went to Paris, was to have usedhim as a contact man for scientific circles. The Strete apparent tlyknov! SOUKHOMLINE and will be making further investigations.Neville Bland looked in for a gossip and was clearly anxiousfor some dope on the FUCHS case.According to press reports, the Czech Ice Hockey team arenot coning. Clearly there must have been too much talk about defeetion.THIS is A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDNDEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSAOT 1958Merd201062.17th Marchmhe D.G. called a meeting for the purpose of conducting apost mortern on the PUCHS. case. He began by congratulating alll thoseconcerned in bringing FUCHS to justice within the short space of sixmonths. He said that he had satisfied the Primne Minister on the briefwhich WaS given to him when he visited the latter on Manch 3rd, but atthat time he had not seen the file. Had he done so he would have beenextremely apprehensive, and had an enquiry been ordered he felt that hewould probably have lost his job and the Department would have been splitfrom top to bottom. He then criticised the action iring the earlierstages of the enquiry. He drew attention in particular to a minute byTar Robertson which had expressed the view that FUCHS might well be aSpy, and also to one by Michael Serpell expressing the view that bothFUCHS and PETERLS. might vell be spies. He could not understand why, inthe light of these minutes, more had not been done to investigate thecase, beyond the imposition of a H.O.W. for a period of two months. Healso criticised a letter by Garrett in Which it was suggested that detailsof the slight suspicion against FUCHS should not be communicated to theAmenicans.Various people spoke in answer to these criticisms which haveof course to be considered in the light of events at the time. ASBennett pointed out, a statement, even though it may in the light ofevents have proved to be prophetic, is of very little use unless it issupported by facts. the only facts that were known showed FUCHS in nomone sinister light than literally hundreds of other cases. Skardonpointed out that there was not one single- fact on the files whichcontributed anything to FUCHS' interrogation Or which, in fact, had anyreal significance. The association viith Hans KAHLE in the internentcarp in Canada. to which the D.G. dr'ew particular attention, had had nobearing whatever on the espionage case: it was merely a political actorwhich was quite reasonably explained by the faet that the camo in whichFUCHS was interned was largely composed of Iiazis. It is not thereforesurprising that he should have associated vith Hans KAHLE. Apart fromthis,theinformationagainstHansKAHLE,asMissBagotpointedout,wasfrom a highly dubious source. It seemed therefore dangerous to reorientatone's whole machinery on the basis of the FUCHS case, which was in manyrespects exceptional.Mitchell made it clear that enguiries which we made luring theyar about internees in Canada had produced absolutely no results. Theindividual in charge with whom we had been in touch seemed quite incapableof giving any assessment of the people under his charge. Enquiry aboutFUCHS in those quarters, therefore, is unlikely to have told us any morethan we knew already and which we felt was satisfacorily explained by thefact that FUCHS had been engaged in anti-azi activities and in s0 doinghad had Comrinist associations in Germany prior to the Hitler regime.As regands telling the Americans, this seemed to be a matter of majorpolicy which had been considered at the time. I said that if theministry of Supply sent FUCHS to America as a British subject and aFritish officiall,, it was difficult for them at the same time to say toche F.B.I. that we regarded him with suspicion. It seemed to me that itWas up to the Governnent Department concerned to establish a standard onthe basis of whatever information we could give them, and either to endthe individual out or not to send him. In estimating standards to beestablished the matter could only be considered in the light of theinformation available at: the time and of the whole circumstances of the cas63.FUCHS, as far as ve could ascertain -- and indeed this Was supported by hisown confession - had not engaged in any political activities while hewasinthis country. He had received glowing chits from Edinburgh and BristolUniversities, and was a man of outstanding ding ability. He was only one ofmany others concerning whom there were much more Sinister indications, whosebrain was so formidable as, in the opinion of the Ministry concerned, tojustify his employment, the more so since, at the time, we were fightingthe Germans and not the Russians. Mitchell pointed out, and vas supportedby Hollis, that there were, certainly now and to a large extent at the time,many other projects of equal, if not greater, secrecy and importance thanthe atomic bomb, and that even today, in Category I there were no less than1,000 employees. Marriott made it clear that, in a case such as that ofFUCHS, only an intensive investigation of a continuous period of three tofour months could even hope to give any results and that, at the outside, ourresources would only allow two to three such cases to be investigatedSimultaneously. We had therefore to deal with those which. on prima facieevidence, appeared to us to be the strongest. I said that I did not seehow we could do otherwise unless we were going to increase the taff ten-fold,and then we should probably defeat our own object, since the right hand wouldnot know what the left was doing.At the conclusion of the meeting, the D.G. asked me to hold a furthermeeting in order to establish whether there were any points where a smallStrengthening of the staff might help. After the meeting I spoke to theD.G. privately. I said that, if one sat down and tried to think of currentCases where the evidence vas no greater than that in the FUHS case in 1941,Ne should not be able to cope with them, even if we had ten times the staffWe had nov. We cannot even cope with those where the evidence is muchstronger. I instanced people like BLACKETT, Solly ZUCKERMAN and, indeed,BERNAL, who was deliberately taken on, as a fult-blown Communist, asscientific Officer to the Commandos in 1913. The fact was that we had tovealise that we vere permanently sitting on a hornet's nest. A huge increaseof staff would not produce the answer. It would only tur'r us into a mass-production organisation like the F.B.I. It would not be tolerated by thepublic, and it would produce no better results.I drew the attention of the D.G. to the fact that we were nowoperating 200 letter checks and 100 telephone checks,on cases Which seemed to us to be, on prima facie evidence, far moreimportant than the FUCHS case at any time before 1947, but these figuresWere peak figures and we had to bear in mind that the Post Office resourceswere by no means unlimited. The more cheeks we put on the fewer the numberof letters opened. He had criticised the fact that only a lettercheeldlad been put on in 1947 and this in spite of the fact that we knew thatt Lneneral practice, spies did not communicate their secrets through the ppaat..said that the purpose of the letter check was to get some idea of thenan's general background and the names of the people with whom he wascommunicating and the lrind of cincles in which he moved. This was oftenvaluabl pointer to further enquiries in. other directions and possibly toan approach to someone with whor he was found to be innocently in quiteIntimate touch.The D.G. had made the point during the meeting that he had neverbeen informed at the time the FUCHS case was re-examnined in 1947. I saidthat I accepted responsibility. but that he must realise that the case asit appeared then was only one of a very great number which might havebien held to be of equal or greater importance. The D.G. subsequentlywadeitcleartoDiclWhitethathedianotvishtoimplyinanyofhisremarks that the brief which had been put up to him when he Visited thePrime Minister was in any vay intended to be inaccurate or misleading.64.20th March.came to see me and left me a note for the D.G. whichI subsequently delivered. in which he asked for various carticulans inconnection with the FUCHS case. He said that if I would like him to.modify this letter in any way before delivering it to the D.G., he wouldbe pleased to do So. On the other hand, he would have to give someanswer to the points raised to his Head office in Washington. I promisedthat I would condider the matter and let hir know.22nd March.I had a talk with Tolson before he went off to S.I.F.E.23rd March.We had a preliminnry neeting to discuss whether there were anymeasures which we coulld take which might minimise the risk of anotherFUCHS case. I did this at the D.G's request. We reached no firmconclusions, but agreed on certain lines to pursue. It was decided thatwe would have a further meeting.24th March.Johnny Cimperman has delivered to the D.G. a message from Hooverin which the latter describes himself as outraged at the laok OT Co-operation that he has received from the Security Service in the FUCHScase. He complained, firstly, that he was not given a copy of theonfession, and secondly, that his representative was not allowed to seeFUCHS, and thirdly, that we did not discuss the case with Cimperman beforeit brole. There isi of course, a complete answer. Hoover was giventwenty-four hours notice before the arrest in case he wished to raise anyobjection or to take any action on his side of the Atlantic.. Simultan-eouslly, he was given such Intelligence leads as there were from FUCHS'confession Irnmediately his epresentative arrived here, he was shovna copy of FUCHS'E statement, fremn which he took notes. He was told tha'the could not keep a copy, but that one would be given to him as soon asthe proceedings were no longer sub judice. This very naturally coveredthe period of appeal. Ve had never refused to allow Hoover's representat:to see FUCHS at any time, but we had thought it important both in ourinterest and in Hoover's to re-establish contact and good relations withFUCH through Skardon after the trial before anybody else was allowed tointerrogate him. In fact, Skardon would have been strongly opposed toanybody, even from this office, seeing FUCHS until a later sage.The D.G. offered there and then to communicate with the HomeOffice, with a view to getting permission for an F.B.I. representativeto see FUCHS.As regards co-operation with Cimperman, this was purely a matterof indoctrinatio and a question of normal procedure between oun twooffices. It was really for the F.B.I. to notify us if they wanted thecase discussed with Cimperman. Although the latter was indocthinated iingeneral way, we had not been notified that he was speciallyndootrinated in this case and had. in fact, been warned by SIGINTagainst his being approached without the proper authority frau the U.S.A.Apart from this, it Mas our general custom not to institute a two-waycorrespondence. If the case started in Washington, we communicated withGeoffney Patterson. IT it started in London, we communicated withCimperman.65.27th March.Burt and Thompson came to see me about information which they hadreceived, through the C.I.D. , fromwho claimedthat he couldintroduce anybody we liked to THOREZ, the Frenc h Communist. He also gavenformation allegedly relating to the transmission of funds to this countryfor the Daily Worker, eto. They both seemed to think thatwouldnot be anxious wholly to mislead us; they thought his purpose in volunteeringinformation was probably in the hope that he might one day be re-admitted tothis country.I said that we would look into the statements, but that tey did notseem to us to be very promising.German of the G.P.O. came to see me. He is succeeding Firth.Kim Philby came over and he, Dick, Roger, John Marriott, and I hada discussion about the F.B.I. heing allowed to interview FUCHS.Ki.m was anxious to emnphasise the importance which the F.B.I. attacheto this interview. He was afraid that if it could not be agreed, Hoovervas quite capable of reducing our l1aison to a pure formality, regardless ofthe loss that it might be to his own organisation. He confirmed my view tharHoover would be totally unaware of what he was losing, and that even if hedid know he would not care in a matter where his own position and prestigewas concerned. We are still hoping, however, that we might be able topersuade the Home Office to allow the interview. Our case has been perfectlyClear all along; it would obviously have been undesirable,b before or immediatelyafter the trial, for anybody to approach FUCHS except Skardon. We have madethis clear without closing the door, that as soon as Skardon could report thatFUCHS, in spite of his sentence, was in the right kind of mood to co-operate,we could see no objection from an intelligence point of view to the interviewtaking place.28th March.Kitchin came to see me before leaving to take up his post in Delhi.Andrew Feiling also came to say good-bye.29th March.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINEDDEPARTMENT RSECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958201066.General Sir Harold Bniggs called, but I was unable to see him.Hewas seen by Shaw. He is to take over the cO-ordination of Police andMilitary activities in Malaya.I sav Nevsam. He ta lked to me about the FUCHS case; he seemed tothink that the matter was now dead. I said that T thought there would befurther representations through official channels - in fact I had justheard that such representations have come through to the Foreign Office.31st March.We had an appointments Board meeting to-day.There has been a lot of troublle at the Canadian end on theFUCHscase. Pearson of External Affairs has stated that information regardingPUCHS in the HALPERTIN diary was passed to us. Meanwhiille the LeaderChancellor, in making a speech in the FUCHS case in the House of Lords,had stated that no such information was passed. In fact what happenedwas that Peter Dwyer, who was in Canada at the time, was told that hecould have access to the enormous number of documents seized in a raidon HALPERIN house. Inoluded among these documents was the diary, whichhe did not see. He was working closely with the Canadians and relyingon them to bring to his notice anything of special significance affectingthis country. The Canadians passed on a photostat copy of the diary tothe F.B.I., but did not send one to us: the first we knew of it was whenwe started intensive investigations into FUCHS. The information wasreceived from the Americans, but lnt fnbm the Canadians. In fact it hadvery l1ttle significance, since when the entry was made FUCHS had madeno decision to act aa a spy. Had we known of the existence of this entry,it might have caused ns to make closer enguirie and it might have influenceduB when the decision was made to allow FUCHS to go to Harwell after hisreturn to this country.Ist April.The D.G has seen both the P.M. and the Lord Chanceilor, who nowreallises how the mistake occurred. I am afraid, however, tha't we haveto admi't that our statement in the Lord Chancellor's brief, that theSecurity Services were not informed about the entry in the diary, wasnot strictly accurate. It woulld have been possible, I suppose, forPeter Dwyer to wade through every single document and to send us a copyof the diary, and it may well be that if we had had our own representativethere, who would have had an M.1.5 rather than an M.I.6 approach to theproblem, this would have been done. The Lord Chancelllor took the wholething extremely well and winll correct his statement in due course.7.17th Amri18th April.Stephens came in to see me. He is worried about his staffingproblems. He now feels that not only does he want the officer whohas hust bean sent out to Nigeria, but also one in the Golld Coastand one to act as Staff Officer to himself in Accra. He clearlythinks very little ofI told him that in so far as overseas organisation was concernedwe had in a sense bitteneoff rather more than wer could chew. We couldnot deprive sections here, who are already overworked with highlyimportant matters, beyond a certain point. Neither could we go outinto the street and find ready-made Intelligence officers. We weretrying to get away from the practice of recruiting a man and sending himstraight out to a Colony, since we wene veny conscious that what matteredwas that such officers should have at least an adequate knowledge ofHead Office work and methods. It followed, therefore, that the build-up would have to be a gradual process.-THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 April 201068.We emphasised the importance of taking no action which would inany way disturb the ground.Burt telephoned to say that there had been a further communicationfromto Thorp of the C.I.D., in whichalleged thathe was in touch with THOREZ , the French Communist, and coulld effect anintroduction if anybody was interested.19th April.Thisfle came to talk to me about the Lancashine. caseran We have gotan office fixed upwith ten lines running in.ThePolice are eo-operating.The tragedy in Lancashire is that Arthie Hordern has died quitesuddenly. We have lost in him a great ally and a very charming person.20th April.--We held an Appointments. Boand to-day and selected four fairlypromising candidates -and VERNON B whom wehadseenithe previous week.2st April.Bamford tellls me that Sin William Jenkin is likely to accept thejob of Inspector of Police in Halaya. IT with be a great thing if he does.Murrie telephoned to lcnow whether we had any objection to the HomeSecretary sending a letter of notification to FUCHS that enaturalisationproceedings woulld be opened against him. I said to Murrie that it wouldsuit Us far better if this could be delayed for a matter of to months.We did not wish to give FUCHS a body blow until we had got a1l theinforrnation we rianted.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENIT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC BECORDSACT 1958April 20lo69.2lth April.I gave a talk to Colontan Police officer from Malaya and Africa -East and lest.25th April.Vle had a further discussion on the case of VYBROW with Kenneth Strongand Mantin Watson of J.I.B. We outlined to threim bur suspicione ofITYBROU! and brought to their notice the War Ofice papers which we hadobtained, showing that WIYBROW yas threatened with Cout Martiall whenserving as an A.s.0. in Plllestine during the war. He hat apparentlybeen getting money from infiilential Jews in order to pay informants, whowere ostensibly giving information about the Irgun and Stern groups.Such an arrangement, even if it was a bona fide one, was cllearly unwiseand contrany to all regullatlons. WYBROW had been sent home, but theCount Martial dropped and an enquiry was to be held. There appears to beno recond in the War Office of this enquiry, and nobody knows whether itwas even hela or not. The next think that appears in the War Office fileis WYBROW'E posting to I. .T.D. at Oxford, and in 1946, when J.I.B. wasbeing formed, he was given his discharge and taken on as a civilianemployee. We felt that; if this record had been made available to J.I.B.WYBROW would never have been taken OI1. J.I.B. agreed. On going backtoour records, ve had found a trace of WYBROVI being associated withLANDMAN'S daughter, but apparently Joan Chenhalls, thinking that J.I.B.had taken WYBROVI on with their eyes open, did not draw their attention tothis matter until she had made further enquiries. In point of fact,I think she should have done 80, since our records made it clear tha tWYBROW was a J.I.B. employee.Further enguiries as a result of intimation thatWYBROW was a possible suspect, had thrown up other connectons withsuspected members of the Israeli Intelligence Service. Strong feltthat, on the basis of this information, he could not afford to keepVYBROY in his employ a moment longer than was necessanyi. We felt,This IS A COPYORIGINAL DOOUMSNIT RETAINEDIDEPARTMENT UNDER BECTIONPUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 April 201026th April.Charles Haydon came to see me. I aslced him about MCGIBBON, whohad served under him ab a G.2. in Washington. E told him thatnwre haddefinite informatio that MCGIIBON had at one time rendered valuableservicestotheRussiansandthatthishadlinkedhimupinDurmnindswith a Leakage of information which took place in Washington early tn1915. Haydon sati that he had hevermheard MOGIBBON discuss politicsand that he had always found him an efficient offi.cer. Haydon's officei.n Washington had hot been concerned in any way with Ballkan affairs,although it waf possible that they might have seen a certain number oftellegrams about the general progress and intentions of the Soviet Armiesat that time.70.Cumming tells me that the Treasury have agreed to the setting up ofa research branch in the Post Ofice, the head of which will be McMillan.The Treasury will make a special grant to the Post Office for thispurpose.Newsam asked to see me about FUCHS' denaturalisation. He was wornielabout delaying this matter in case of questions in the House of Commons.I said that if he could agree to give us until the 3lst, we would see noobjection. Meanwhile we were anxious not to disturb FUCHS' mind in casehe had anything more to say either affecting us or the Americans. Itseemed to me that it was of paramount importance not to jeopardise anychance of getting leads which woulld assist in the elimination,eithe hereor the U.S., of people working on the atomic energy project.Newsam said that he thought the proposal by the Americans tointerviev FUCHS was now dead. I said that I vas not quite certain aboutthis, since Hoyer Millar was over here and was, T understood, extremelyconcerned about the refusal to let the Americans interrogate FUCHS. I knewin fact, that Roger Makins, whom I have seen at the Travellers. was puttingup a suggestion that the difficulty choulld be overcome by the matter beingpresented in the form of a request by M.I.5 for a representative of theF.B.I. to assist them in a further interrogation. This, Malins felt, wouldget over the question of precedent.Shaw brought Luke in to see me. He is succeeding Seel at theC.R.0.Cumming tells me that the Post Office have been granted a telecheolby the Home Office TD assist them in investigating a Post Office fraud.THIS I A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAIN T RETAINEDNDEPARTMENT ER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBL RECORDSACT 1968.Apad 20(028th April.b.Cmdr. Bowlby, Canadian. DIN.I. came to see me with an introductionfrom Nicholson of the R.C.M.P. T gave him a general outline of our world;he was interested in naval contracts, so T passed him on to F.J.The D.G. has seen the P.M. about the case Df FUCHS. The P.M. wasslightly peeved at not being told earlier. The D.G. pointed out to himthat he had up to now been dealing with the matter on a departmentallevel, since both the orign Office and the Home Office were concerned.The D.G. mentioned the Home Office view, that an awkward precedent mightbe created if the representative of a foreign pover allowed to intervie notone of our prisoners. The P.M. gave the impression in fact, that he granted would thehave interview paid much at the attention outset. to He this remarked and would that have, precedent did not mean a great71.deal, since we were living in an unprecedented world. TheD.G.askedwhether he could inform Patterson that permdssion had been finallygranted on his intervention with the P.M. The latter replied thar hewould rather keep out of it, but that there was no objection to ourgiving advance information to Patterson for transmission to the F.B.I.A telegram to Patterson was accordingly despatched, in which it was madeclear that on our intervention the matter had been re-considered.Perfect tellls me that naturalisation in the Channel Islands iscarried out on local authority, although where a man has been residentin this country Police reports are called for.Holmes has returned from Lancabhire. The case of "LancashireHotpot" appears to be going fairly well, although so far there have beenno sensational results. It appeared fairly clear from what Holmes saidthat the local Police in the area are not geared for an enquiry of thissort.Holmes had a discussion with various C.Cs on E.V.Ws in their areas.They seemed to be generally somewhat uneasy. There two maintransitcamps at Inskip and Full Sutton. When the E.V.Ws leave these campsfor employment, they become the responsibility of the employing firmin SO far as accommodation is oncerned. Some of the aliens are housedin hostels, and others in private lodgings. Most of the hostells areprovided by the National Service Hostel Association, which is a privatecorporation and closely conneeted with the Ministry of Labour. Someaccormodation is provided by locall agricultural committees, and sotne bythe Y.M.O.A. The hostels are normally in charge of a Warden of theex-Army N.C.O. type. The only way that the Police can obtain informatiois either from casual informants, who are rare and unreliable, or throughdenunciations which are often prompted by personal spite. The use ofagents is practically non-existent. Two ex-members of the PolishResettllement Corps in Cheshire, who assisted the C.I.D. in crime enquinie:are well-known to E.V.W.E as being attached. to the Police, and theyeareof little value for security purposes. C.C. Cheshire said he could notsorttthe sheep from the goats, and that if there was any trouble he wouldarrest the lot.THISI COPYSECTIONPUBLIC RECORDS2012D.N.I. rang me to say that he had had a satisfactory interviewwithwho has been told to put his case in writing.is a scientific officer whe was sent to America as part of a team. TheAmnerican D.N.I. alleges that he made statements on several occasions tothe effect that he did not approve of our Government or the AmnericanGovernment and preferred that of Soviet Russia.says that 75hof the onversation came from the American side. He also says thathe is a taunch supporter of the Labour Party and is not in the leastinterested in Communism. The trouble is, however, that he has createdthe wrong impression in the U.S.A. by talking about politics instead ofconfining himself to his official duties.72.lst May.Dick White has returned from leave.I saw Newsam aboutWYBROWT, andHe vasa little worried aboubut when I explained to him how essentialit was to establishbona fides, he gave way. He asked me whetherwe had lists of Communists ready to effect arrests in case of trouble. Tdo not know exactly what he had in mind, whether it was a war or thesuppression of the Communist Party, both of which seemed to me to be somewhatremote. I think he hnd been reading about the banning of the C.P. inAustralia and South Africa and he asked me if I could procure for him copiesof the Government Acts. He said that he did not wish to go to the C.R.O.At the D.G's meeting to-day, Roger Hollis asked for guidance aboutpositive vetting of certain highly important categories. This matterarose from the FUCHS case and the P.A. had the idea that something oughtto be done on these lines. Winnifrith had been placed in charge of aWorking Party. Roger's view is that we should not undertake enguiriesof relatives and neighbours, but that if the departments themselves wereengaging a man, or promoting him to highly confidentiall work, tey shouldperform the role of any employer and question the applicant very closely.There was general agreement with this view.'c' rang up to tell me that there was a Foreign Office proposal thatvisas for Germans should be cancellled on a reciprocal basis. There is tobe a meeting on Wednesday. Everybody, except the Foreign Office, appearsto consider the idea a bad one.There is a telegram from Singapore, stating that four members ofthe Singapore Town Committee (7) of the Malayan C.P. have been arrested, andalso another Chinaman suspected of being the culprit in the three recentgrenade instances, including the attempted assassination of the Governor,Gimson, on the 29th April. Documents seized disclosed the M.C.P. programmefor the next six months; this included strikes, arson, and murden.There has been B case of sabotage on H.M.S. Illustrious. Somebodyhad placed a number of flares round the boiler, which would have gone offwhen the boiler became heated.2nd May.This COPYORIGIALAL DeeUMENT RETATNVEDNDEPARTHENT UNDER SECTIONOF THEPUBLIC RECORDSACT 19582010John Marriott said there had been a satisfactory confirmation ofDur records as regards the number of Soviet diplomats in this country.After Several Questions in the House on the subject, the Foreign officeeventually wrote to the Soviet Embassy and asked them how many diplomats73.they had here. The Soviet Embassy replied by sending a complete list,which, Marriott said, tallied with our rexords. He said this wassatisfactory and that it also onfirmed his own belief that the Ruselansare punctilious on formal matter of this kind. He went on to say thatthe Foreign Office have put up a paper to the J.I.C. suggesting thatRussian diplomats should not be allowed to bravel more than fifty milesfrom London without giving notification of the fact. This paper istobe disouseed at the J.I.C. (o. & S.) on Friday next.I asked if,provided the paper is agreed, a list of Soviet Embassy cars would becirculated to the Police, and whether the latter Would have instructionsto pull them in if necessary. Serpell said there was a minute of theJ.I.C., nov in circulation, which made this point.The D.G. asked about the operation in the North-West. MalcolmCumming said it wan going wellDick said tha nothing of interest had yet come out of thetwo weeks check. A certain amount of watching is now being contemplated,although this cannot be carried out by the Police,a they are tcowell-knownboth in the district and to the individuals concerned.Malcolm Cumming said that the scheme for trying to deveto our owntechnical aids is going ahead. McMilllan of the G.P..0. is here for threemonths, and, although he is to visit Australia to carry out a specialjob shortly, he will be returning here for another rtwotmonths. MoMillanhas asked that he may be kept up to date with the Intelligence problemsof the day, which, he said would greatly assist him in his examinationof technical methods. Malcollm asked Dick and Shaw if they wonld havetalks with MeMilllan on this subject.Furnival-jones told the meeting about the sabotage to the"Illustrious"'. He said the ship has now sailed for Mensey Bay, butHoImes in touch with the Admiralty and will, if it is thought necessary,go to Liverpool to investigate.Stone said that the Military Security Committee of the BrusselsTreaty Povers had expressed a desire to be advised by the Security Serviceon counter-sabotage and general physical security. Exercises are at themoment being carried out in France, where our technical advice would bewelcomed.Hinchley Cooke spoke about a conference which he has to attendin the near future at the Foreign Office on the subject of theabolition of visas. He said that P.O.D., the Home Office, and ourselvesare going to tesist this to the utmostAlec Kellar said that the Ausitralian High Commissioner, who isa8o Minister of Defence, had compllained to the O.R.0. about the lack ofinformation received by Australlia on Malaya, particularly Intelligenceinformation Aeot said he had discussed the matter with the C.R.O.and had informed them of the general set-up in Singapore. The Austr lianshave, in fact, a representative on the J.I.0. (FE) who should be au fairwith everyting that is going on. There is also Courtenay Young'e closecontact with S.I.F.E. The fact is, however, tha't there 1s a generalshortage of information coming out of Malaya as a whole.Shaw spoke about the radd on the Communist H.Q. in Singaporefour and the arrests following made in attempt this connection, the anfd the foyerpornen- He mentioned thedocuments concerned had been examined they should produce quite a CFo offurther information.DOCUMENTRETAINEDINDEPARTMENTRECORDSACT 1958 Afrl 2o1o74.The D.G. told the meeting of the trouble tha had been experiencedwith the F.B.I. as a result of a representative of that body not beingallowed to see FUCHS. He said that as a result of further represenatiorto the Home Office, this permission had now been granted. He hoped,therefore, this would smooth things down with Mr. Hoover and that normalrelationship with the F.B.I. would be restored once more. John Marriottsaid that Johnny Cimperman had been informed of this decision.Perfect is rather worried about the relation between C..Cs andfactory managers. 0.2 officers are inclined to say that C.Cs willhelp factories, with the result that long lists of employees are sentto the Pollice for vetting. Clearly this is wrong and unnecessary.Wakefield has returned from sick leave.Baskervyle-Gleeg will toto B.4 Clayton to 0.S. and Mills to B.4.cTHS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDNDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3rd May.OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSAre2010At the J.I.C. to-day we were given a somewhat gloomy picture ofRussian air superiority. The display in Moscow on May lst was some-what impressive: there were T.U. 48 (the equivalent of the AmericanB.29), and both single jet fighters and twin jet bombers with sept-backwingo. An important deserter from the Soviet Air Force, who is underAmerican control, states that the tactical Air Force in Germany has800 fighters, 300 of which are jet-propelled, and 250 light bombers -probably twin jets. The photographs of these 'planes, taken in the air,have been submitted to aero dynamic experts in our principal factorieshere; they say that the planes are more advanced than anything thatwe even have on the drawing board. It is, however, difficult to saythis with any degree of certainty without knowing more about the aircraft'performance. It is hoped that the new defector may be able to enlightenus on this.Martin Watson told me that Tizard is always accusing J.I.B. andIntelligenve generally, of over-estimating Soviet capabilities. Watsonis inclined to think that perhaps there a tendency to underestimate.From time to time samples of various tools, pots and pans, eto. areobtained from Soviet Russia: on examination these arbicles prove to bemade of extremely inferior material, and from this the possibly fallaciousdeduction is made that Russian aircraft and other equipment are equallyfaulty. But, as Watson pointed out, the screwdriver which the ordinaryhousewife buys in Russia for 5 roubles and which anybody here would beashamed to sell for 6d, probably serves its purpose perfectly well, andthat it is entirely erroneous to conclude that screwdrivers and otherimplements used in the manufacture of aircraft are of a similar quality.I ha a conference vith Kelllar and Shaw on the WYBROW case. We agreethat we would discuss with Strong whether to let the case runor whether J.I.B. are ready to disclose WYBROW'E name and detainsof documents inJ.I.B. to which WYBRON might have access. Ve did notthink that we should discussIsraeli Intelligence on generallines at the. moment. Lastly,75.Lester Peanson, Canadian Commissi for External Affairs,has made a statement which has appeared in the Press, to the effectthat the Canadians not only gave us FUCHS'S name, but these of fourothers. This has been followed by two questions in the House here.the moment we have no idea who the other four are.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIO RECORDSACT 19582010Lith May.Colonel Knight, Canadian D.M.I., called. He talked about positivevetting for the Canadian Army which is conduoted by Intelligence Corpspersonnel after names have been passed over the R.O.M.P reconds. Iasked what form this vetting took and whether it did not cause resentment.Colonel Knight said that it took the form of enquiries from relatives,neighbours, former employers, etc. and when conducted by Army personnelwith Intelligence Corps badges on their shoulders it apparently caused noresentment. On the other hand, positive enquiries of this kind by theR.C.M.P. usually resulted in complaints being made.Colonel Knight vas interested in security matters generallyand I passed him on to Hollis.At the J.I.C. today Strong gave an account of the impressions ofa German General on the Russians as a result of his experiences in theRussian campaign when he cormanded a Division. Strong had known thiGeneral intimat when he was Assistant M.A. in Berlin before the war.The German, who was here on an official mission of some sort, made itclear that he had no subsequent knowledge about the Russians, and thathis views were based entirely on his former experiences. He thoughtthatthe present strength of their land Armies wag due in large measure to theirappreciation of the immense importance of ammoued units, and particularlyartillery, With regard to supplies, he would fee it wise when estimatingRussian capabilities to callculate that the Russians only needed about onethina of what any other Army would r equire, although this did not of courseapply to ammunition. He believed that the Russiand would always fixtheir objective, and having reached it would not be inclined to go furtheruntill they had reassembled their Forces and taken stook of the position.They would be too afraid of things getting out of hand; in other words, theywoulld probably not be good at exploitin a victory by giving rein to localinitiative. He thought., therefore, that the Russians woulld undoubtedlystop on the Rhine if they met with any sort of opposition, and would attackelsewhere, possibly in the Middle East or in Seandinavia.The Generall made the astonishing statement that the Russians weneon occasion eapable of not only shooting their own wounded but eating them.would not have believed this had he not witnessed it wi.th Hs own eyes.We discussed a poreible breal with China, which might result fromarefusal by the Britiish Goverpnent to allow the Chinese to establi.ahConsulates in Malaya. The Service were certainly worried about sourcesof intelllgence if al1 their Attaches were viithdravn, but a more serttous76.aspect would be the effect upon Hong Kong it might lead to an increaseof both over and covert propaganda within the Colony which might culminatein serious disturbances. The Garrison had been reduced and thedifficulties in increasing it again would be considerable in viev ofthe pressure upon our troops in Malaya.Philip Viclery's report on the reorganisation of IntelligenceDivision in Germany was generally approved, and the importance of theparts of security within Int. Diiv. were stressed. It was realised tha tInt. Div. might now expect attempts at penetration by the new GermanIntelligence service. The hope was expressed that the re-interrogationofPrisonerg of War would not be hampered by the proposed reduction instaff. It was recommended that the existing organisation shoulld beretained until the task was completed.We had an Appointments Board and selected RICH, an ex-IndianPoliceman, MORTON Jack Morton's brother),Robin Eyfe, B candidate for employment whom we had seen previouslycame to tell me that he now had a school for teaching Russian at a castlein Scotland, which could take on about twenty students. I said thatIwould mention the matter to the Service Departments. Fyfe allsosaidthat if we had any opining for him he was still anxious to get someregular employment.5th May.THISI A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDINDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSAOT 1958Apal 2o1o77.THE ORIGIVAL DUCUMENTRETAINED IN DEPARTMENTUNDDER SECTION 3(4) OFTHE PUBLIC RECORDSAGT 1958 Apr2oio78.A COPYORIGINAL RETAINEDNOEPARTMENT UNDER DERSEGTIONPUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958. Apr2Qo6th May.The Daily Express has Rcome out with a front page article on the FUCHS.case, stating that after considerable pressure, due to objections raised bythe British, permission had finally been granted to the F.B.I. to interviewFUCHS. It had, of course, been a condition that no publicity would be givenA telegram of protest has gone from the Foreign Office to the StateDepartment and Mr. Douglas, the American Ambassador, has told the StateDepartment that it is impossible to expect the co-operation of the Britishif all his telegrarns become the subject of a hand-out to the Press.This is about the fourth serious leakage through hand-outs to thePress by the Amnericans in the last few weeks. Others were even more damaginboth to us and to the Americans and related to the monitoring of Russianwireless. It appears to be impossible to do anything in the U.S. withoutconsulting the Congressional Committee or the semi-public (?) Commission on Wrepresentatives of the Press take copious notes.8th May.Burtcame to see me. I explained to him what vas proposed with regardto WYBROW.It had occurred to us that if after dismissal we got certainreactions which made it clear to us that WYBROW was retaining officialdocuments, we might want to operate a search warrant at short notice. Wecould not, however, afford to do this unless we were working on an alolutecertaintyi to search and to find nothing woulld cut the ground from underJ.I.B's feet, since WYBROVI was being told that his dismissal was due entirelyto administrative reasons. He was only a temporary Civil Servant and hisjob should be held by a permanent official. Burt said that if we gave hima statement to be produced to the Magistrate, he would arrange for an officeto be on tap; it would not, however, be possible to actually apply for awarrant unless we were going to execute it.The DwG. told us for the first time that he was proposing to go toCanada on a short visit to assist in the reorganisation of the Special Branchand the Intelligence Branch of the Canadian Police. Commissioner Wood hadasked that we should either give him an officer, or second one for a periodof two years. There vas no mentioned of the officer whom it was proposed tosend. The D.G. said that he would not be going to Washington or to Ottawa;this might give rise to speculatio and to further discussions in Congress orParliament about the FUCHS case.Val Boucher telephoned to say that Tubby. OLAYTON is worried aboutCommunism in Toc H, and wanted to see a representative of the security Sel dI said that if he could tell us when and where, we would see what we couldIt would not however be possible for us to advise on the subject of a purgeof Communists from To H.THIS I A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED79.NDEPARTMENT UNDER. SECTIONTHE PUBLIC RECORDS9th May.ACT 1958 Apri 2010At the D.G's meeting to-day, Dick said that had had some varniingfrom an agent regarding the May Day demonstrations which took place lastSunday and we had passed this on to Special Branch. As a result of thiswarning, the Police were in complete control from the start, 69 peoplewere charged. He said that these demonstoations arose out of therefusal by the Horne Secretary to meet members of the Trades Councilregarding the ban in May Day rallies. The Communist Party hadaccordingl;organised shock parties to break up Police cordons.Perfect said that he Chief of the Railway Police had rung upon Saturday morning in order to give some information about thesedemonstrations,whichhehadaccordingypassedontoB.l.A.Hesaid he thought this was a good example of the willingness of theRailway Police to co-operate with us.Dick said we had warned the Australiane about onea Communist, whom they were proposing to emplloy in a branch of theirBroadcasting Corporation in this country. In interviewing the man,however, they had informed him that what they called "the Secure ty chaps"had something against him and that they had been warned accordingly.Dick said this is the second time this has happened with the Australians,although he did not think anything more would be heard of this caseas the Australlians had turneddown for the job, and in any caseour information had been derived from TABLE sources. Hesaidhehadgiven instructions to his officers that when visiting the Australians,they should ask the latter how they intended to handle our informationand give advice when necessary.Malcom gave the final instalment in thecase, So far asthe disposal of his person was concerned. Having anrived in Montreal,telephoned here to say that he had forgotten the addresses givento him and could we please supply them again! He is apparently now quitehappy.Hill said that 0.S.3 had passed to him a draft Bill which theSouthern Rhodesian Government have drawn up in order to combat Communismthere. This will enable them to ban public meetings and to stopCommunist propaganda coming into the country, etc. Hill said, however,that he was not at all happy about the section of the Bill dealing withthe control of persons, which lays down that when a Minister makes adecision regarding an individual, the matter must then be referred to theCourts in order to decide whether or not the decision was justifiable.He said this is entirely contrary to our own constitutional practice andthat it coulld not possibly work out satisfactorily, since the questionof endangering sources would be involved. A Minister would probablybe in possession of secret information which could not be disclosedincourt, in which case the Court would be in no position to give judgement.We do not, Hill said, want a precedent of this kind established,Serpell said tha't when the D.G. was in Southern Rhodesia a similarpoint arose in conneetion with imigrants, when the D.G. made it quiteclear that we could not allow our evidence to be used in Court.It was finally agreed tha't Shaw and Hill should look into this matterand, if necessary, point out to the C.R.O. Hill's doubts If theyagreed with this line, it was thought that the C.R.O chould be asked wheththey would consider informing the Southern Rhodesian Government what theywere letting themselves in for.80.In connection with this matter, I asked if we had copies in thisoffice of the South African and Australian Bills to proscribe theCommunist Party. Shaw said we had not. I said I had been asked bySir Frank Newsam whether we could let him have copies as, for somereason unstated, he did not wish to go to the C.R.O. for them. I saidI thought Newsam's wish to see these Bills might probably be due tothe fact that he thought the same question might arise in this countrysooner or later, and he would like to study what they had done inAustralia and South Africa beforehand. I spoke to Shaw after themeetingand he agreed to obtain copies of the Bills.Roger said he had attended a meeting at the Treasury last weekin order to look into the question of positive vetting for some 200posts of particular importance. They did not get very far, he said,beyond asking the consumer departments to draw up a list of the mostimportant posts. The Home Office and this officer were asked to drawup a paper on the advantages to be gained from positive vetting.Roger. went on to say that he has now written a draft paper,which he las sent over to Mr. Baker of the Home Office, in which he has setout four possible lines of enquiry:(a) The employing department should ask candidateswhat their on position was.(b)References should be taken up more fully thanin the past, and other enquiries should be made offormer employers, who should be asked specificallywhether the individual concerned was considered to beloyal and trustworthy, etc.These two points, Roger said, should be valuable.(c) Police enquiry. We doubted whether there was much valuein this, because these enquiries could only be made wherethere was not a positive adverse trace in our records.(d) By checks of various kinds, operated by us, which wouldbe quite impossible to use for positive vetting as we mustretain it for definite work on suspects.He said that in the case of Police enquiries, they would undoubtedlycome to the notice of the public and of the candidate. If, on theotherhand, the enquiries were made by the employing department, no curiositywould be aroused as it was the normal practice for them to do S0.Peoplewould be far less inclined to give informatio about an individual tothe Police than to a prospective employers He concluded by sayingthat, although he did not think very much would come ou't of this plan, hedid think that it was of value in that it would tighten up departmentalprocedure.Roger said that Horrocks had received an enquiry yesterday from theEstablishment Officer at the Ministry of Defence regarding one of hisofficers, CUNDALL by name, who was in onsiderable financial difficulties.The Police had been making enquiries and had found at CUNDALL'S home anumber of official papers. He had also, apparently, been talkingindiscreetly outside and had mentioned that he was doing a courseatBroadway.Mr. Johnson, the Ministry of Defence EstablishmentOfficer, had wanted advice as to whether this man, having secretinformation in his possession, should be specially treated and kept onin his. job in order not to encourage him to divulge that information.ROger had nformed him that, although ve did not know details of the case,81.as a general principle we thought it was entirely wrong to thinkof keeping the man in a job because he had had access to secretinformation. The matter should be dealt with in a disciplinaryway under the Official Secrets Acts. He asked Mr. Johnson to letus have detaills of the case, in order to have on record the nameof a man who had been indiscreet. The Ministry of Defence arehandling the matter as a disciplinary ne and are not asking usto involve ourselves in the case.came to discuss the WYBROL. case. I explainedto him that General Strong fellt that he could not delay mattersanylonger. This did not mean, as Washington seemed to think, that allfuture leads into Israeli Intelligence woulld be broken; in fact, wehoped to devise ways and means for getting rid of WYBROW without hisbeing too apprehensive. I said that I would like to think thatWashington appreciate the dilemma. and felt reassuredAs soon asthe dismissal took place we would acquaint him, for the informationof C.I.A., with the name of the person dismissed, and that individualsconnection with Israeli Intelligence agents here. Thereafter, Ithinkve might have a useful pooling of information as between ourselves,S.I.S.andC.I.A. We are already giving C.I.A. any memoranda onpotential enemy Intelligence Services which we produce here, and thereseems no reason why we should not do the same with regard tD IsraeliIntelligence. We should also, of course, pass a copy to the F.B.I.who might have considerable knowledge about Israeli Intelligeneeactivities in the U.S.A.During the course of this discussion, poor Alec unfortunatelylet out the name of WYBROW, not once but three times, and indeedshowed the document in which WYBROW'E name vas mentioned toWith the utmost tact,effectednot to have hoisted this in! However, no damage has really beendone.loth May.THIS IS A GOPYbrought hisintoDOCUMENT RETAINEDsee me and others in the office.DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIO RECORDSl1th May.ACT 1958 ARIL 2.010Michael Cressvell, Chairman-of the J.I.C. (FE) attended the.I.C. to-day:He first reviewed the various countries in his a rea.In general he thought that the pace of deterioration had somewhatslackened. In Hong Kong there was no evidence of attack. In Indo-China there seemed to be a fair chance of cleaning up Tongking:ifthis was achieved, there was a reasonable chance that the Frenchmight make good. In South Korea the situati on was much better: theKoreans seemed to be doing well with American assistance. In Siamthings were improving. In Burma there was just a gleam of light,but a certain arnount depends on what they may be ablle to achieveduring the next two months. The situation in Indonesia is not toobad.82.As regards the military threat to Hong Kong, Oresswell thoughtthat there were now enough Chinese troops in the area to constitutea threat, and that if they really contemplated action, we might nothave more than about a week's warning. At the same time, he saw nosigns of action.The L.I.C. in Hong Kong was doing quite well; one had been startedin Borneo and was beginning to get under way. In Malaya, however, theposition was rather disquieting; he thought it was a matter of greaturgency to get Jenkinout. It had not yet been finally decided whatJenkin's position would be, but he thought that ht should be underGeneral Briggs.As regards the Interrogation. Centre; this was not yet a goingconcern; there appeared to be some argument as to who was going topay for it and there was a teneency in the Union to say that theynever asked for it and that it was, therefore, up to London to supplythe funds.In talking to Cresswell afterwards, I was satisfied that herealised the importance of getting the Interrogation Centre going atthe earliest possible moment. I gathered, too, that We are likely torefuse the Chinese the right to establish Consulates in Malaya.There is a certain exchange of information with Indo-China, up to andincluding "secret" on the basis of the need-to-know. The French areasking for information about Malaya, but this, for obvious reasons,cannot be supplied. At present our information about relationsbetween VIET MINHar the C.C.P. is inadequate.The draft security agreement between Australia and the Americansappears to be hanging fire. The Australlians are are sitting on itand the Americans are restive. It was suggested that the shouldcommunicate with Shedden.The Chairman raised the question of the reduction of staffsbehind the Iron Curtain, apparently on grounds of expense. He The saidthat the Moscow Embassy now. cost roughly. El, a year.Services are anxious to maintain their staffs and a suggestion wasmade that bachellors only should be sent.RILTHIS A COPY 2o0ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC REOORDSACT 1958 ARRIL 200Vle had a taffemeeting on postings.We still have a certainnumber of facancies.COPY 2o1083.ORIGINAL DOCLIMENT RETAINEDDEPARTMGNT UNDER SECTION12th May.THE PUBLIC RECORDSAOT 10T1958I told Irvine that the J.I.C. had discussed a proposal to raise theissue of French security in a big way. This is due to lisquieting reports,particularly in regard to the French Air Ministry. He thought thatthe matter would be better handled through N.A.T.O. than Western Union.I lunched with 1He told me that he was rather worriedby certain apprehensions of S.D.E.C.E. particularly in the mind oftha t Dick and Irvine were trying to build up the surete atthe expense of S.D.E.C.E. One of the instances which had caused thiswas a failure to letknow sometime ago that Irvine was going toParis.I toldthat Irvine had quite properly notified Andre,presumably because he was the servant of the Permanent Commission. Wehad been sorupulously careful to avoid any suggestion that he was stilltheservant of M.I.5. Andre ought, of course, to have notifiedandbut unfortunately Andre had ommitted to do this.The firstknew of Irvine's presence in Paris was a telephone callafter his arrival.I toldtorassurewhom he would beseeing on Monday, that the last thing in the world we wished to do vasto get mixed up in French intrigues; we had one aim and object and that wasto get on with the job, and so long as there were two or three FrenchDepartments who had information bearing on our subjects, we shouldwishto be in touch with them all.quite understands the position,a and will do his best to smooththings over. He thinks thatWill get a kick upstairs;mayl then be recalled, but will certainly not be head of the organisation.It is likely, too, thatandwill also get a kick upstairs,in which case Vidal may take over.has already promised the S.D.E.0.that he will r gard as his liaison officer in London. This soundstoo good to be true! I gather, for some reason or another, thatstill has confidence in me.I attended an extremely reary meeting of the Jebb Committee withWarner in the Chair, when we discussed the J.I.0' paper on subversivemovements in Africa. The Chiefs of Staff want to know what is beingdone about this paper. A great deal of time was wasted in explainingto the Commd ittee that in the British Colonies there were no CommunistParties and, indeed, with one or two exceptions, no Communists. Most ofthe movements were indigenous, but some of the African n tionalists,perhaps not surprisingly, thought that Stalin was a good fellow as hekept on saying that they ought to be rulling themselves. Equally, I hadto explain that most of the T.Us were only in embryo and that,with theexception of the Miners Union in the Copper Belt, Northern Rhodesia, nonewere affiliated with the W.F.T.U.Noel Willd came to see me to tell me about the reorganisation of L.C.S.gather that Drew is to take over. Wild's view is tha't as the armedonces are so limited, the only chance is to go in for cold war in a bigmay This may be so, but I am not quite sure whether Wild and Dreware the people to undertake the task. Wild has evidently been talk ingto TOKAYEV at very great length. The latter has persuaded him that thereis a considerable amount of disaffeotion in Russia and that if these84.elements were exploited, something in the nature of a counter-revolution might be started. I cannot help feeling that TOKAYEVlas rather let his imagination run riot on this. Even if Stalin andMolotov go, it does not follow that there will be any change in theregime, for the very good reason that there is unlikely to be anyonethere who would know how to change it.We had a staff meeting to-day.Roger is to create a new section todeal with security in Government Departments. We selected officers -VERNON,ELWELL is to go to S.I.F.E.and will be replaced by AKEFIELD, who is returning from sick leave.Baskervyle-Glegg will go to B.4. Clayton to O.S. and Millls to B.4.C.15th May.Kerr of Glasgow S.B. came in to see me with Mann. Glasgow havedone a really good piece of work in getting the membership of the Partyin the Glasgow area. I congratulated Kerr on his coup and on the waywhich he had tabulated the information to suit our files.brought the American D.N.I. Admiral Johnson,and the head of Air Intelligence, General ICorbell to see me. on acourtesy visit.It seemed a little odd that this introduction shouldhave been effected through C.I.A. although I bellieve C.I.A. relationswith the Navy and the Air Force are better than they areiwith Gr2 andthe Army.ORIGINAL DOCUMENIT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIO16th May.3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958APRIL2o10In Graham Mitchell's absence, Dick said thb problem as to whatpolicy should be adppted with regard to stopping the entry offoreign Communists into this country was becoming acute. Hementioned the case ofa French African Gommunist who had visitedthis country twice during the last two months, and had announcedhis intention of visiting it again in the near future for thepurpose of talking to Colonial students over here. We haveput up a proposition to the Home Office, with the agreement ofthe Colonial Office and the Foreign Office, that although thisman is a French Deputy, he should be refused permission to comeagain for the purpose of spreading Communist propaganda amongstColonial students here. It is thought, Dick said, that the HomeOffice will accept this proposition. Dick also mentionedthecase of another French Communist, closely associated with theCominform, who had visited this country recently. We had warnedthe Home Office but they would do nothing as the man had statedthat he was only visiting this country to place his child at school.It transpired, however, that the headmaster of the school in questionwas a member of the C.P. Executive. Conferences were, in fact,held, which were designed to bring the C.P.G.B. under the Cominform.Dick said attempts were being made to learn more about what wassaid at these conferences, and in the meantime he thought the HomeOffice should be warned of the extent to which people of this kindlie as to their intentions when they visit this country.Dick went on to say that the Daily Worker of 15.5.50 gave plansfor a World Peace Conference to be held on May 31st, to which manydelegates from abroad will obviously be coming. He said that, unlikethe Amnericans, our Government haa itherto done nothing to stop people85.coming here to attend such conferences and he felt it was time that somedefinite policy on the subject should be adopted as soon as possible. Hesaid he would ask the Aliens Branch of the Home Office to inform us whatdecision is taken eventually.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIO RECORDSACT 1958AfRiL 2oloI asked if there was any suggestion that this case might be a "plant"by the C.P., in order to try and find out what our sources of informationwere in these cases. Disk replied that he did not know, but it was apossibility. I then went on to say that I thought it was a mistake toput up cases where there was only one piece of evidence. Dick said thatwehad not urged that the case should be put up, but the department concernedwere most anxious that it should be. The D.G. asked whether when anindividual comes before the Tribunall he is shown the evidence against him,br whether the accusation is made verbally. Dick said that the man ismerely accused of being a member of the Party and that he is not shown theactual form of evidence.Marriott spoke about the recent closing by the Czechs of the BritishCouncil and the British Information Service in Prague, and our retaliatoryaction in closing the Czechoslovak Cultural Institute in London. Hesaidthis latter move did not amount to much, since the Institute had notreally functioned as such for about two years and in any case it was nowtechnically a British concern and woulld tontinue to flourish. He sadd theCzechshad also been asked to close down their Information Service over herebut he did not think this would have much effect either. He hoped, howeverthat the ineffectiveness of these efforts might make the Foreign Officetake notice of our annual expulsion of the Czech Military Attache.Malcom Cumming told the meeting that the Americans had been perturbedover mysterious knockings which had been heard in the house next door toAdmiral Connoilly, D.miin-C. U.S. Naval Forces Eastern Atlantic andMediterranean. Having visions of microphones being installed the Americanshad sought our aid. It transpired, however, that the lady next door wasmerely having her house nedecorated!Perfect said that the Home Office have set up a committee underthe chairmanship of She Alexander Maxwell. to enquire into the organisationof the Jersey Police. This had arisen out of a Scotland Yard enquirylast year into cases of arson on the Island, when the local Police had beenmost unco-operative. Sir Alexander Maxwell and Mr. Tarry had left forJersey.Shaw said he had been informed by Valsh-Atkins of the C.R.O. thata conference was to be held on the 17th May for Commonwealth High Commissionwhen the question of Commnunism in their various countries was to be disousse86.He wanted to know if we could send somebody over to a briefing meetingthis evening, when the Secretary of State would be in the Chair, to discussthe line to be taken at the forthcoming conference. It was thoughtthis office could give information on Comtnunism, Which the C.R.O. coulduse in encouraging High Commissioners to make their own contributionson the subject. Shaw said that Kellar and Oughton were to attend themeeting.Shaw apoke about the importatior of half-inch steel tubing intoWest Africa fron this country. This matter was brought to our noticeby the firm of Acoles and Pollock, who, amongst other firms, had hadorders for this material from West Africa. They said that this tubing hadbeen used in the past for the manufacture of Home-made weapons, althoughnow it was said to be needed for the manufacture of bicycles, etc. whichwould in fact not be made of this high-grade material in the ordinary way.He said this was a serious matter and S.L.O. Nigeria has bean asked forhis comments. The Nigerian Government have asked the Board of Trade tostop these supplies being s.ent out, but the Boand of Trade replied that theycould not do this as it might interfere with our export drive. Shaw saidthat orders had also come from South Africa for this tubing, which, he said,was curious as they had large supplies on the spot out there. Theargument between the Board of Trade and the Nigerian Government is stillcontinuing.Furnival-Jones said we had now heard fromn Alan Roger that theaeroplanes which were sabotaged on the airfield at Hong Kong were theproperty of the Chinese Communist Government. Investigations were stillgoing on and we are to receove a full report in due course. Unfortunatelhowever judgement was given in favour of the Chinese Gomnunist Govt.since it was maintained that when they took over in China the air serviceconcerned was automatically taken over by them. This had caused greatembarrassment to the Government and to the C.R.O.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDTDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSAOT 1958 AeRie DoOStrong telephoned to me about a disciplinary matter in his office.Hismilitary re'presentative had intimated to D.D.M.I. (0. & S.) thattherewasaleakageinJ.I.B.Strongwasanxioustoknowwhathispowers were for dealling with this man. I said, after consultation withHill, that while he could proceed under the Army Act and under Section 2of the Official Secrets Act, this would obviously get him no where. Itseemed to me that if the officer refused to disclose from whom he got theinformation in J.I.B,, Strong was perfectly within his rights in sayingthat he had no further use for his services and that he should go back tohis Regiment.came in with a letter whi.ch he was proposing to sendto the D.G. a propos of an incident87.had by that time opened and rea it. I do notthink much harm has been done, because before we can collaborabe with C.I.A.on Israeli Intelligence, we must know exactly where they stand.ould be referring the matter to Washington for their comments. I saidthat I thought when he had done so, it would be useful to hav a round tablediscussionseemed to be genuinely distressed about Kellar, whoHe had, hoped that Kellar would not get into any serious trouble as a resultnot unnaturally, been in a frightful state about what he had done.of his indiscretion.THIS IS A COPY17th May.ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONThe D.G. left for Canada to-day with Michael SerpellTHE PUBLIC ICRECORDSACT 1958Apo2o10Holmes talked to me about the case of the Illustrious", where flareswere placed against the boiler. He was anxibus to take finge printsof those who might be concerned, since prints had been discovered on theflares. I said I rather doubted whether this would be acceptable to theAdmiralty, who were of course running a certain risk of being accused offorcing ratings to have their prints taken, even if this were done on apurely voluntary basis. Provided, however, he could carry the Board ofAdmiralty, I saw no objection.Miss Chenhalls talked to me about the WYBROW case. It is now comingoutfairly clearly that WYBROW was definitely the man responsible for theleakage from J.I.B. he is obviously closely tied up with the IsraeliIntelligence,and both his behaviour and that ofhis secretaryare extremely dubious.I held a meeting to-day wit Hollis, Furnival Jones, Perfect,Holmes, Oughton and Mann on the question of Police vetting. It wasagreed that there should be no alteration in the terms of the letter,addressed by B.1.A. to Chief Constables, when it is proposed to placea secret contract with a particular firm in a Chief Constables area.It was agreed that in future P.L.S. should make it clear at S.B. officersmeetings that the results of any sedurity vetting which they might carryout at the request of a firm should not be transmitted to tha t firmdirect but through this office. It was felt that no further instructionsto the existing ones given to C.2 office rs with regard to their relationswith the Police were necessary. C.2 undertook to inform the ChiefConstable of Dorsetshire that in our view the demand made bySir Alan Cobham' firm for the vetting of their employees was throwingtoo heavy a burden on the Police and should be resisted.a8th May..At the J.I.C... to-day Blount gave an account of his visit to theFar East. On the whole what he hod to say was already known; he did,however, draw attention to the dangers of spreading disease in rubberplantations. The Americans are very largely dependent upon the rubberthey get from Malaya.The Russians are, however, also gettingconsiderable quantities and willl probably, therefore, be opposed to thespreading of any disease until they have completed their stock-piling.It appears that the disease could be very easily spread with no more than bechecked. The young rubber could be destroyed in twelve minutes.the contents of a fountain pen; it woulld spread rapidly and could not Blountat.THIS A COPYappears to have met Jack Morton,an other officers, Land to hsvenformed a very good opinion Df them wherever he went In ThdialheSiteKitchin.OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 Aprel 2010Cresswell, Chairman of the J.I.0. Far East, has also at themeeting. He mentioned the demand in Malaya for good IntelligenceOfficers; they are for the purpose of collating information receivedand no linguistic quallifications are apparently required.We discussed a paper placing restrictionsson the movements ofmembers of the Russian Trade Delegation. It was agreed that the numberof members of the R.T.D. could not be regurded aa excessive, in viev ofeconomic and trade factors. It appears that we are already restrictingcertain types of machinery being sent to Russia; meanwhile, we learn thatother European countries are selling the same articles. The questionofrestrictingthemovementsofmembersoftheRussianTradeDelegationmay be considered further. It is realised, however, that it presentsa formidable administrative problem. The Services said they had noticedthatcertainmembersoftheR.T.D.hadamilitarybackground;theythoughtthat if we could supply lists of members of the R.T.D. since 1946, it mightbe worth checking the names against the Services personality index. Itwas finally decided that no request should be made to cut down the size ofthe R.T.D., but that recommendations should be made to larrassboth ServiceAttaches and members of the R.T.D. The Russians should be asked to stateby what routes they intended to travel and the Passport Control shoulddemand fuller particulars of reasons for visits.D.M.I. raised, off the Agenda, the question of the application ofthe purge system to employees of SIGINT. He quoted the case of a mannamedin Cyprus, who had written to the Greek League forDemocracy in London, asking for literature and to be informed whether hisletter had been censored. On present information, the man could not bebrought up under the purge system. Even if it were permissable to posthim elsevhere, there is no place to which he could be sent where he would belikely to lese damage than he may be doing in Cyprus. D.N.I. had anothercase.andIt was agreed that before proceedingfurther with this matter, 'c' and I should consult with Bridges.I was talking to Graham and he tells me that eighty-nine cases havebeen dealt ith under the punge. In 44 cases there was no counter-challenge by the accused: Among the 40 challenged who were seen by theAdvisers, 14 had the charge upheld; in three cases the prima facie rulingwas withdrawn; in two cases there were extenuating circumstances; in 18the case was not upheld, and in three the accused declined to appear.There are some 185 cases being investigated, where there is only suspicion.In some 67 cases Ministers to whom a prira facie case has been submittedhave decided to take no action, owing to the innocuous employment of theacoused.Wild came to tell me tha t Drew had been appointed as head F-L.C.S.He seerned pleased at this idea, as he thought it might lead to more positiveaction.I went to see Howe and Burt, at notice Burt's about request. which he Howe thought tad me I that oughthistwo to know. things He had had recently been dining come had to with been Doughty., present who and is was I belleve evidently Recorder a great of frie:Brighton, when a87.of Doughty's It seered on the whole to be extremely undesirablle thathe was boasting a great deal about his own importance; he travelled agreat deal and offered to get Howe through the Customs if he was everin difficulties, ete. etc. In fact, he gave the impression of beinga kind ofa dubious financial adventurer who gave us a lot oftrouble during the war. The conversation turned on the FUCHS case, whensaid that he understood from a friend of his in M.I.5 that in factall the newspaper talk was nonsense tha M.I.5 had had the whole thingtaped and were employing sixteen watchers to unravel the FUCHS network.Ronnie Howe eventually askedwho his informant was, when the latterreplied that it was a man namedI said that T should like to takethis up, but Howe was anxious that I should say nothing until he had madefurther enquiries aboutHowe then asked me aboutDid I replise that he had beenbrought up in the very worst possible Police circles, namely, under twoBrighton Police chiefs, Griffin and Gentle. He said that in thewholeannals of the Police it would be impossible to find two more shockingcharacters. He knew nothing againstbut it did of courseoftenhappen that if the heads of a Police Force were bad, the subordinateswere of the same vintage. I said that if he had anything ngpositive aboutI should naturally wish to go further.He promisedat ifanything did come to his notice he would let me know..URIGINAL DOCUMENIT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS19th May.AOT 1958 ARRIL 2010I attended a further meeting of the Jebb Committee, with wanerin the Chair, when we discussed affairs in the Midate East and thepossibility of assisting Middle Eastern countries to improve theirsecurity forces. We had, of course, done this in the Lebanon, whereafter a visit by Graham Mitchell a Police officer had been appointed.Wehad also sent an officer to Persia, and hoped to get a Police adviser.I said that I thought a Police adviser was the best solution, but that itwould generally need a visit beforehand to ascertain precisely what vasrequired.Clegg and Lamphere of the F.B.I. have arrived to interrogateFUCHS.. They have brought with them some reasonably good photographsof a man called Harry yGOLD whom they believe to be identical withFUCHS'S contact in the U.S.A. They sent us a somewhat phoney photographof this man several weeks ago, whi.ch FUCHS had failed to identify. Ibelieve they allso have a movie of Harry GOLD. It seems to us that itwas their intention to represent this visit as a scoop for the F.B.I.where the British had failed.2oth May.The F.B.I. interrogated FUCHS and showed him photographs. Hewould go no further than to say that he woulld not discard the possibilityof identity. Meanwhile, I warned Pat Reilly of what we thought was goingon.We allso sent a telegram to Geoffrey Patterson.22nd May.The arnest of Harry GOLD has broken,As re rather expected, therefection in the Press here is that the Americans told us about FUCHS,leading to the latter's arrest, but we refused to allow them toTHIS COPY 2o1go.ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDERISECTIONinterrogate FUCHS, but that now we have done so they have Solved thercase in fourty-eight hours, where we failed. The aesaon anose as towhetherTshouldhavesaidanythingtoCleggbeforethebreak.Itookthe view that it was difficult to accuse the EB,I. of trying to makea scoop before they had done so, and that in any case we had to reckonwith the fact that we were dealing with a cross between a politicalgangster and a prima donna, who had no intimate knowledge of the caseand who, even if he had, would be quite prepared to sacrifice anythingand anybody if his own position was at stake. He would have no idea ofthe measure of our co-operation and, indeed, it would be in the interestsof his own people to keep the information from him. If, therefore, therewas a total break, Hoover would never know what he had lost.23rd May.I talked to Boddington about interviewing certain people in theMinistry of Defence and the Foreign Office on the subjeet of the leakage.of information concerning the Templer Mission. It seemed to me thatBoddington had done well in a similar case affecting the Admiralltysome time ago, and that he might well undertake this work under Hill'sdirection.At the D.G meeting to-day I told them about a criticism of thepurge system by the Ds of I., which is based in one or two cases ofSIGINT. personnel. They have expressed anxiety regarding the securityof SIGINT and intend tr put the whole matter to the Chiefs of Staff.I said I had pointed ou to them that there was a constitutional issuein this. We had made it quite clear that there were many disadvantagesin the purge system, but we had been overruled and we had, therefore,operated it to the best of our ability under inatructions from thePrime Minister. We could not be a part to any joint criticism putup by the Ds of I., but if they did so the matter would automaticallybe referred back to us for comments. This, I said, was accepted by theDs of I. but it was decided that as a preliminary step 'c1 and I shouldsee Bridges.In this connection, Graham Mitchell said it might be possible forDepartments to ring off a very small number of highly secret jobs, inthe same way as is being done with the Ministry of Supply at the momentin connection with positive vetting. It would be possible, he said,without damaging the purge system, for Departments not to post peopleto these jobs when their reliability was in doubt.T asked Graham to study the situation and to let hme know, as far ashe could, what the concerted view was in order to make some concreteproposal to Bridges.John Marriott said he knew nothing about the Russian trawlers whichhave recently been anchored off Plymouth. He said it was interesting,however, that two traveilling Russians who were concerned with thedistribution of "Soviet Newsil were due to have made a trip to Brrminghambut suddently turned up in Southampton instead. IT was thought that thiswas probably due to the fact that Western Union naval manoeuvees wereshortly due to start. I said I woulld robably hear more about this atthe next J.I.C. Directors meeting. Dick thought something interestingin this connection might turn up on the B.2a checks. Alec Kellarexpreesed the view that this move by the Russians was purely colld wan1,propaganda. When our ships stray into Russian waters they are arrestedand ther is a tremendous fuss, but the Russians are allowed to comeboldly into Plymouth harbour unimpeded.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION314) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 Apre 20l0Graham spoke about the Working Party of the Jebb Committeeand discussions which had been going on regarding the admisiiono ofleading members of foreign Communist Parties into this country toattend conferences, ete. This had arisen in connection with theWorld Peace Conference, which is to take place, next week. Oughtonand Miss Bagot had attended the meeting of the Working Party last weekand had found themselves in the extraordinary position of having toexplain to the Foreign Office that the Home Secretary had certainpowers to refuse people to land in this country! Graham went on tosay that it had been suggested that the whole matter should be put up fora high level decision on policy between the Home Secretary and theForeign Secretary, who were the two people immediately concerned; itwill then probably go up to the Cabinet. He said it was unlikely thata policy decision would be reached before the World Peace Conferencetakes place. A report on the subject is being prepared by the WorkingParty.Vickery reported U'ren's return to this country. He said thatIndia is rellying more and more on us and they could not do without ourS.L.0. there at all. This is satisfactory.I gave lunch to the F.B.I. Everything vent off quitepleasantly. Their interrogattion was continuing, but they are alreadycovering ground which has been covered by Jim Skardon. T learnedoff the record from Thistle, who has seen something of Bob Larapherethat my estimate of Hoover is not very wide of the mark. He clearly92.lid not know what he was doing when he sent Fletcher to his outstatiorn San: Francisco, and relegated Lish Whitson to a junior position. Fletcherlad more knowledge of Soviet espionage than anybody else in the Bureauind all Hoover has really done is to dislocat his organisation.Asimilar position would be reached here if the D.G. suddenly sacked DickWhite and John Marriott.George Jenkin came round. He has accepted the post as Adviser to thefalayan Government on Intelligence matters, but is still in the air as tonis precise position vis a is General Briggs. I told him alll I could,and said how glad I was he was going as I was sure that he could get the.Bs on to the right lines. He said that he thought he would be able toeffect a very satisfactory liaison with S.B. Singaporels as Athe head of it wasa personal friend of his.OBIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS25th May.ACT1958Apr2010I went to see Pat Reilly to ask him whether the Foreig'n Office hadconsidered the political aspects of the proposal to hold the World Peace.Conference in London on the 3lst May. From the security point of viewwe did not mind, providedwas not admitted, since we thoughtit might be hisintentior to establish contact with West African students.If,however, the matter was being considered by the 6old War Committee, on thelinesofgettingsomejointactioninWesternUnionaboutsuchconferencesit might be a pity to allow London to be the centre of such an importantmeeting. Alternatively, if the delegates were turned back the publicityand propaganda might be worse. It seemed to be an open questior but onethat should be onsidered on a high level.Reilly did not know who was handling this in the Foreign office;whether it was the Northern Department or I.R.D. He said there was a questioof setting up an anti-Communist section intthe Foreign Office to deal with Onthese matters in future and that he hoped it would be under himself.this occasion he finally ran the problem to earth in I.R.D. They a said thatthey had been considering it carefully and that they were and puttingshoulld berefused. I heard and Stellites later that should Younger be refused, suggested but that to the Western Home Europeans Secretary is Irecommendation up to Kenneth Younger that hadshould fail to be understand. given Ultimately it was decided to stop nobody; thisthat Russians admission, although what the logic of this decisionpresumably on the Home. Secretary's recommendation.more I into mentioned the Intelligence again to Pat picture. Reilly the He apologised uestion however, of that bringing for it having was the his done Home intention nothing Officebeyond to tackle spealcing the problem to Strang. on the first appropriate occasion.Igathered,at prints Plymouth. Perfect of ratings. came rattled The to Admiralty talk The and Board approached to me have agreed about now the got the that First sabotage cold this Lord, feet was case about who to be on reversed done, taking the "Illustrious" but the the C.-in-C. finger order.PlymouthgotAll very typical.3Oth May.The D.G. returned from with Canada. the reports He wishes in the to American see Clegg, and Canadian as he isprofoundly press since on his the depasture. dlseatisfied FUCHS case. I told I gave him the that D.G. I was an proposing account of to what see had Bridges happened with93.'c' to-morrow on the question of unpurgeable people in SIGINT.Telegrams from Hong Kong show that the C.I.A. incident is calmingdown.C.I.A. will, I think, withdraw at an early date.Hutson of the Home Office rang about the letter to FUCHS. informinghim of the Home Secretary' decision to denaturalise him. I said thatitwould be most unfortunate if this letter arrived in the middle of theAmerican interrogations, and, indeed, that there was still, we hoped,one more identification on this side in which We thought FUCHS might beable to assist us. I had spoken to the D.G. and he wished to have aword with Newsam. This he subsequently did and obtained a respit untilthe 15th June.Thistle brought me in a draft on the E.V.W. situation, which I amsending to Newsam.31st May.'o' and I saw Briages about non-purgeable cases in SIGINT. Winnifrithwas also present. It was agreed that administrative d justments would haveto be made, where this was possible without recpurse to challenge. If adismissal had to take place, it could only be done on grounds ofinefficiency, etc. These grounds would have to be carefully consideredby us in conjunction with the Department concerned ar the Treasury.Ineither case we shoulld be given a mon'th to six weeks for intensiveinvestigation before action was taken. This it was hoped, would reduceany question of victimisation to the minimum.Bridges mentioned that in conversation with the Prime Ministerand Bevin, a desire had been expressed for an enquiry on a Ministeriallevel into the activities of M.I.6 and M.I.6. Although the FUCHS casewas obviously the cause of this, the enquiry was to be of a generalnature. Briages had talled on this, as he thought it unnecessary, buthad been obliged to compromise by suggesting that Norran Brook shouldconduct the enquiry, possibly with the assistance of Drew. He hoped wewould not mind. Feeling that it did not matter much whether we minded ornot, we made no comment. Briages had also been asked whether he thoughtthere should not be a Minister in charge of Secret Services. This he hadvetoedsuccessfully;hecouldthinkofnothingmoreundesirable-themore S0 since we should probably get some low-gradeMiniste Minister withoutPortfolio who had nothing ellse to do.ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSst June.ACT 1958 AfRIL DoroLangley, Director of Scientific Intelligence in Canada, spoke to theJ.I.C. about his work.I presume thathe has now become a Canadian citizen. What seemed to be of interest inhis brief tallk was the similarity between geological and meteorologicalconditions in Northern Canada and in a large part of the north easternsector of Soviet territory. He appeared to have made a very carefull studyof this.ARRIC THISI A COPYOICORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED94.DEPARTMENTUN SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSThe D.N.I. mentioned that Schofield, his reprepentatsive on the J.S.M.in Washington, had recently paid a visit to Canada. He hadfoundthat,in Service circles at any rate, de COURCYS recent lectures had made avery deep impression. It was even suggested tha his remarks about Russdirdevelopments of atomic energy were so depressing as to cause people towonder whether it was worth while proceeding with the cold war - in facthe was trying to engender a defeatist attitude, although with what measureof suocess he did not know.It was thought desirable that the Foreign Office should inform theC.R.0. and let them have the note on de COURCY which they had circulatedto their Ambassadors.The D.M.I. sai.d that he had recently had a long talk with King Carol,who apparently had an elaborate intelligence system and seemed to be Wellinformed.(I) said that Air Vice Marshal George was reassuring about thestate of security in the Air Ministry; which not as bad as he. thought.He could not, however, speak about the position in Civil Affairs Ministries.The Ministry of Defence, he thought, was trying to get down to theCommunis st problem.The Directons of Plans attended themeeting for a discussion on Frenchinsecurity. They said the present position was leading to a deadlockall round and was hampering the preparation of papers. This was the moreimportant, since it seemed that the Standing Group for NATO in Washingtonwas really to become a kind of 6ombined Chiefs of Staff in peace and van.If we could not talk freely to the French, this was going to be verydifficullt.As suggestion was made that the Minister of Defnrce might approachthe French Minister of Defence, Pleven. I said I thought that this oughtto be followed by a discussion on security standards, on somewhat similarlines to those that we were proposing to hold in Washington with theAmericans. Such discussions would deal with vetting, the purge system,and the METRIC and COSMIC systems.Wild and Drew came to talk about deception, Drew has just takenover the L.C.S. He said tha his aim and object was to obtain the channelsand to pass something through them which would produce a reaction which couldbe noted. T pointed out to him the great difficulty of providing such achannel. While it was possible to find people who would receive informationonbehalfoftheSovietGovernment,itwasextremelydifficulttoknowwhatthey thought of it when they got it, and still more difficult to know whatMoscow thought of it. Apart from this, reaction on informatio of this sortwas less likely in time of peace than in time of war. Drew thought thatwe might from time to time come upon channels which obviously, from a C.E.point of view, woulld lead us nowhere, but which might be of interest to him.I said that this was possible and that we would certainly keep our eyesopen. Drew subsequently saw the D.G., when it was arranged that he shouldcome and talk to Directors.Clege and Lamphere came to say good-bye. The D.G. had seen themonthe previous day. He referred first of all to Mr. Hoover's messagein which he had spokenn of his sense of outrage at the lack of co-openation.He hoped his reply had made it clear that he considered Mr. Hoover's he hadcriticisms to be unfair. He did not like the references that, seen9s.in the Press while he was in Canada, to the FUCHScase, and in particularthe arrest of GOLD; the implication was that the F.B.I. had succeededwhere M.I. had failed, or had been obstructed. He said that if theremere furter press comments reflecting on the reputatior of his Service,ley might well lead to Questions in the House of Commons, and he wouldnot hesitate to put forward factual statement on the real relations betweenM.I.5 and the F.B.I in reply to such questions. He felt that hi Servicehad shown onsiderable patience up to the present time, but this patiencewas not inexhaustible.Clegg replied that he would have no objection to such statementsbeing made; there was nothing to hide,a tha't the F.B.I. had a clearconscience. He said tha Hoover's sense of outrage was not directedagainst M.I.5 but against officials of the British Government.THIS I THISISAC COPYThe D.G. saw Newsam yesterday about the denaturalisabion tterewhighAiNEDthe Home Office were proposing to send to FUCHS. It was agreed that theSECTIONdespatch of this letter should be postponed until June 15th OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958Are"The Giant Panda" (Denham) came in to talk about a recent visit ofhis to Malaya. He seemed to think that S.0. activities were called for.I do not quite know whathi business is, but I gather that he travels aboutlookingatrubberplantationsnotonlyinMalayabutalsoinJavaandSumatra. He was anxious to have returned to him his notes on his visitto the Caribbean. T told him tha t nobody was allowed to take away theirdiaries, and that in fact the late D.G. had destroyed his before leaving.Nould, however, have a look at these notes and let him know my views.2nd June.I Saw the D.M.I. and the D.IN.I. in order to explain to them whatBridges had said in regard to jumping the purge system for SIGINT employees.I made a point of telling them how necessary it was to allow for a period ofa month to six weeks intensive investigation, in order to avoid as far aspossible any accusation of victimisation. I cited to them the examplesof a Woman in the A.T.S. and of the case in the I.D.C. and pointed outthat where the facts were absolutely correct, the circumstances as finallydiacibsed put a completely different complexion on each case. They weremuch impressed and interested by these two examplles. Iesaid that therewerequite a number of others of varying kinds. I then pointed out that whilethe purge system was clearly necessary since, although every Communistwas not necessarily a spyi, the temptation to become one if he had accessto secret information vas obviously very great; he would probably start bydisclosing some confidential information to his local group; this wouldget to the ears of the District Party Commi who might ask him toelaborate. Finally, he might well be asked to produce a document or acopy of one. I was, however, important to realise tha it was not alwaysthe Communist who was the spy - a review of cases over a period of twentyyears revealed that something between 600 and 700 of the British subjectsInvolved were not Party men; they might have a Marxian ackground; they mightlieve vaguely in the Russian experiment; or they might be pro-Russianfor other reasons. Equally , they might be subject to certain vices whichgot them into debt, OP they might arbe unwittingly drift into espionagethrough some apparently innocent commercial enquiry which they had been askedto make. The ellement of blackmail sometimes entered into the picture. The95.number of otential spies in these categories was, Of course, very large,and detection extremely difficult. The lesson of the FUCHS case showedthat in similar circumstances another manoof his kind might well berecruited for a secret project. Once the decision had been made toemploy FUCHS, there were two fields of detection. Firstly, the fieldwhere he obtained the information, and secondly, the field where hetransmitted it. In the first field there was really no prospect ofsuccess, since the information vas either the product of FUCHS' brain,or he was entitled to it in view of his position. In the second fieldthere was a period of a year when he did not operate at all, and thereafterhe only made contact about once every three months. It followed, thereforethat unless you were behind him continuously for three months without hisbecoming aware that he was the subject of observation - in 1 tself anextremely difficult task - there was very little chance of obtaining aresult.When yoll considered that there were literally hundreds of cases ofa prima facie kind, where the evidence was far stronger than in the case ofFUCHS, it would be realised that we were up against a formidablle problem.I then explained that our machinery was designed, as far as possible,to concentrate on Party members, associates, and anybody who was believedto be engaged in underground activity. It was onthe basis of thisinformation that we tried to obtain from the centre that we carried outour vetting commitment. To approach the problem from the circumferenceinvolving the Ministry of pply.industrials, involving some 300,000 people,would merely clog the whole machine.I wondered whether for SIGINTpersonnel it woulld not be possible to get them under some sort of ceiling.This would remove them from the purge prodedure and enable the authoritiesto deal with them administratevely or by Court Martial:D.M.I. said that this had been put uy but had been shot downon grounds of economy. I wondered whether it would not be possible toreopen the matter on a really high level, but what shook me far more wasthe fact that conscripts were being takeaninto Eastcote and employed inSIGINT establishments abroad; then passing out fully indoctrinated at thecompletion of their service. Firstly, they left the Service just at thetime that they were becoming most usefull, and secondly, since many of themwere about twenty years of age, their political views might not haveformulated, and nobody knew whether they would go Right, Left or Centre.This, surely, was a veny great danger. Both Shortt and Longley--Cookeagreed, but did not see what could be done. They both seemed extremelygrateful for what I had told them and, I think, considerably enlightenedand reassured about our work.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDNDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1 1958 APRIL 2006th June.I attended the J.I.C to-day when we discussed French secnrityIput forward a suggestion tha tafte am approach by the thinister Defence,22.we should send over a commission to discuss security standard on thebasis of: (a) vetting. (b) the purge system, and (c) METRIC and COSMICsecurity. To soften the blow, we should say that the Americans hadexpressed anxiety about our security: that we were not wholly satisfiedwith theirs, and to resolve the difficulty we had agreed to a meeting inashington. Whether their doubts were legtimate or otherwise, it wasessentiallto cllear the matter up, otherwise there Would be a restrictionin the flow of secret tinformation which could only be detrimental to theAllied cause. We were anwious about the French position, not unnaturally,since there were one and half million Communists in France and 168Deputies in the Chamber.It was generally agreed that this was the right approach. Itwas felt, however, that we should tell the Americans what we were doingand about our anxieties, since the matter had a bearing upon the affairsof the Standing Group of NATO.T had lunch withHe was worried about he election of thenew Secretary to the S.I.C. Je had put forward a candidate: one had alsobeen put forward by the Surete, an ex-Prefect and a member of Berthaux'Cabinet(IftheSureterepresentativewereelected,participationby the S.D.E.C.E. in the affairs of the S.I.C. would cease, at any rateinall but name. The S.D.E.C.E. werei, therefore, hotly in favour of aBritish representative being appointed.thoughtthatiftheBxixane French stood down, it was by no means certain that the French,Belgians, and Luxernbourgers would elect the English candidate. I saidthatwhateverhappeneditwouldhavetobesubjecttotheapprovallofthePermanent Commission, and that inthe event of things going wrong theymight act as a long-stop.then asked me about co-operation with the Americans.Hethought that the F.B.I. must be plirsuing useful enquiries as the resultofthe arrest of GOLD. Could we pass on to them such informationaswereceived, or would it be better for them to approach the Americans direct?I said that we could no't pass anything on without F.B.I. approval, and thatfeltitwouldbefarbetteriftheFrenchmadeadirectapproach.Inthis basis. way they would build up a useful liaison for themselves on an exchangethen asked about Stephens visit to Paris (He saaYhethought it would be an excellent thing if T could accorpanly TAFFhe wassure that such a visit would be appreciated bydo my best to go.Towwould3 4) THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 Apri 2010came to see me. He had had a visit from Caro the eGarda, whowasydefinitely worried about the drilling that was going on quite openlyin Phoenix Parlo. He said that although this matter was reported to theauthorities, there vas not one of them viho woulld interfere - least of allMoBride: Costello might not approve such activities, but politicallyhe would not like to interfere with any anti-partition move, as in so doinghe might hand a stick to Dev. Carroll ha3 allso heand that certain membersof the T.R.A. were definitely gunning for Roger Moore. He apparentlywarned Roger about this, as he took the matter Berously. He said that whenRoger lefttheewould be no co-operation with his suecessor Kennedy.Carrol also toldthat he himsellf should be more circumspect i.n the(e oontaots that he made in Dublin; Carrol was glad to meet him, but thoughthat if he were coming over they shoulld meet down i.n Wexford.91..I suggested tothe, Carrol hiimsellf might be the subject Dfattention by the I.R.A., in view of the liaison that he had now hadfor many yeans with the North, and that he was, therefore, anxiousto cease contaot with Roger Moore and was consequently trving to soarehim out of the Force: then saying that he could not conduct a liaisonwith his successor.said that of course this was a possibility,but in hie view an unlikely one.I talked toagain aboutT had respectedHowe's wishes, but I was nevertheless anxious to clear the positionup withundertook to have another talk with Howe.Drew addressed a meeting of Directors on his deceptionrequirements.Jim Skardon interviewedyesterday.went S0 far an to say thathe had met CLAYTON and MILNER in the Communist Society (?) and thatover a few drinks he might have been indiacreet in 1945. He wasgenerally evasive when he had the facts formally put to him bySkardon, and was told that we were quite certain of inormationHe made no real denial. Skardon is to see him again to-morrow.DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION7th June.OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSAOT1958tpr2o/The boredom Of the Deputies' J.I.C. meeting to-day wasrelieved by a statement frorn Rankin of the Air Ministry, by anexpllanation of a brief statement that had appeared in the press abouta "flying saucert over here. One of our jet pilots, flying at20, ,000 feet off the South Coast, had seen several thousand feet abovehim, ,what he described as a flying saucer, some 5Oft in diameter. Itwas flying considerably faster than his own plane. Curiously enoughthere had been some confirmation of this by local RADAR units; at thematerial time an objeet had appeared in the screen travelling veny fast,and had suddenly been noticed to travel equally fast in the oppositedirection. The turn of an aeroplane is done visibly in the screen,but on thiis occasior nothing was visible; the object merely startedgoing in the opposite direction. We have been promised a furtherstatement on this matter. At the moment one can only remain sceptical.The curious thing to me is that these flying saucers never seem to cometo earth, but that, of course, might possibly be due to the very highspeed at which they are travelling, if in fact they exist at all.I had a meeting with Hamblen, Miss Bagot, and Serpell aboutthe Foreign office proposal thet in future when any Department is abouttowriteapaperonanyaspectof.Commnnism,thefactsshouldbenotedto Reilly., SO that other Departments can either contribute on stakeacllair as uses. The meeting appeared to be rather concerned bhatthis business should be centralised in the Foreign DIfice instead of inthe J.I.0.I said that I did not think it really mattered and that thereWELG some point in getting things centralised under Reilly. It wasagreed, however, to notify the Seoretary that in Dur view there shoulebe consulltation between the parities concerned before the report wasdrafted and after the fingt draft had been prepared.979.Hutson rang about the S.I.C. memorandum on the Transport Workerssection of the W.F.T.U. which is going before the Permanent Commission.It contains a recomnendation that the Western Union Powers shoud agreeto put the gate up against ertainblack-listed personnel. I said thatI had discussed this ntter with the French, as I felt that it did clearllyimpinge upon the powers of Ministers of the Interior. The view was thatthe Permanent Commission could either accept or reject the idea, and thatthe Foreign Office concerned would then pass the proposal to theirrespective Ministers of the Interior, who would have the finall say.If,therefore, our Foreign Office representative on the Permanent Commissionagreed to the proposal, it would presumably be submitted to the HomeSecretary. Hutson wondered, perhaps wisely, whether the Foreign OfficeWoulld consult the Home Office and thought tha't he had better enter a caveat.I suggested that he should communicat direct with Jebb.Wild rang up to tell me that he was proposing to see Admiral Danielof the I.D..C. about his lecture, in view of the presence of Indian students.I said that if he could arrange a meeting, I should be very glad to go withhim. I did not feel that I could say what I normally do if theIndians were ther, and that if I did not tell the whole story it wasdifficult to make sense of our activities during the war.Hollis tells me that Fenton has put in a very good report about theIpswichsabotageincident,involvingconsiderabl.edamagetoaPowerStation. The trouble was caused by someone turning Off all the oilcocke. Fenton'f solution is that there should be no oil cocks, but plugs.So far the Police have not succeeded in dis.covering the culprit. MeanwhileHolmes ig interviewing a man calledarrested on a charge oflarceny, at Hove.alleges that he was associate with a Russianahd a Pole who were intending to blow omething up with gelignite, eitherat Harwell or at the Royal Ondnance Depot at Didcot. We have to takethis seriously, although I feel convired that it is a mare's nest.8th June.I saw Sir Ralph Stephenson, Ammbassador to Cairo, in the D.G'sabsence, with Shaw. I expllained to him the general set-uo of S.I.M.E.,and in particular the duties of Emery and Ffoulkes, who are members ofhis staff. I explained to him that our relations with the EgyptianPolice, although somewhat expensive, were on the whole good SACOPYORIGINAL DOGUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIO RECORDSStephensor asked about Sansom, the Security Officer the nassy;whose services were to be dispensed with. He wondered whether they wouldbe of any use to us. I said that we should have to refer the ma tter toS.I.M.E.Stephensons said that Slim's conversations had been very sticky atthe outset. The Egyptians had been adamant about our leaving Egypt.Finally,Slimhadsaidthatifthatwastheirfinalword,theyhavetounderstand that we should rely upon the Treaty, which was valid until1956, and that we shoulld then leave Egypt never to return. It wouldhe uselless for the Egyptians to invoke our aid when they were introuble.This somewhat dangerous bluff seems to have been successful; it was followedup by a lange cocktail party, when various hints and suggestions for a100,solution were thrown out. The a tmosphere was SO alcoholic, however, thatnobody knew quite what they amounted to and there was a great deal ofelevenbhhour coming and going, even to the extent of officials arrivingwith documents at the Air Port. There is apparently some suggestionthat the Egyptians might agree to joint air defence, which would have toinvolve the preparation of aerodromes and the leaving of various dumpshowever, to be some doubt as to whether we could afford to move There the Army seems,required for starting up operations immediately in a crises.to Cyrenaica. Stephenson thought, however, that these proposals, if theywere confirmed, might form the basis of further negotiations. The wholebusiness was typically oriental; the Egyptians keeping their rock-bottomprice until the last moment.The Chiefs of Staff have produced a paper on their defence policyon global strategy, dated lst May, for discussion by the Cabinet. Theyhave four major priorities1.a. A.A. air defence of U.K.Maintenance of the Arnerican and European lifeline.THIS COPYC The European military front.ORIGINAL DOCUMENT Adequete striking power from suitable bases.IN DEPARTMENT land, sea, and air strengths to hold the3(4)OFTHE PUBLIC RECORpoSition during the cold war in the Middle East,ACT19582oloFar East, European theatre, and the Pacific.4.Minimum forces to hold the Egyptian (?) bases.The report also recommended that Ministers should review theexisting position, that S0 long as the Communist yiremained a legalrlitical organisation H.M.G. should not undertake anti-Communistactivity at home this, of course, for the reason that the Governmentin power cannot use Government funds to attack another Party which islegal. The Cabinet discussed this paper on the 25th May, and more orless approved the Chiefs of Staff report. On the questionofthelegality of the Party, the Foreign Secretary said that the cold waractivities at home were an extremely delicate issue; he thought that theadoption of more offensive tactics against Communism in England might verywell provoke the very state of affairs we should be trying to avoid.Skardon has Seenagain and has i nduced him to write a statement.There is no doubt in our minds thatis a guilty party. He telephonedto his wife from a calllbox immediately after the first interview, but saidno more than that something extremely serious had happened in regard tosomething that he had done.I saw (I) on the same subject which I discussed with D.N.I.and D.M.I. I found him very receptive. He had evidentlly bee givingthe subject considerable thought. I had the impression that both he andthe D.M.I. felt that the legality Df the Communist Party. oushould be broughtto an end. In fact, A.C.A.S.(I (I) definitely said S0. Clearly it i8 alsothe view of the Chiefs of Staff. .A.C.A.3(I) probably feels more hotlyabout it, as he was formerly our Air Attache in Moscow. I said that onthe whole I was against it, certainly at the present time. So farexperience had shown that tinkxthe Party was better dealt wit by pullingaway the bricks from under it than by using the bludgeon. I advancedall the usual arguments. During the last thirty yeard it had kept the.Us alive to its responsibilities and sosprevented a serious upheavalin the Labour movement. In spite of the fact that it was now the onlyParty telling the workers to do less work for more money, it was maling1Ot.no substantial headway.. Its membership of 40,000 was constant, sincewhile 10,000 new members joined yearly. 10,00 fell away. Theunreasonablenese of the Soviet Government, demonstrated in a blaze ofpublicity on U.N.0. had had a considerable effect, particularly on thosewho ane allways anxious to make a case for Russia. As an illegal partyit would be more difficult to deal with. If it re-emerged under a differenname with a "Peace and Democracy" cry, it might gainrmore adherents andwould maintain precisely that element which by throwing dust in peopleseyes was really dangerous. The out and out Communist who preached violencedid not get very far. The Us were making a real effort to put theirhouse in order. This. did not? say that there might not come a moment whenthe Left would get out of ballance and action would have to be taken. Itcertainly would have to be taken in a crisis.Skardon has seena Lithuanian, who with EGOROV of theSoviet Embassy has been traveling about in the midlands in connectionwi th the same of "Soviet News".denied that he was engagedon any other sinister activity; he gave the impression that he did not wishto betray his masters. Skardon impressen on him that it was his duty toassist the authorities and that,even if he and EGOROV were nothingillegal, he would render a service if he reported precisellyisvhart They weredoing. Skardon will be seedng him again.ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMIENT UNIDER SEOTION3(4) OF TTHE PUBLIC RECORDS9th June.ACT 1958 AlRIL 200I had a long talk-with Hill about the legality of the Communist, Party.Hill thinks, and apparently oughton and others, that the D.P. should bedeclared illegal. They do not think that our work would be hampered,as they feel that such aotion would reduce the hard core of the Party toabout 5,000. Hill would proceed by having a Royal Commission, withGoddard in the Chair, although he was not too sanguine when I asked himwhat sort of case he thought the office could present. While, of course,it was an easy matter in the old days to prove that the Party which adheredto the Comintern vas an illegal conspiracy against the King Emperor, suchproof would now be extremely difficult. The evidence to be presentedcould only be circumstantial, unless admissions could be extracted fromC.P. officials who would be sub poe naed. Personally I am still onvincedthat aim such action now would be unwise; we should inevitably get driveninto the position of penalising any party which had any sympathy withRussianforeignpolicy.EvenDickseemedtobeveeringtowardsillegalityfor the C.P. I think, however, that I have convinced him that while itis always well to have an open line,any such action would be undesirablle.T shuddered to think of the publicity that this Department would get if allita officers were sub poeaned before a Royal Commission It would,moreover, be extremely difficult to conceal our sources.A notice appeared in the Evening News yesterday, suggesting that theM.I.5 representative in Australia. was going to take over the AustralianSecurity Service. We have asked Courtenay Young for his views.Geoffrey Patterson has written an account of the somewhat unsatisfactorrelations that now exist between ourselves and the F.B.I. Our representatiwas given no intimation prior to GOLD's arrest and nothing is being clear saidto anyone about subsequent developments. Mickey Ladd has made it thethat this is due to an order thus from "the Boss" who thinks that102..previoue close liaison may lend to undesirablle disclosures. There appearsto be a firm idea that the British have been trying t D put the sorew onthe Americans. This is a criticism not SO much of M.I.5, but of theHome Office action in turning down the original request for an interviewwith FUCHS. The American attitude is, of course, wholly wrong, stupid,and unreasonable: it merely shows how utterly incapable they are of seeinganybody'spointofviewexcepttheirown.andthattheyarequitereadytoout off their noses to spite their faces! It would, of course, be easy forto clamp down on veryting and refuse to answer any further Amnericanenquiries. I think, however, we can be relied upon not to do anything BOfoolish. The whole business is utterly childish.I understand that Olegg reported by wire, and in person hisinterview wvith the D.G. We do not quite know yet what the reaction tothis has been.loth June.Potter came to discuss with me a nunber of erroneous reportswhich have been submitted to US from time to time by Special Branch.Atypical example was a long report with a list of people described as"members and supporters 02 the Comnmunist Partyil with no indication as towhich were members and which suppporters.In twenty-even cases takenat random, Special Branch mention individual reported by us to them as1950 members. We do not know whether in reporting these people backthey have confirmatory evidence, or whether they are merely quoting fromour reports. There is a llot of this sont of thing going on and T shallhawe to try and get it straightenedout with Burt.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958APRIL 201012th June.I took the Direetora Meeting to-day. It was agreed that eachDivision woulld prepare a memorandum on its aims and objects for theNorman Brook enquiry, and that I should brief the .G. for Broolte visitwhen terms of reference are to be discussed. It 1s by no means cllear atthe moment whether the enquiry is to extend beyond ourselves and S..S.Horrocke said that S.L.F.E wene pressing for Oughton to go outbefore the leave period, but that we would fly him out instead of sending himSeptember. It was agreed that we could not spare him untill afterby ship. Morton is still jibbing about having Elwelll: I gather mainlybecause he does not want a married officer. He ought, in fact, to beextremely glad to avail himself of the services of Anne Elvell, not be if a she good isprepared thing to have to work. husband Horpocks and wife seemed in the to same think office.. that it might Personally T .do notAPRICTHISIS A COPY 2010103.ORIGINAL DOQUMENT. RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENTII UNDER SECTIONthink this matters.3(4) OF THE RUSLIC RECORDSAOT 1958Shaw raised a point about get etting a list of agembe from all overseasations. This had been put uD to him by Alec, but he did not seem verysangune about its value. Horrocks amneared to think that it ought to be donehaving in mind the case ofbut the rest of as agreed thatoverseas officers must be responsible and that even if such a list werereceived, it would not mean veny much to Head Office. It wasagreed,howeverthat Shaw should consult with Finance in order that he might be informed ifthere was any undue increase in payments to agents; he would also discuss thematter locally when visiting overseas stations in October.I asked Shaw about the situation in Hong Kong. Mackintosh hasapparently written a long diatribe against C.I Suggesting that they bebanned from the Colony, and this is supported in a covering letter byGrantham, the suggestion being that the matter should be passed forconsideration by the Foreign Office and the Chiefs of Staff. Shaw has gotthe Colonial Office to hang on to this document until Grantham arrives.I said that if Grantham waB not amenable to the proposals alreadvagreed with C.I.A.; that they would in due course withdrawwe should bring the J.I.C. and S.I.S. into action. Hong Kongseemed to be regarding this whole business in rather a parochial way, notrealising that relations existed with C.I.A. all over the world. There isno doubt that C.I.A. have been inthe wrong, but it would be the greatestmistake to antagonise them permanently.Dick is working out with Shaw some line of demarcation betweenS. and B. Divisions.Hollis explained the position reached in Winnifrith's committeeon the question of positive vetting. Winnifrith seems to have come roundto our point of view; that such vetting should to a large extent be done bynormal enquiries as between employer and employed through establishmentbranches. Such enquiries, if they cannot be satisfied from existingrecords and local information, should in such cases be referred to thePolice. Baker has agreed to this and is prepared to give instructionsthatsuch enquiries should be carried out by a senior Inspector. Newsamsuggested that if it were considered necessary. to institute such enquiries,the individual concerned should be warned. This seems entirely wrong, forthevery good reason that if the man were warned and subsequently did notget the job, some explanation would have to be given; this might be extremelyawkward. It was felt that whenever enquiries were made, they shoulld befiltered through us. There is to be a further meeting to-morrow, whichGraham will attend.13th June.I attended the J.I.C. when we had a further discussion onFrench security. The paper which se had prepared jointly with S.I.S.was in the main accepted. The Foreign Office, however, thought thatbefore anything was done an approach should be made to our Ambassadorin Paris, to seek his advice on the channels through which we should putour request to the French Government. There was still some. doubt aboutthether the approach should be a joint Anglo-American one, or an a unilateralbasis. I thought the latter was preferable in view of French susceptibilitieThe Chiefs of Staff are to be notified of the general state of ak Frenchinsecurity, with particularreference to the NATO Standing Group.10l,The D.G. has received a letter from Geoffrey Patterson, giving ancldarly perturbed about the present state of relations between ourselves isaccount of an off the record talk with Mickey Ladd. The latterand the F.B.I. The D.G's interview with Clegg and Lamphere appearsto have caused a reaction, although how violent we do not know.Patterson got the impressior that Mickey was afraid that the lettermight draw another volley from us; he hoped that it would not and thatthings would be allowed to die down. Meanwhile, Hoover has reducedour liaison to a mere formality.I attended the S.I.0. luncheon. The question of the Secretary isto be dealt with this afternoon on the arrival of the delegate from theSurete. Meanwhile, the S.D.E.C.E. have put forwardas acandidate. Andre pointed out that as the Committee, and in particularthe French, had objected to Irvine being employed on part-time duties,if. he were appointed, would be the S.D.E.C.E. representativein London and the Secretary of the International Committee. We intendto propose that the matter should be settled by the Permanent Commission,assisted by a delegate, not French or English, from the S.I.0.THIS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSAOT 1958 ARIL DooT spoke to Vickery and then to Easton about Intelligence Division.The Deputy Directors (o. & S.) had considered the run-down and appearedto have accepted a doublingr of the cut recommended by Vickery. Weare now asked whether we wish this matter to be considered by theDirectors. We are not, of course., directly concerned, although weshould benefit by any Russian or German intelligence coming from theBritish Zone; it is really a matter for the Ds of I. Nevertheless,as members of the J.I.C. I think we ought to protest against thearbitary cut, seeing that Germany is probably one of the best potentialfields for intelligence work that we have. Vickery made his reporton the basis of a 50 cut, and to double this cut is tantamount totearing up Vickery's report and cannot obviously produce an efficientservice. If the argument is that the service is not efficient anyway,the J.I.C. should consider how it could be improved. Easton said hewould consider the matter and ring me back.The D.G. has suddenly been asked to attend a meeting of the cold warCommittee to-morrow, when it is proposed to discuss cold war measuresin the U.K. The guestion- of the legality of the Communist Party is notbeing challenged, but suggestions are made about work in Trade Unions,the teaching profession, youth movements, and the co-operation of theChurches. How this is to be done without the use of Government fundsI do not know. Although a certain number of people might be inducedto co-operate free, there is always the payment of the salaries ofofficers engaged on the work. Perhaps this is a point which could beignored. The main argument, of course, against the cold war in theU.K. is that as long as the Party is legal, you cannot use Governmentfunds to pay for propaganda against it.FINGAL has now reached a point where it seems almost certain thatMARTHA is the talent spottee, although whether she intends to recruitFINGAL is still an open question. She has recently put him through a105.in fairly spite grilling of the examination, lacunae in his out story. of which he came quite successfully,14th June.Val Boucher mentioned that one,Soviet Assistant MilitaryAttache, was regarded by certain of the Western Union countries as apossible defector. He told me afterwards that he got his informati onfrom whom he Would endeavour to obtainfurther particulars.Johnny Cimperman has been asked to carry out a loyalty test herewith regard toone of our atomic scientists in America. Thismatter was already the subject of discussion in the State Department,and agreement had been reached on what we should tell them. What theBureau are thinking about, T cannot imagine; we certainly cannot tolerateenquiries of this kind being made about British Government offichals in theU.K15th June.At the J.I.C. to-day I mentioned to D.N.I. a suggestion I had inmind that we should address a protest to the Americans, through theState Department, regarding recent leakages in the U.S Press. In somecases protests had already been made on a departmental level, and thereply had been received that it was impossible to control Congressionaland Senatoriall Committees. This answer is clearly unsatisfactory.Itseemed to me that even if this line were not considered expedient atthe moment, it would be valuable to have a careful record kept of thesecases, as they might be useful in arguments with the Americans on futureoccasions.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958fal2olo20l0106,I spoke toto-day regarding the case ofwho is demanding money to be returned to her which was taken from herduring the war and part of which was used for OSTRICH, presumably by 0.S.S.T explained to him that Rothschild was no longer a member of thisdepartment and I felt, therefore, that the case could be more appropriatehandled here.told me that(whose letter to Rothachildwaa forwarded to us by the latter) was in fact a C.I.A. representativeabsorbed from S.S.U., and that his present task in Paris was to dealwith the liquidation of cases of this kind. He undertook to communicatewithand to let me know the result in due course.The D.G. called a meeting, at which Miss Chenhalls, Dick, Malcomand Winterborn were present, on the subject of defectors. He was Worriedaboutthe recent developments. There are, of course, two problems:(a) the handling of defectors who have a realintelligence value, and(b) the line-crossers and deserters whom the Servicesin Western Germany ard Austria wish to re-classifyas defectors in order to get them 6ff their hands.The argument of I.R.D. and the J.I.C. is that if these peopleard not generously handled they may be induced to return to Russia, andthatthis would be damaging to the efforts that are being made to causehigh-grade Russians to defect. Personally, I think that this view issomewhat exaggerated. The D.G. does not wish to accept commitment (b),although he is preared to agree to the payment of a limited sum of moneyfrom the Secret Service vote to some other Department prepared to undertakerehabillitation. We have said that we do not think that more thanThis would in fact onlyprovide at the outset for twenty defeotors. Personally, I feel itdifficult to see why the burden should not be carried on the open vote.The Ministry of Labour are already looking after 86,000 subjects frombehind the iron curtain, and often recruited from camps in Germany. Theystate, however, t hat these people are required for special types of workin this country and that theie Charter would not permit them to look afterthem for purely intellligence reasons.Isaw Major for a moment. He has just returned from Malta, where heseems to be doing well.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDHollis left for Washington to-day.IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSl6th June.ACT1958Apal2010Val Boucher rang me to say that he had seenregardingThe information was apparently obtained fromtheFinnish ttache. There was a time when M.I were slightly worried abou'tbut they now appear to regard him fairly favourablly.askedwhether he had had any indication thatwas likelyto defeot, as he was prepared to bet 25 tha't he would before very lon.1o?.Whenas asked for his reasons, he said thatgoing to see people privately and alone; he had in fact spent quitewas constantlya lot of time at house. An additional reason was thathad lived for a considerable time abroad in the U.S.A.It was agreed thatwould tellthat he hadreported this matter to Bouher, and Boucher expects that before longwill discuss it with him personally. In this case he will let ushave more details.Boucher also mentioned that the wife of the Czech MilitaryAttache appeared to have considerable funds. It is alleged that thismoney is derived fra the property which she has in South America.Continent.She and her husband appear to do a certain amount of travelling on theSir Norman Brook came here to-day to see the D.G. about theenquiry which he to conduct. This enquiry is apparently to coverall Intelligence, and the emphasis is apparently more on finance thananything else, at any ratte at the outset. Brook wishes to compute, in BOfar as this may be possible, what total sum is expended on Intelligence,not only from the secret vote but also the open vote. When he hasobtained this information he willl wish to see Directors and to get someidea of the purposes for which the money is used.It was explained to Brook that it would be quite impossiblefor us to compute what the War Office, the Post Office, or the Ministryof Works spent on our behalf. We could do no more than to say that theyrendered us considerable services. The DG. stated specifically thatif it were found that the Post Office were spending, say, E100,000 onour behalf, he hoped that this item would not go down in that formin the document submitted to Ministers; this would inevitably raisequestions which would be difficult to answer to anyone except the P.M.himself. Brook said that he fully understood this point and Wouldsubmit a draft to us before he sent it in.The task of computing what is spent on Intelligence is clearlygoing to be extremely difficult, for example, how much of an M.A'B workshould go down as intelligence cost? While an M.A. might, and quiteobviously does do a certain amount of intelligence work, he also adornsthe Ambassador' Embassy and he i.s concerned with pushing the sale ofBritish weapons.19th JuneitI sawand Potter.Potter explained totheinaccuracies which appeared in a number of reports on Communists whichwe have been receiving from 3.B.was clearly very perturbed bywhathad been going on and he t'ook notes and expressed his intention ofgoing into the question thoroughly. He seemed to be a little surprisedthat Jones had not spoken to him about it. I suggested that when hehadmadehis enquiries we should send over Potter, and perhaps somebodyfrom B.1., with a viev to reaching agreement as to the best lines onwhich S.B. reports should be submitted to us in future. In particular,itseemedtomedesirablethatweshouldhavesomestandardphraseology.Whatd, for example, was a Communist supporter? Did this mean that hewas actually a member of the Party, or a sympathiser, or a person whoput a Communist plackard in his window during the elections? Iexplained tothat accuracy in these matters was of paramountimportance to us, particularly when we had to put people befone thepurge tribunal.ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIDEPARTMENT UNDER3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS1958 201008.20th June.Stephens and I went over to Paris, primarily to discuss liaisonwhether anything comes of the meeting or not, I am sure that goodwill andwith the French in West Africa. We were extremely well received,has been created.lookwas charmingand took immense trouble toon us the widespread activities of S.D.E.C.E. as compared with otherafter us and entertain us. He opened the discussion by impressingServices. He clearly wanted us to feel that they were the up-andecomingand in particular the Surveillance du Territoire underorganisation. He referred quite openly to the "war" with the Surete,win I think rather over-coniidently, that his department were goingHe said,this "war". What, unfortunately, he does not understand is thattowars of this kind get nobody anywhere. Even if he gets a decree fromthe President du Conseil, it will avail him nothing unless his relationswith the Surete at all levels are satisfactory. The Surete is bound tobe paramount in times of peace and they have the investigating officerson the ground. If they are unsympathetic to D.E.C. the informatiowill not be passed. This, I am afraid; is rather characteristio ofFrench politics and it can only lead to inefficiency. In actual factwe do not believe that D.E.C. are particularly well-informed and, indeed,from the Police.this is not surprising as they get virtually nothing of any importanceI askedfor security on C. Division lines. He said that he had not, but thatwhether his organisation had any responsibilitythere was some question of his organisation taking over suchresponsibilities I explained to him roughly the lines on which weworked. He said that it would be useful to. him if he could have a noteon the question. Having in mind the present proposals being made throughthe J.I.C. to tackle the French on their security standards, I did notblow press the conversation very far, as I was afraid that if and when thefell it might be attributed to anxieties on the part of the SecurityService rather than the Service Departments. On the other hand, if theseconversations are to take place, there might be some advantage in gettingthe D.E.C. on to our line of thought. Would it be possible in due coureeto let ther have a, copy of the revised Bridges Panel booklet?wasinterested, too, in learning that we had definite responsibilitiesin regard to secret contracts placedwith firms. Clearly this matter hascaused the French some anxiety.the discussions by explaining that French Colonial territory varies opened inAs regards liaison with the French in West Africastatus; in some cases it comes under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,in other cases under the Colonial Office, and lastly, under the Ministryfor Overseas Territories. In so far as West Africa is concerned, theterritories acome under the Ministry for Overseas Territories. B.E.C.,coming under the President du Conseil,he the right of representation in allthese countries and is in course of buibding up its organisation.There is no representation for the Surete of metropolitan Francein West Africa. Each Colony has its own Police Service, coming under thelocal Minister of the Interior.Stephens' working liaison, apart from his nections withGovernors and other high officials, has been within Eakar andin Brazzaville. Both these officers are responsible Lo the localColonial Governments for the supply of information on all subjects -admihistrative, economic, and politicall. In this capacity they ha verepeesentatives access to a certain of D.E.0. amount Collonel of information procured by hedocalin Brazzaville.in Dakcan and CommandantORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONTHE PUBLIC RECORDSACT1958 Apr 2010.109.While no objection is raised to Colonel Stephens maintaining hiscontacts withandor indeed with brother of the localofficials, it is suggested that for information on C.E. and subversivemovements he should in future have a direct contact withandcement this liaison, two proposals were made and accepted byand his chief, Colonel(a) that a meating should take place in Acerabetween Colonel Stephens, ColonelTHIS IS A COPYand CommandanttodiscussrsDOCUMENTRETAINEDof local interest and settle methods of EPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONcommunication;3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 foril 2010(b) that D.E.C. should have a representative in theFrench Consul-general's office at Accra, withfacilities for wireless communication both withDalar and with Brazzaville.I said that, subject to anything my Director-General had to say andto British Colonial Office approval, such an arrangement would be entirelyacceptable to ourselves, and should do much to improve the flow ofinformation. The French will, therefore, expect confirmation of thetentative agreement reached.D.E.C. welcomed Bell's visit to Madagascar between the 8th and1Bth July, and have already communicated with their representativesTananarive. They are also quite prepared for Bell to visit theirrepresentative in Jibouti, Captainat whatever time isconvenient. We have only to suggest a date and the necessary arrangements14I be made.The question of Hong Kong was not mentioned,and the French will beexpecting a reply through the normal channels.-Certain other mtters were discussed in general terms, but it soonbecame evident that they had not been receiving nformation supplied byStephens throughandIt was agreed that they might moreprofitably be the subject of discussion in Accra, when ColonelandCommandantpay their expected visit.Colonelwhom T had not seen before, struck me as a somewhatdour personality and, frankly, not very well-informed. He readily gavehisagreement to the proposals about liaisbnnwith his Department in WestAfrica, which was in fact all we required of him. He did not seem tothink that it would be necessary to obtain the agreement of the localGovernor for these proposals.I paid a courtesy call onwhen T told him aboutPeter KERRIGAN' visit. He was extremely cordial, but I thought lookedabit worn. Doubtless neither he norknow where they stand inview of the Revers scandal. He told me that he had jus t heard framthat General Revers and General Maast had been put on the retiredlist. I said that the whole case vias/ complicated that I really had founditimpossible to follow. He replied that the case was not reallyplicated, but that it had been made so by the politicians. He spokea lot about a report that his Department had received to the effect thatpossibly some deal was going on between Franco and Stalin, by which Francowas to be given a free hand to deal with Spanish Communists in exchange for110.air bases for the Russians in Spain, if and when this was required.This all seemed t me rather fantastic and unlikely. In support of this,he said that there were certain indications that the Russians were inclinedtoencouragetheFrenchtoliquidateSpanishRepublicangroupsinFrance.There was a possibility that the informant, who had put the French on tothe cache of arms in Toulouse, was a Russian provocateur.I askedabout the French Communist Party and thequestion of ts legality. He said that he had always been againstproscribing the Party; he thought it would only aggravate the situation.He was not Worried 80 much about the Party itself, but about important"fellow travellers' amongst the intellectualls and professiona] classes;he mentioned in particular the doctors. He was worried about the defeatistattitude of these classes, which he thought had aecertain influence.ly general impression was that in a crisis little, if any, reliance couldbeplaced upon the French patriotism (?), and that unless they can succeedin removing some of the Inequalities, they will never be able to pull theoricks away from under the Communiste and reduce the extent of theirinfluence. They have 168 Deputies, a hard core of half a million, andprobably another million "fellow travellers"ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS22nd June.ACT 1958Hori2010The D.G. told me about his meeting yesterday with the Cold WarCommittee. He said that he had been extremely well briefed by Mitchelland had succeeded in demolishing all the various argunents for aotion whichhad been put up by the Committee. He was astonished by their generalIgnorance and the stupidity of some of their proposals.23rd June.came in to see me.He is just back fromSingapore on leave.He seemed plaased about the arrival of General Briggs,and even more pleased that George Jenkin had gone out. He also, onthewhole, had a good opinion of Gray, with whom he said Jack Morton was onexcellent terms. The fact was that, outside Catling, there were very fewpeople on whom Gray could reiby,thinks that there is a great dealto be done in regard to the organisation of the S.Bs, particularly inoutstations, but the difficulties in getting the right peophe are considerableBriggs' At plan, the apparently, moment these is settlements to clean up are the harbouring settlements bandits,an outside the there jungle isno area. organised Police Force to keep them under control; it was largely aquestion of numbers. The policy adopted in India in dealing with therecalcitrant villages, was to surround them completely and let no-one go inor out until the subversive elements had been haned overThe method wasapparently extremely effective.telephoned to ask me about ry visit to France.I toldhim of the tentative agreement which we had reached.I lunched withand with the American D.N.I.Admiral Connolly' representative over here, whose name I cannot rememberandThe meeting was purely social.(IL.At Bil Stephenson' request, I went up to Claridges to see himand General Donovan, late of 0.8.8. They both seemed in quite goodform.Donovan reminded me of the GARBO story that I had told him inWashington towards the end of the war. He said that he had never forgottenit and that he thought it was the finest job done by any Service. Hethought it was a pity that it could not be published. I explained tohim the reasons why we thought this inadvisable; we did not wish theRussians to think that we had had a major success. Donovan seemed todoubt this argument; he said the lessons of one war are never applied tothe next. There is, of course, a certain amount of truth in this.Bethat as it may, I am sure L.C.S. would view the proposal with gravencern and I am personally convinced that the less said about thesethings the better. Donovan, of course, knew all about it because hisofficers were sitting alongside ours right up till D. Day.He then discussed the cold war; he did not think that enough wasbeingdone. This raised the question of declaring the Communist Partyillegal. I said that while this might apply elsewhere, T thought itwould be unwise to do anything of the kind here. It would invite thecreationof a "progressive" party, which having freed itself to someextent from the taint of Communism, might gain a considerable number ofadherents who would support the really harmful and insiduous organisationsofworldpeaceanddemocracy"andthebolitionoftheatomicbomb.TheParty itself was small and had lost its Members of Parliament and a numberof seats in the municipal elections it was poorly regarded by Moscow,and the Daily Worker was short of funds. To declarei illegal wouldgive dt a certain advertisement and would in other ways make our taskmore difficult. Donovan was not wholly convinced by this argument,although I do not think that he had any valid reply.In regard to the cold war, I told Bonovan that for two years I hadbeen trying to find someone who would get Walt Disney to do cartoonof "Animal Farm" by George Aliyat Donovan had read the book and thoughtthe idea an excellent one. He expressed his intention to approach R.K.Owith which company he is ither connection as a Director or as legaladviser.Donovan was extremely freindly and asked me to visit him withoutfail if I were h America.Bill Stephenson, too, was very friendly. He evidently wan'ts tosee me again before he goes back. I suspect that he wants us to employhim in some way or another, and this, of course would be impossible.Hetold me that he had metand liked him.DOCUMENT RETAINEDDEPARTMENT SECTION26th June.3 RECORDSAt the Directors Meeting to-day Dick spoke about "Lancashire Hotpotiwhich is to we wound up at the end of this week. The whole experimenthas worked smoothly and the various points which were worrsing us have beenmore or less cleared up.at Liverpool has been raided andinterrogated; not much has come out of this beyond his Party membershipand the factthat he apply for Soviet citizenship.A Czech espionage case has been discovered, involving onetried to recruit Peter ASTBURY, who in view of his pastexperiences, consulted Party H.Q. as a result of whichwas112..forced to resign and is somewhat disgruntled in consequence. The Partyobviously could not fact up to being connected with an espionage case.who was employed at one of the atomic energy plantsand whose name was supplied on a piece of paper by Dayson's agent, isapparently entirely innocent.Sir John Shaw mentioned his agreement with S.I.S. in regard to theappointment of officers o,having been trained here and in S.I.S. would beprepared to assist foreign Governments in building up their counter-espionagedepartments.Roger talked of his visit to the U.S.A. which he thought had on thewhole been extremely satisfactory. It seemed that in general terms theAmericans were prepared to accept our standards of security, which they thoughtwere in certain ways better than their own, although Arnison of the StateDepartment seems to have had certain reservations due to Clegg's report onhis interview with FUCHS. We are dealing with these reservations, which insubstance do not amount to very much. We were throughout strongly supportedby the Canadians. It was disclosed during the meeting that neitherthe Americans nor the Canadians had got anything out of their loyalty tests -in fact they regarded them as a serious emnbarrassment: they could not becornpleted.under about three months, at the end of which a voluminous reportof some seventeen to eighteen pages is produced by the F.B.I. Ib containseverything for and against the man, including every kind of tittle tattle.The Atomic Energy Corimission, having read it, find it extremely difficulttoassessitsvalue.TheF.B.I.expressnoopinions.Therewasanaddeddifficulty about the loyalty test, namely, that a man could appeal and BriefCounsel, who could call in all the witnesses mentioned in the F.B.I's reporWitnesses were not, however, bound to attend if they did not wish to. Theeffect of this was, certainly in the case of the Canadians, not to presentevidence which through cross-examination would cause the source to be revealed.There was a special discussion on the FUCHS case, during which Hollis andPerriexplained the circumstances in which FUCHS came into the atomic energy projectand the reason why he was not detected for so long. Roger had a talk withMickey Ladd, who was obviously, a bit sheepish about the F.B.I' attitudetowards ourselves over the FUCHS case. Patterson had, meanwhile, had aninterview @ith Laughlan, the F.B.I. liaison officer, who, with the exeeptionof Ladd, is now his only line of contact with the F.B.I. Laughlan, who wasclearly very sympathetic, intimated that he had instructions to read outsections of Clegg's report, which had been endorsed by Hoover. In thisreport Clegg said that the D.G. had accused Hoover of certain leakages whichhe considered detrimental to M.I.5, and that in fact no such leakages had takeplace. In the circumstances Clegg thought the D.G. ought to have tenderedan apology.Ashehadnotdoneso,Cleggrecommandedretaliatoryactioninconfining our liaison to Laughlan,an withholding any information whic ch did nospecifically concern this country on the GOLD case. Geoffrey Patterson saidthathecouldnotreallyacceptthisruling,whichwastantamounttotreatinghim and M.I.5 as if they were outstations of the F.B.I. and would have to bedisciplined. M.I.5 was not an outstation of the F.B.I., and such a communicareallycreated an international incident between the U.S.A. and the U.K.hecould only regard it as such unless he received some better explanation.We now await the better explanation. Meanwhile,wehavemadeitperfectly clear that we do not intend to embark on this childish kind ofactivity in withholding information from phnnyCimperman haveaccess to everybody in this f'fice as usual.ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT LINDER SECTIONTHE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 April 20r0113.I mentioned to t he D.G. the sabotage case in Plymouth on thesubmarine "Tally Ho", about which a leakage appeared in the press.Skittery, the C.0. was apparently worried because Pelling had hotncalled upon him. In fact, Pelling deliberately refrained from doing SOwing to the leakage about the 'Illustrious' which he attributed to thePlymouth Police, and not, I think, without reason. It was agreed thatin future we would arrange for our officers to call on the Police whetherthey needed their assistance or not.himself and wanted to know the form. I told him about our arrangement overrang up about my visit to France. He was goingwith regard to West Africa, and warned him that the question af D.E.C.representation in Hong Kong might be raised. If it was he had bettersay that the matter was still under consideration.ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINE TRETAINEDDERARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIO RECORDSFreddie KUH has been fishing round on a story which 1958 conneots heri\ 2D1DAOTthe D.G'S visit to South Africa with the banning of the .there.I spoke to Burt about the case in whic one,had giveninformation to the American Erbassy about the alleged interception byGreece of arms being sent from the U.S.A. to Italy - the ides being todivert these arms to Pakistan. One, SOKOLOV, a former employee of ARCOSis said to be the central figure. The Americans had asked us to supplytn agent who could probe the matter Since it was already in the hands ofurt and Superintendent Lee of the C.I.D. I told Burt that we would fadeoutof the picture. I subsequently rang Cimperman and explained theposition.Cecil tells me that at the 3rd Divisional dinner last Friday, Montymade a very outspoken speech about the state of affairs in Western Europe.He did not anticipate war, at any rate at the moment, but he said thatthe Russians were leaning agains the Vestern Wall and that if we didnot step up our armaments and take a stronger line, they would hop overinto Europe. He had expressed this view Very forcibly to the P.M. andShinwell, and told them that he thought that the public should be madeaware of the position. Not more than about thirty people were presentat the dinner.Stephens said goodrbye to me.He is going back to West Africato-morrow.The news broke this morning of the attack by Northern Korea Forceson South Korea. This seems to raise an extremely grave issue. AsManchukuo was to the League of Nations, so this act of aggression will beto the United Nations, unless the attack is forcibly resisted by the AlliedPowers. The matter is being raised at the Security Council. Meanwhile,MacArthur is reported in the press to be sending 10 us tangs.27th June.The Governor of Hong Kong, who is home on leave, does not like theidea of a D.E.C. representative in Hong Kong, but is prepared to give wayll (tif it is considered that wider interests make their presence there necessary.He has recommended that the Acting Governor should be consulted. Meanwhile,we are asking S.I.F.E. for their views.Graham tells me that the Ministry of Supply have sent their filecontaining three of our documents connected with a purge case to thethe secretary of which is a Communist. The file was returned immediatelywith a letter nitialled by a typist, and as there have been no repercussionsso far, it may well be that we have got away with it. Jagger is extremelypenitent - aas well he may be!I saw Drew for a moment and suggested to him that B.J.S. might providehim with a deception channel. G.C.H.0 might be able to tell him whatciphers the Russians were reading, Dr at any rate what foreign cipherswere weak. In this way he might pass information to, for example, theTurkish litary Attache, who woulld wire it back to his own Government.This telegram would be read and deciphered by the Russians, and wouldprobably be given an enhanced importance owing to the manner in which theinformation was obtained. Drew seemed to like the idea.Callaghan, one of our Os during the war, called to see me to-day.He is now working for a soya bean company in this country which has relationswith similar companies in the U.S.A. and Canada. The London company hascertain propositions to make to the Ministry of Food with regard to theimportation of soya beans. one of the Direotors had met Wilfred MACARTNEY,who had affered to effect an introduction to Maurice Webb; this would bedone through Aneurin Bevan, with whorn MACARTNEY was on intimate terms.Callaghan had heard from other sources that MACARTNEY was undesirable, thathe had a strong Communist background, and that he was intimate with Bevan.He had in cons equence advised his Directors against having any dealings with thsuch a person. I told him privately that MACARTNEY was the author of abook called "Walls Have Ears", and that in general I thought he was concernedmore with MACARTNEY and his future than with anything else; his Cormunismwas only a very dim ackground. I told Callaghan very forcihly that he shouldon no accouht tell his Directors, or anybody else, that he had obtainedconfirmation of his views about MACARTNEY from this office. He assuredunthat he would make no mention of his visit here. His own advice to hisDirectors has already been against any dealings with MACARTNEY, but some Ofthe less serupulous members of the Board are rather inclined to play with him.I said that, purely as a matter of curiosity, I should be interested to knowhowMACARTNEYbecameintroducedtothefirm,andifhewasemployedwhetherhe could fulfill the promise he had made to effect an introduction toMaurice Webb.came to tell me that General Johnson, commanding theAmerican Air Force units here, had asked whether, as a result of events inKorea, the Communists here were likely to take any action in the way ofsabotage which might affect his units. I toldthat we hadnothing heee to suggest a positive policy by the Communists in the matterof sabotage, and that in normal circumstances we believed that they wouldkeep cllear of it. It seemed to be their policy to keep the Party clear ofespionage and sabotage, as they did not wish to increase their difficultieswhich were already considerable. I promised that if we heand anythingto the contrary, we would let him know.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN 1DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONOF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 Aerl QLolDHIS.Malcom tells me that King Street have an idea that the purges ofParty members are due to information being transmitte from theirregistration department. They are pressing to have a meeting aboutthis on Saturday. We shall endeavour to cover it.King Street are also extremely worried about the Korean situation,which they think may lend to the Party being declared illegal.I discussed viith Roger and Irvine the auestion Of the approach to theFrench regarding their security. Irvine points out that in so far as theCOSMIC and METRIC systems are C oncerned, the matter has already beendiscussed in the Standing Committee and by the Permanent Commission. Thelatter appeared to be extremely averse to any international body lookinginto the workings of the METRIC system, which they think is their owndomestic concern.28th June.At the J.I..C. to-day we had a discussion about Korea. The J.I.S.have been instructed to prepare a repart for the Chief's of Staff, who aremeeting the Defence Committee in the House of Commons at 3.30. The reportis to show whether there are any signs of Soviet agressive action in anyother area which might affect British interests. Persia would be a casein point. Brain informed the Committee that the State Department hadcommunicated Truman's statement about support for Southern Korea andFormosa to the Western Ambassadors. Kennon (7) of the State Departmenthad explained that the American action was restorative. The Americansdid not anticipate that the Russians wanted a major war. The NorthKoreans presumably started operations as they thought that their forceshad been sufriciently trained and the Russians had made up their mindsthat they woulld not participate in the Japanese Treaty. Strategically,the Americans were not too Worried about South Korea, but they wereconvinced that Formosa would be the next to be attacked, and that if aotionwas not taken against Korea the position was bound to deteriorate.Operations referred to as "coverage" by Mr. Truran will be as much asGenerall MacArthus can carny out with his Far Eastern Forces. It isrecognised by the Americans that there is an element of risk in theirpollicy, but they think that the risks of being nothing are immeasurablygreater. Their action they consider to be within the charter of theUnited Nations.Malcom andcame to discuss with me the question of mikinga meeting at which the Party are going to discuss wi th Communist membersof the Civil Service Union what they consider to be a leakage of informationon the identity of Party members. They believe that this information iscoming from the registration department of London District.116.29th June.I had a long discussion with Dick and Hollis. The D.G. has askedBick who is responsible for his work he is away.Dick replied that histhree Senior Officers were each responsible for their own particulardepartment and that there was no reall point in making any one of themsenior to the other; it would only hold things up,and and clearly Mitchellcould not make any contribution to Marriott's problems. If any of theSenior Officers were stuck they came to mne. While in my view this isundoubtedly right, I think there is something to be said for Dick havinga Deputy with clearly defined responsibilities. It would be no usehaving a man who was merely looking over his shoulder; the Division wouldhave to be pun aa Dick and I ran it during the war. We were both in eachother's pockets all the time and each of us took certain sections as aprimary responsibility. The only man I think who could be of any realhelp in the present circumstances would be Hollis, which would mean havingtwo Directors in B. Division.De COURCY has askedwhether she can asdertain the reactionsof the Politburo of the Rusian Communist Party to recent events in Korea.She replied that this was not entirely in her line, but she thought thather son, might be ablle to help him. The methods of hersellf and herson are, of course, purely psychic. I suggested to Dick that PerhapsMax Knight might get someone in alongsidewho could extractfrom him the fact that he was vorking for de COURCY and SO give thenecessary cover for our source of information.Graham tells me that Tim BUOK (?), who is on his way back toCanada from Moscow, has been told that the policy is to use the PeaceCommittees as the principal Party organ. In France the Partyapparently contemplates going underground to a large extent, particularlyin connection with the sabotage of arms destined for Indo-China. Thisseems to prove my point that it would be madness to declare the Partyillegal here; they would merely create a Peace Party which would gaina large number of non-Communist adherents. The Peace Committee herehave been making a number of alterations to Crown property and have inconsequence been given orders to quit immediately. Piratin is runninground in very small circles!30th June.Thornton of the Lancashire Police came here. He was a littleapprehensive lest there be any repercussions from the search ofpremises, and had a slight feeling that we had perhaps rather prematurelytroubled the waters, but on the whole he was extremely f riendly. Heis worried about his E.V.W. problem and agrees with me that the firststep is to get an intelligence Camp Commandant with a language-speakingstaff. He does not think the Police could possibly undertakeinterrogationstlst July.I had a tall with Inspector Dick of the R.C.M.P. who is concernedwith Internment Camps in time of war in Canada. He is also interestedin the protection of Vulnerable Points and with the recruitment of PortControl staffs. I mentioned to him the possibility that, as in the117-last war, this country might like to send a considerable number ofenemy aliens for internment in Canada. He said that so far no provisionhad been made for this; he quite understood the possible necessity if thiscountry showed signs of being besieged. He thought furtherthattheovernment ought to give early consideration to the point in order thatthe Canadian Government should be warned.We have now ascertained throughthat IGOROV of the SovietEmbassy is engaged in certain clandestine dealings withthe stribution of Soviet literature to .V.Vs.concerningI met Guy BURGESS last night. He said that it had occurred to himthat Moscow' action in instructing the Chinese Communist Party, to come outagainst the American occupation might be associated with the recent actionin Korea. He also mentioned that General Briggs had got himself ntoas suggesting that the British Government would now withdraw its recognition quoteda certain amount of trouble, owing to a Press report in which he wasof Communist China.The operation to Cover the Communist meeting which is to discussthe purge has been wholly successful.The first impression is that themethods employed by M.I.5 are of a somewhat haphazard kind, although therewas a certain amount of comment on the case of a man who was purged withinthree months of his Joining the Party.I have had a rather pointed letter from Olegg, addressed to my privatedress, in which he expresses to me personally the deep appreciation ofmy thoughtfulness, personal consideration and hospitality on the occasion ofhis recent visit to London. What the inner meaning of this is I do notknow.Clegg, in fact, put in a report in which he said that the D.G. madefalse accusations and should have apologised, and then he went on torecommend that M.I.5 should in consequence be penalised by not being allowedaccess to all members of the Bureau.He also submitted a report of anextremely tendencious kind, which had been produced by Arnison of the StateDepartment to our Embassy in Washington after the conversations on atomicenergy security standards, at whi.cl Holllis and Perrin represented thiscountry. This had in some ways raised doubts in Arnison's mind as towhether our standards were in fact as good as Holllis had made out. Thisisperhaps the more reprehensible since it had been agreed that theinterrogation of FUCHS should be confined solely to affairs in America. Areport on these lines has been drawn up and signed by FUCHS himself, a copyof which is in our possession, but we have no copy of the other report whichClegg appears to have submitted3rd July.At the D.G's meeting to-day we were informed that Norman Brookintends to come here on Friday. He will see the D.G. first and thenDirectors. We are sending him a memorandum on the work of Divisions,n Organisation Chart, and a copy of the Charter.THIS COPYORIGINALDEPARIMENT UNDER SECTIONACT 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS1958ApriQOLoB.I have arranged with Baker of the Home Office that Inspector Dickshall see Cornish on internment questions. The idea that the Home Officeshould commit themselves to asking the Canadians toprepar some accommodatipnin the event of war for internees from the U.K. appears to fill themwithalarm, although Baker seemed to agree that in the event of war such aproposal might well be made. We should then get the answer that theCanadians had no aceommodation.Lith July.A very good report has come in from J.I.C (F.E) dated 13th June.Its conclusions are as follovs: (FE) Memo (50) 23 (Final) Appendir A.(a) Owing largely to external factors, particularly eventsin China, but also owing to the threat of arrival ofCommunist Consuls, the cooperation of the Chinese withthe Government in the campaign against the bandits mustbe expected to diminish;(b) For the same reasons, the morale of the bandits mustcorrespondingly be expected to increase;(c) The peak of the effort of the security forces has beenpassed, unless materially reinforced.(d) The strength of the bandits has not materially beenaffected but they may be running short of arms andammunition(e) The programme of squatter resettlement is of the utmositimportance in denying food and other aid to the bandits.The resettlement areas will, however be a target for attackby the bandits and it will be essential to protect them and alllsquatter areas in which screening has taken place. Thisprotection is an additiona ommitment for the SecurityForces.(f)Assuming no change in the strength of the Security Forcesor the development of any new method of attack, the situationis likely to deteniorate slowly during 1950. Owing to theimportance of external factors and the impossibility ofpredicting developments in surrounding territories furtherahead, it was not considered that an attempt to forecast thecourse of events in Malaya in 1951 and 1952 would be of anyvalue.This report also contains some interesting information aboutdevelopments in Sarawak and Borneo, and it makes a strong recommendationthat something should be done throughout the whole Far Eastern area todeal with the disnemination of Communist literature, particularly inschools.The D.G. went to see Ricketts about the case of de COUROY.There does not, however, seem to be much prospect of getting the matterventilated in the House of Commons in the near future. If and whenan opportunity occurs, it will be possiblle to use the information about tneDAVIDOFF PLAN, which the "Digestll allleged had come from most secret Sourcesand had been smuggled out of Moscow. In fact we noy know that it wasbroadcast from Budapoet and discussed in a German newspaper.119.5th July.Burt tells me that he was sent for by Shawcross, who wishes toinstitute prosecutions for conspiracy against the Smithfield strikers.Miss Nunn, whom I saw subsequently at the Home Office, told me that thiswas a question which had .come up frequently but it had always failed, owingto lack of evidence, or at any rate evidence that could be used. Theprosecutions for a breach of contract in not giving sufficient noticebefore strike action were generally cumbersome and ineffective.We had a discussion with the D.G. on the papers submitted byDivisions to Sir Norman Brook. The D.G. thought that we ought to beready to give as many positive facts about our achievements as possible.We all agreed that this was desirable and that it could quite easily bedone.I talked to the D.G. about a proposal that we should have a moreopen liaison with the Egyptian Police in efforts by them to deal withCommnnists and 5th Columns in Egypt. This has been put tousunofficiallythrough our contacts in the Police. I said that in my view we shouldkeep clear of this, since it would be likely to bring us too much intothe political limelight and would ultimately get us into difficulties.Apart from this, the Istakal Muselmein might well make it profitable toleave a bomb in the .L.O's office.rang up to ask me to let him have anything that mighthave even a remote bearing on the war in Korea.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENI UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958. An 00(06th July.I had a meeting ith all the Directors on war planning Joe Spencerrepresented D.E./A.The following points were agreed:(1)) In time of war an E. Division should be set up.In peacetime a shadow section of E. should be formedwhich would be responsible to the D.D.G.(ii) A Babotage (?) section should be set up. Investigationbeing the responsibility of B. Division, and counter-measures and technical measures the responsibility ofC. Division.(iii) There should be an enlarged legal section. Thepresent S.L.B. would be broken down and leakage ofinformation would become the responsibility of B.Division.(iv) The Regional organisatior would be set up and P.L.S.would become the Regional controlling section in London.20.(v) A training centre should be set up under an Officer 1/cresponsible both for training and recruitment. This wouldbe an A. Division responsibility.(vi) A Secretariat should be formed which should be theDivisions and Sections.responsibility for the co-ordination and policy of the(vii) That a study should be made of plans drafted on theorganisation of M.1.5 staff to meet all conditions.Sinclair telephoned to say that in answer to my query his officewere considering the employment ofconclusion. We then discussedbut had come tonoin connection withrecent proposals that one or two officers should be earmarked to visitforeign countries and advise on security matters. Sinclair did notseem to think thatI did not feel that Sinclair had a very clear conception of what thewas wholly suitable for this job, butjob was.! He ended by saying that he thoughtcould beconsidered among others.Major Croker rang up for Harding-Newman to know whetherthe A.M.S who was seeing the badcould give him anyinformation as to why he was considered unsuitable for promotionto confidential work. I said that as far as we were concernedthere was no objection to his using Int. Div. He could not,however, say anything aboutactivities in 1940, whenhe and his wife were apparently in touch with the Soviet Embassy.This IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDINDEPARTMENT UNDER IDER SECTIONOF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958, Apr 2010We said we saw no objection to this in principle.then reverted to his original argument about the difficultyof providing a representative here, but agreed to my suggestion thatit might be possible to make some nominal appointment in the HighCommissioner' office. In this connection he thought thatBrigadier Garvas, the Military Liaison Officer, might be suitableon account of his former connection with the Peshawar IntelligenceBureau.is advisingto come here and see us at the endof July.In the course of a general discussio on the operations ofS.I.M.E. and S.I.F.E. , Ahmed asked what would happen to S.I.M.E. if FH.M.G. was compelled to leave the Suez Canal area. He wonderedwhether at some future iate the question of using Pakistan as aSecurity Intelligence base might not be considered. He was' obviouslyputting the idea out very tentatively and admitted that he had notthought over its implications very deeply, since at the moment alleyes in Pakistan were turned towards India. I explained to him that121.S.I.M.E. was to some extent an integral part of the nilitary machinein the Middle East and would have definite responsibilities in connectionwith the counter-intelligence order of battle. This meant, of course,thatS.I.M.E.couldnotbeseparatedfromG.H.Q.Ahmedmadenocommentthis and whether he envisaged the possibility of G.H.Q. M.E. moving toukistan as well, I cannot say. This is a new thought and a rather theinterestingone.ThepossibilityofusingairbasesinPakistaninevent of war with Russiahas, of course, been considered. The generalfeeling was that if such a request were made to Pakistan, it woulld provokethe natural reply that the invasion of Pakistan territory by Russianforces might well ensue. However, as nobody knew the answer regarding whatassistance would be forthcoming from the British Government in such aneventuality no further action was taken. Ahmed is now one of the leadingmembers of Liaquat Ali's Cabinet Secretariat.We had an Appointments Board to-day. 'The D.G. suggested that beforepeople were asked to attend a Board their papers should be considered bythe Directors. He had the impressior that the time of the Board wasoften wasted by considering candidates who on their records were obviouslyunsuitable. In this I think he is quite right. We considered the casesof five candidates, all of whom we thought should be given a trial. Wealso discussed the case ofof J.I.S. who was applying to ccme tous. I told the meeting what I had learned aboutHe clearlyhad very considerable ability, but was self-opinionated and argumentativeto a degree which had obviously got him into trouble on a number ofoccasions. It seemed to me that if he came into this office it would bedifficult, owing to his age (42), to place him under a younger man andthat inevitably he would have to move up the scale quicker, owing to hise PTustration which might well bring out his worst characteristics.and qualifications unless he was going to suffer from a feeling To ofaccelerate his promotion would be unfair to a large number of highlyqualified officers who had been here for a considerable time. The number withinthe of next five years is very considerable. For all these reasons I dopotential. senior officers who will be coming up for considerationnot think that we ought to offera job.Beaumont-Nesbitt came in to see me. He told me that he was now abouthead lack of information from the South: could we provide him with any contactsof Civil Defence in Northern Ireland and that Pym was worried thein Southern Ireland? I said that this was right off our beat and thatour connection with Southern Ireland were purely nnofficial.COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDOFTHE PUBLIC RECORD7th July.AOTItpr20/0Norman Brook, Cliffe and Drew came to begin their enbuiries. TheBrook, D.G. and the two sections, S.L.B. and P.L.S., which I control, weintroduced the Directors and after I had explained my position got toin Dick and discussed the work of B. Division. there was Dick not put too much his case emphasisextemely well. Brook vondered I think whether was satisfied when it was explainedhim B.1 how rather much than B.2 B.2, was dependent but upon B.1. Later Brook went up to seethestablishment on the sixth floor. He is coming back on Wednesdayto see certain section officers of B. Division.22,8th July.Inspector Dick looked in again. I told him about the arrangementsthat I had made forshim with the Home Office, and suggested he should makeit very clear to them that if they wanted accommodation they should stakea claim now. He will let me know the result on Monday, when he is camningto see Hill.Colonel Spry, late Australian D.M.I. has taken inAustralia.IHISISACOPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDloth July.ACT 1958 THE PUBLIC RECORDSI gave a short talk of the usual kind to Colonial police effiicers.There were some from West Afrida, East Africa, Malaya, Cyprus and theCaribbean.came to talk about one, ALI SHAH, a Moslem of Afghanorigin who has resided in this country off and on SInce the first worldwar. ALI SHAH had apparently ingratiated himself wi.thwho, backed by industrials in Holland, had put up the sum of 56,000to assist in running a Moslem Union. He believed that in 80 doinghe was helping anti-Communist activities in Indonesia. It looks as ifALI SHAH and his rather dubious Dutch associates, having got hold of themoney, used it for promoting arms deals with Pakistan and other countries.main object was to assure me thatmotives were bf the very best; his error had been to dabble in intelligencematters without consulting his advisers. I toldthatI would look into the whole matter and let him know how we regardedALI SHAH.We had a staff meeting, when we discussed the case ofofJ.I.8.I was on the whole rather against taking him on; it seemed tome that if we employed him he would be bound to go over the heads ofpeople younger than himself, which would be bad for morale, and that if hewere made to serve under his juniors his known characteristics (not sufferingfools gladly and being self-opinionated) would show up at their very worst.The general feeling of the meeting, however, was that he should be seen byShaw, when the limited chance of promotion in this office should beforcibly explained to him. We could then consider whether he should comebefore the Board.We then considered several other candidates, in accordance with theD.G's instructions, and decided that with the exception of one, they shouldbe brought before the Board.l1th July.Dick and I saw King, who is to work under Pat Reilly in the Co-ordinatioof Russian or Communist affairs as between the Southern Department, I.R.D.the Russia Committee, and outside bodies like ourselves and S.I.S. This,I think, is a step in the right direction.12th July.At the J.I.0. to-day I raised again the question of exploring Munich thepossibility as a place for rehabilitation for Russian defectors.of using: the S.B.O.N.R. (Vlasov Movement) Centre in123I told Val Boucher aboutrecent remarks about the possibilityof establishing S.I.M.E. in Pakistan if we had to move out of Egypt. Itold him it was not clear whetherhad in his mind the question of.Q. also moving to Pakistan.Val felt it was an interesting thoughtand that he would watch for any further hints in this direction.13th July.called again.I assured him that nobody here wouldthink the worse offor his excursions into the intelligencefield, and that he should rest assured that the information in ourpossessio would not go any further. He seemed quite happy about this.T gave him the note on ALI SHAH. He is very anxious that I should go toHolland and inspect his frontier posts; he has been S.0 insistent aboutthis that I suppose I shall have to go sooner or la ter.It seems fromwhat he said that he is having a certain amount of trouble withwhom he refers to as "a very good chap, but difficult aboutwhat he regards to be his own particular reserves".The D.M.I. asked me to go and see him. He told me that for a longtime he had been a fairly intimate friend of LANGDON-DAVIES, whom he metoriginally in 1940 when they were both conducting a Home Guard campaign.He had since stayed with LANGDON-DAVIES, whom he regarded as an extremelyintelligent mandand a very likeable person.LANGDON-DAVIES spends most of his time now in Barcelona, butComes over here periodically for a week or 8o, when he generally luncheswiththe D.M.I. He is in fact over here now but will be going hack tocelona again twoards the end of nextweek. Discussing matters a fewdays ago, he expressed the view that if the authorities here coneentratedon a limited number of people whom he considered to be really importantin the Communist movement, they might obtain interesting results.I asked the D.M.I. if he could recollect any of the names mentionedby LANGDON-DAVIES. He: said the only ones he could remember wereDudley COLLARD, Ivor MONTAGUE, Geoffrey BYNGI, and a man called GOLDBLUM,who, I think, he said was the Managing Director of Marks and Spencer.There were. apparently a certain number of others on his list, and he saidthat if anyone was interested he, LANGDON-DAVIES, would be glad to discussthese people in greater detail.I told the D.M.I. that we knew a considerable amount about thepeople mentioned, although I could not recollect anything about GOLDBLUM.I said I would consider the question of ameone meeting LANGDON-DAVIESand let him know.I have since discussed the matter with Mitchell, after lookingat the LANGDON-DAVIES file. It seems that some approach was made byLANGDON-DAVIES, through Archie Rowlands, about two years ago, and at thattime he was associated with a Mr. DIOK, who subsequently went into amentalhome; While I do not think we are likely to get a great deal out ofthis, it may be that LANGDON-DAVIES might have his uses in putting ustouch with other people. I think that Max Knight would be the mostpropriate contact. Owing, therefore, to the shortness of time available1 asked Dick to speak to Max on Monday and to let me know the result 80 thatI can fix up a meeting through the D.M.I.ORIGINAL DOCUMENT ENTRETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER S RSECTIONPUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 Aprd 2010124.14th July.Sir Norman Brook and Cliffe came again to-day to continue theirenquiries. He dealt first with the 0.S. Division. Brook was interestedin the measure of elasticity which now existed between ourselves andS.I.S.; a hard and fast line of the three-mile limit had been abandonedin exchange for the integrated S.I.M.E. and S.I.F.E. which, I explained,I might haveadded, as I learned from Jack Morton this morning, that in S.I.F.E. thisevaluation has led us to the conclusion thatThe local J.I.C. are a pparently getting quiterestive on the subject.Brook then saw the Registry and subsequently Hollis, who gave him anaccount of C. Division.After lunch Brook made a visit to B.2. I think on the whole that hehas gained a fairly favourable impression of the office.Jack Morton, whom I saw for a minute, is full of woes which are,in order of piority, as follows:(i)Housing and staff, and (ii) Colonial Police Forces and S.I.S.This IS COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDNDEPARTMENT SECTIONACT 1958OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSBpprd20ioGeorge Jenkin has been a great success with everyone and has alreadygot the S.BS on to better lines.15th July.Newsam rang up to know whether we had any information about thesabotage case in Portsmouth. I told him that we had send down anofficer at the Admiralty's request; that he had seen the C.-in-C. whohad expressed the view that it might be due to an accident following theescape of gases, or that it might be due to sabotage. There is to bea Court of Enquiry on Monday; meanwhile he did not wish our officer toconduct any interrogations. It was unlikely, therefore, that we shouldhavemuch news for about a week. I explained to Nevsam that we wereacting on behalf of the Admiralty and that possibly, therefore, N.I.D.might be able to give him more information, but I doubted it.Roger Hollis has seen de Putron and the American General commandingthe U.S. Air Force units, in regard to vetting the personnel employed ontheabrodrome and any security information which might affect the Americanforces. This followed a letter received from the General, stating hissecurity responsibilities, which he exercised through what is known as theOffice of Security Intelligence (?). This is a new organisation whichis peculiar tu the American Air Force. It has been agreed that we willcontinue to vet personnel for the Americans through the Provost Marshal'sbranch of the Air Force, who are represented on all aerodromes used by theAmericans. The present arrangemenbsivith the Police, Customs, etc.appear to be satisfactory. We also made it clear that we could not(25.conduct loyalty checks, as was done in the U.S. ; we would in fact do forthe Americans precisely what we did for our own people, We also made itclear that we should take a poor view if the Americans on their own triedto conduct a loyalty check. This was all accepted in good part andfinally it was agreed that the O.S.I. should have a liaison with ourselvesthrough which any major complaints or policy matters could be discussed.The main reason for this is that if any sabotage of American aircrafttakes place, Congress would be critical of the American: Air Force if theyhad not es.tablished a liaison with M.I.5.I spoke to the D.G. about the proposal thatof the J.I.S.should be taken on as a member of this office. I told him that we hadhad a meeting as he instructed, and that we had agreed tha't Shaw shouldhave a perpnal interview withmaking it perfectly clear to himthat if he joined this office he would be likely to find himself workingunder people who were his juniors and that his prospects of promotionin a narrow field would not be very good. He accepted these conditionswhole-heartedly.then told Shaw about his domestic difficulties.Shaw said that obviously this was a matter whebe the final decision wouldhave to rest with the D.G., but that if he himself were asked he would haveto say that it would be impossible to employabroad, since localgossip was bound to ensue and be detrimental to his work. The D.G.agreed that we should discuss this matter at his meeting on Monday.I spoke to Horrocks and told him that I wanted a cockshy war plan fordiscussion on Wednesday, since I did not wish thi's matter to drag over theholidays.DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS17th July.ACT 1958 Aore 2010T saidand that until we had it published say; its findings we could make no comment. was Hen Newsam nothing rang me up to about we the were sabotage sitting case in at on Portsmouth. the Board of Enquiry wasseeling informatio in order to advise the Home Secretary, whoattending the Cabinet where this matter was going to be discussed.At the D.G's meeting Hollis did to-day, not want Shaw made him as it a clear replacement that he for could that Bennett, not thereand was employ a Dick matter was then of principle asked if to he be could considered. use him. that We I were told they the in would the D.G. habit be called of *axickupon telling to all serve officers overseas; joining certain this exceptions department obviously had been bad made policy in the to have case a ofhighly technical personnel, who could not but be moved was abroad in case was of clearly emergency. a man Ifitnumber it vere of not people for his domestic complications, in eitherwhocouldbe very usefully employed should S.I.M.E. be barred or if S.I.F.E. B. DivisionThe D.G. did not consider thatthought they could give him employment.Jack Morton and Bamford came to with see me a about certain a knowledge request from of George businessJenkin that we should intelligence find him work a man who could be placed in some firm in thatand, Singapore above and all, build up a secret network community in Malaya. that The they trouble should was impartinformation although it about had been subversive made plain activities to the to the Police, collect the Police this were notgenerallytrusted. It was, therefore, George Jenkin necessary himself to intended to be at theinformation by other means.126..receiving end. Neither Jack nor myself were very clear as to howthis was going to operate. I rather wondered whether it was necessaryto place this man in a firm; as I saw his job, he would have introductionsto various business firms who would assist him in the selection of areliable Chinese in their employ. who could give him either first orsecond-hand information relating to various walks of life, e.g. seamen.I gather, however, that Goerge Jenkin wants to go a little deeper; hewants to find one or two really high-grade agents who will have accessto officials of the Executive Committee of the Malayan C.P. It was agreedthat Jack Morton would communicate with Jenkin and get a clearer definitionof what he had in mind.18th July.I had a long talk with Jack Morton, who is still very worried aboutthe administration side of S.I.F.E. As a result of one disoussio thathe has had here with the Office of Works, certain of his difficultieshave been ruled out; he cannot understand why this could not have beendone before. It is indeed difficult to see any reason for this. Thehousing problem in Hong Kong is still unsolved.There is to be a me eting with S.I.S. to-morrow to discuss the basiccharter of the integrated .I.5/M.I.6 unit (J.S.S.).Morton told me about the case ofa Chinaman, LI PING, who had beenemployed on the staff of the Consulate at Taipeh in FormosaThis man had been sacked andsubsequently arrested by the Nationalists as an agent of the ChineseCommunist Government, if not a Russian agent. S.I.F.E. had only heard ofthis through reading a report in the Press; they had then made a demandto see the interrogation reports, which were obviously of considerableinterest to S.I.F.E. After a certain amount of trouble, these were beinproduced.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENTRETAINE[IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTON(4) OF THE PUBLIO RECORDSACT 195821010Burt came to see me about the case of a Ganadian Communis hamedCARON. We had asked Immigration to give us particulars about him andonly rather late in the day had Immigration informed Special Branch.Burt thought it might be desirable in such cases if we sent a copy ofour letter to Special Branch, so that they could inform their officer.Hollis, when consulted, saw no objection to this in principle.Burt was very conscious of the age-long friction between SpecialBranch and Immigration. He did not disguise from me that this was notalways the fault of Immigration; wherever he saw his men were inclined toassert themselves too much he witharew them.Anthony Blunt came in to tell me that Andrew REVAI had had hisnaturalisation certificate turned down. I got the file and subsequentlydisanssed the matter with Hill and Dick. Anthony had REVAI' side ofthe story and would liise us to look at it. We explained to him, however,that it vas difficult for us to intervene with the Home Office, as we hadlately been trying to stifren them up in regard to naturalisation cases.122.19th July.At the J.I.C. to-day, Baker-Cresswell mentioned that the P.M. hadsent for the D.N.I. and asked him about the explosion at Portsmouth.Itseemed that the Admiralty Court of Enquiry would find that an act ofsabotage had been committed, despite the fact that the evidence on thisubject seems to be extremely slender.I forgot to mention that last Weanesday Val Boucher told me thatrepresentatives of the American First Army had arrived here entirelyunheralded for a conference with War Office officials. They said thatthey wanted to know exactly where their unite would be stationed in theevent of war, as they would constitute the first army of occupation.They had a Securit) Officer with them, who said that he would wish toknow about security arrangements generally, and also what the Britishwould be doing in regard to screening Europeans fleeing from esterncountries in fromt of the Russian invasion.While it is clearly quite right and proper that the Ameeicans shouldreconnoitre the grond, it does show a certain state of hysteria that theyshould arrive here without any previous consultations.We had a meeting on mobilisation plans, at which Horrocks, D.0.S.D.B D.C. and Hill were present. Horrocks had a number of points whichhe wished cleared up in 0 rder to produce his war chart. I should liketo have had it before now, as the next step, p,namely earmarking peoplefor specific jobs, cannot make much progress until after the holidays.2oth July.I discussed with Perfect the question of the Admiralty Police.organisation. He feels that both as head of P.L.S and as responsiblefor the areas where these Special Branches are to be set up, he personallyshould make the initial arrangements. Later he should Scotlandandvisit Rosyth with Jack Mann.I spoke to Roger about this and asked hi.m to arrange for a meetingbetween Perfect and Clayton of the Admiralty. Roger seemed worried aboutPerfect doing the job; he would have preferred Holmes, owing to the latter'smore recent and more extensive police experience. I said that it wasdifficult to put Holmes in toe deal with Chief Constables, who were mrmallydealt with by Perfect. Clearly the Chief Constables would have to comein right at the start, since it will be exteemely important to ensure thatwhoever is placed in charge of Special Branch activities in the Docks ispersonagratawiththelocalpolice.Hollisthoughtthatweoughttotellthe D.G. that Perfect was going, and I told him that I had no objection tohis doing this.ORIGINALDOCUMENTDEPARTMENTRETAINEDACT 1958OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS20r0Van Moyland mentioned the Dutch report on S.0.E. which has now comeout in the form of a White Paper. I gather that it is highly criticalof Dutch authorities over here during the war. Van Moyland says that i't128.is a hopelessly distorted account of affairs. That S.O.E'sdropping unfortunate Dutchmen into the arms of the Germans over purpose a periodinof eighteen months was a truly lamentable one, there is no doubt whatever;I do not think, however, that it can be regarded as more than stupidityor lack of judgement.I lunched with Simmons of the P.L.A. Police,wh is retiring, and Coxhis suocessor. They were full of stories about smuggling in the docks.Theyareonthewholeahad something comparable, it might make our task considerably easier. Admiraltyprettyefficientorganisation.Ifthe21st July.I went over to see Newsam to tell him about the Portsmouth explosion.The D.G. saw the D.N.I yesterday, and recommended to him that the wholematter should now be taken up by the Police. Hampshire Constabularyshould be in the Chair and call in Monmouthshire and Portsmouth. We wouldittold a watching brief and render any assistance we could. D.N.I, agreedand obtained the First Lord's concurrence. Meanwhile, Hollis had seenAdmiral Willis, who was in a co-operative frame of mind and ready to give usanything we wanted.Newsam approved of this arrangement and agreed that I should get intotouch with Dr. Watts and make any use of him that I liked.Des Graz, of the embryo Censorship Committee, came to see me lastweek. He told me tha H.G. Valentine,wh in the last war was in chargeof censorchip in Trinidad and now works in Thomas Cook & Sons, will beleaving in the middle of September for Trinidad, Jamaica, British Guiana,Antigua, St. Lucia and the Bahamas, to make certain preparatory arrangementson behalf of the Censorship Committee He will wish to make contact withour representatives in Trinidad and Jamaica.Thisinformationnay,ofcoursehave reached Shaw from other sources.Des Graz himself intends to visit Washingto on a somewhat similarmission during the first ten days of September. He would like to establishcontact with Geoffrey Patterson.Dr. Watts, the Home office explosives expert, came to see me. Fentongave him a very lucid explanation of wha't had happened and of the experimentsthat had been carried out under his direction. Watts was pensive and, Ithinkonthewhole,slightlyscepticalaboutanactofsabotagehavingbeencommitted. He was anxious to Conduct experiments with Torpex, which he saidcontained a considerable amount of aluminiom. It seemed possible that ifTorpexwereburned,itmightproducesimilarphenomenatothosedescribedby the various witnesses. The really lamentable aspect of the wholeincident is the lack of security precautions. Before the loading took placethereshould have been a hose attached to the hydrant ready to be turned onat a moment's notice. In fact there was difficult in finding the cockand when the hose was produced it was not long enough to reach the barge.It had not been possible to do more than get two buckets of water to thescene of the fire. Dr. Watts says that if the hose had been in positionthere is no doubt that the fire would have been put out, and thatE1,000000 might have been saved. It is clear, too, that the depth charges,one of which originally caused the fire, were lying about more or lessunguarded for a matter of days, both en route and in sidings at the dockyard.Dr. Watts hag agreed to go down to the Chief Constables' meeting on Monday.129:The "Giant Panda" (Denham) came here to ask whether he could be givenhis diary and files relating to his Caribbean visit during the war. Itold him that I had taken a oursory glance at them and that,i view of theof the material they contained, I thought they should remain here. Hereadily agreed.ORIGINALSECTIONACT RECORDS1958201oI gather that at last accommodation has been obtained in Hong Kong.25th. .July.Colonel Darling came to see me. He has just been appoined as Plannerto the ehb..Committee. His business is to follow up the Jebb Committee'sconclusions and ascertain what is being done. He reminded me of the recentmeeting,w) which was attended by the D.G., when the cold war in the U.K. wasconsidered and it had been asked what ve, the Home Office Or any otherdepartment concerned was ding in this respect. He said that althoughtheCabinet had decided that there could be no expenditure of Government fundsin combatting the activities of another Party which was legal, there might bevarious forms of action that could be taken. Colonel Darling clearly hadno knowledge of Comrunism or of the work of Government departments which wereinterested in the subject. I explained to him on very broad lines whatwe were doing. I then gave him a rough sketch of the Communist Party and itspotentialities as we saw them. We were dealing with Communists or associatesin Government departments under the P.M's ruling, and for this purpose hada considerable coverage. allthough we did not presume to know the identityof every Communist It seemed to me that the field in which theCommunists were doing the most harm was the industrial one; this was, however,clearly a matterfor the T.Us themselves; they were thoroughly aware of theposition, as was indeed the Government, and itseemed that some progress wasbeing made. As regards teachers, it was a curioue fact that, as far aswe could see, the Communists were not taking special steps to exploit thesituation. There was, of course, the added difficulty of teachers whowere appointed by local councils. I made it clear tha't we were by nomeans complacent and that if the Jebb Committee had any plan or any viewswe should be very ready to consider them. The only suggestion that I couldmake was that a film might be made of "Animal Farm" by George Allwell.I gave him a copy of the book which I asked him to return.lateoftheL.R.C.,cametoseeme.Hetravelsalot in Europe for a Bradford form dealing in wool. In his spare time,which seems to be considerable, he studies psychologyr and religions.Hehas apparently worked for a long time with a Dr. Jung, said to be thegreatest psychologist in Europe, who is now about eighty and lives inZurich.who is a Catholic, seems to have meteall the leadinglights of almost every religion, and about a year ago attended anInternational Conventior of Religions in Switzerland. He is a member ofthe Vedanta Society, 51 Lancaster Gate. The purpose of his visit was tosay that a conference of religion was to be held in London in August,which is to be attended by high Church dignitaries from all over the world.has been told by one, GHANANADA, a indunfrom Hollywood, that theorganiser of this conference, AVYAK-TAMANDA, a Hindu Vendantist and monkof the Rama Krishna Order, is laying'politics and is likely to presentthe conference at the end of its deliberations with some political resolutionpossibly on peace or the abolition of the atom bomb. I said T did not thinkthat there was anything to be done, but that as he was attending the(30.conference I should be interested to hear what happened.26th July.At the J.I.C. to-day I said a word to Pat Reilly about West Africaand our proposed liaison with S.D.E.C.E. there. There appeared to be somehitch in the Foreign Office about the proposed appointment of a representativeof S.D.E.C.E. in Accra. I told him that we had agreed this between S.I.S.and ourselves and that I hoped we could get on with it as the French, withwhom I discussed it more than a month ago, were willing and anxious to appointsomebody.I sav Newsam to-day aboutour old friend Maria BUDBERG,who 1s to be visited by MCGIBBON, the British Communist who is stronglysuspected of acting as a Soviet agent while employed on some Staff Missionin Washington during the war. He now runs a publishing business, for whichwe understand he has received aograntof about E2,000 from the SovietGovernment in recognition of his past services. Maria BUDBERG is a friendof the HALPERNS (Security Co-Ordination) and was at one time mistress ofMaxim Gorki.I told Newsam about the alleged sabotage case at Portsmouth. I couldnot understand what had prompted the Prime Minister to make his statementin the House of Commons, since recent evidence seemed to indicate that theexplosion wassdue to faulty cons truction of a depth charge. We now nowthat the depth charge came from Dene Hill and not from Glencoeed, whichmeans that it is probably of ancient manufacture and also that the substancewhich came out of the depth charge and impregnated the clothing of one ofthe loaders was torpex, and not thermite.It looks as if the P.M. hadacceptedthe assurances of his brother-in-law, Admiral Willis, C.-in-C.Portsmouth.There may well be two factors operating in this case. One,political wishful thinking about a Communist plot, and two, anxiety on thepart of the Admiralty to cover up faulty construction, bad inspection anda general lack of security. In both cases the cry of "sabotage is a convenientone.Brigadier Mellor and Colonel Barton of the W.D.C. came to see me.Mellor has a moan about our not collaborating directily with him and supplyinghim with the names and particulars of Communists in the Government establish-ments for which he has a Pollice responsibility. I told him that we were theservants of the Ministry of Supply and that for a variety of reasons we hadto maintain that position, particularly where the question of personnelemployed on secret work were concerned. The fact is that Mellor is livingvery. much in the past, when the W.D.C. was about the only justification forthe exisbence of M.I.5. It was then under the command of Colonel olt-Wilson,who designed for its officers and himlf, as Colonel in Chief, a beautifulblue uniform covered with silver braid.!The Ministry of Supply do not want Mellor to be pursuing Communistswithin their establishments, but have recently agreed, as has also the WarOffice, to supply him with those particulars which they supply to theirown Superintendents. I told Mellor that I would look into the matter andcommunicate with him further.131.27th July.I have spoken to Horrocks to-day about getting on with our war chart.Me said that he would have it ready for the time when I came back fromsave. I replied that I did not think this was good enough and that Idid not feel inclined to go on leave until I was satisfied that considerableprogress had been made. It seemed to me that there were certain keymatters which we should clear as soon as possible; we had to decide inprinciple whether a Director of E. Division should be found from amongstthe existing stafr, or whether he should be one of our ex-wartime employees.We had to make progress with the Regional organisation and we had toconsider whether in wartime B. Division would not want another Director,in which case we should have to find someone else for C. Division on theassumptionthatHolliswouldbetherightmantoassistDickinB.I havearranged a meeting for to-morrow and have asked Dick to come up from BarrowElm.Air Marshal Tedder and our Ambassador had a discussion withGeneral Bradley and Mr. Jessup in Washington on the 25th July. There are tobe joint talks how far a large-scale Chinese Communist intervention.in Korea is likely. to affect the situation in Korea and whether war therecan be localised; (b:) an examination within the U.N. framework of theeventual disposition of the Korean problem - possible reoccupation bfNorth Korea by the Soviets is envisaged; (c) an examination of the wholeMiddle East problem; (a) an urgent study of the Iranian situation, includingthe problem of the conservation or denial of the oilin the event ofSoviet invasion; (e) a study to determine the capability of Allied Forcesin West Germany and the Western sectors of Berlin to withstand an attack bythe East German; forces; (f) the capability of Bulgarian forces to invadereece, and the question of assistance if necessary to the Greek Government;1g) a joint Intelligence conference on Soviet capabilities and intentions,to be followed by a meeting of the joint Chiefs of Staff for discussionsin regard to global strategy; (h) a conference between the U.S. and the U.K.military representatives concerned with the problem of cover and deception,to be held in Washington. Meanwhile, the defence debate is going on and weare pledged to send land forces to Korea.I went down to see Little and Barnett. They were worried boutcertain Terminal Exchanges, both from the point of view of espionage.sabotage: They had in mind that we might possibly vet some ,000 employeeswho were in positions where they might do harm. Barnett. that it wouldbe quite easy for an engineer to tee-in on important Government linesand that the chances of their being detected would be fairly remote.Iexplained the principles of our vetting policy and our relluctance to departfrom them. We proceeded from an investigation of the Communist Party andits membership and notified departments concerned of members or associateswho vere in their erploy. This system was not infallible, but neither was tlvetting system.I undertook to let the G.P.0. know roughly the number of cases of PostOffice employees about whom we had notified them already, and I asked themto let me have details of their new V.PS.I ascertained on return to the office that we had notified them sincehe beginning of 1949 of 569 cases, 60 of which had since left the department.This figure was a considerablle shock to Barnett, as indeed it was to me. Hehad found on enquiry that these names had been coming in to one section ofwhe.re the Post Office, which had been sitting on them. He now proposed to find outbe of laid off the 8o that moment if we the got authority in time of emergency they could easilyhis the .PS 569 people were. I suggested to him that he should keep filesflagfell.He agreed to do this.(32.A COPYIN ORIGINAL DOCUMENT BETAINEDDEPARTMENTOF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT1958Aprn2010Sir Norman Brook came to-day to discuss with the D.G and myselfthe results of his enquiries into the work of this department. Before hegave his views, the D.G. told him that he had been surnmoned this morningtothe P.M. to Downing Street. The P.M. said that he had heard fromAir Marshal Elliott that two further acts of sabotage had occurred, oneat the new House of Commons and the other at the American aerodrome atLayton(? Heath. As regards the latter case, the action had been tracedto one of the guards in the Ulster Rifles; this man had slashed the tyresof some of the aircraft with his bayonet. Enquiry had led to the discoveryof particles of rubber on the end of his bayonet and the man whenchallenged confessed. The P.M. was inclined to think that the I.R.A.might be responsible and was anxious to know what was going on in thisfrield. The D.G. told him that the I.R.A were the responsibility of1h.Scotland Yard. The P.M. said that he would like the D.G. to find outabout this incident and also to obtain particulars about the one at the newHouse of Commons, where it was alleged that the disconnection of certainwires would cause a boiler explosion on its bpening day. This had a realGuy Fawkes ring about it, but there was no dynamite! The P.M. suggestedthat the D.G. should see Air Marshal Elliott. The D.G. had warned theP.M. that the incident at Portsmouth vas looking more like a technicaldefeot in the depth charge than an act of Sabotage. The P:Ma was surpriseto hear this.Sir Norman Brook said that Elliott had suggested to him that in viewof the various sabotage incidents, it might be a good thing to considerwhether some warning should not be issued to V.Ps and that in any case thershould be a meeting of Cornish's committee on the subject. Brook himselfsaw no harm in a meeting, but was doubtfull whether there was anything thatcoulld usefully be done. Brook then told us that the Cabinet had beenconsidering some form of legislation which would supercede the MaliciousDamage Act and make it a criminal offence to impede in any way the measuresbeing takan which affected the security of the State. Brook pointed outthat unless this legislation covered calcanny unofficial strikes or failureto carry out certain duthes, not only vould it be useless but it wouldmake it clear to any disgruntled ellements that ca' canny was the line topursue. The Government had apparently consulted the T.Us, who wereadamant about anything of the kind being exoluded. Brook said that hehad for years been telling the Government, and particularly Morrison, thatfailure by the Government to aot in this matter was, in the industrial fielhighly detrimental to the security and efficiency of the obuntry. Morriso,knows this well enough, but finds himself powerless to act. It is clearly133.an issue that will have to be faced before long. Brook thinks that thebasic trouble may well be that the workers think that their T.U. leadersare too much identified with the Government and are not, therefore, to betrusted to represent the workers' interests impartially; they have,therefore, lost control of their members.Brook then gave us his views on the enquiry he had conductedinto the work of the office. He said that there was really practicallynothing that he could criticise. He had been enormously impressed bythe difficulties and complexity of the problems with which we had to deal,but. with the exception of one or two minor suggestions, he could thinkof no way of improving our knowledge of Russian Intelligence activitiesthat was not already being pursued. He had at first been inclinedtothink that the manpower and efforts devoted to the work of B.I wereperhaps out of proportion with those of B.2, but in arguing his case withthe officers concerned he had been entirely convinced that this was not soHe recognised that there was an awkward gap in our knowledge of Marxianswho were not members of the C.P., but felt themselves idealogicallysympathetic towards the Russian regime. He realised the enormousdifficulties of finding starting points which would help us to disseminatein this very large field, but he thought that the reorganisationppla inB.1 should help us in tackling this problem. He asked whether we had ourfeelers out in scientific circles. I said that we had certain contactsof our own in the scientific world, to whom we could go for assistance,and that we were also in close touch with J.S.T.I.C., who were operatingin this field and were able to get at any branch of the seientific world.It might be, however, that we could develop these lines a bit more.Brook then gave us his views about our relations with S.I.S.Hewas glad to find that reason had at last prevailed and that the workof counter-intelligence, a t any rate in the Middle East and Far East,was being considered more on a functional than a territorial basis.He wondered whether this principle should not be extended elsewhere.(The .G. then left the room to attend another meeting and I continuedthe conversation with Brook).This IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDDEPARTMENT NDERSEOTION(4) OF THE HE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 Apal 2010134THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEC(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 Apr Aprlao QoroBrook said that he had been talking to Drew about deception plans.He said that while he had the highest regard for Drew and was sonsciousof the necessity for maintaining some embryo deception organisation forexpansion in any future crisis, he had always been somewhat scepticalabout the possibilities of practising deception in peace time. Drew hadtold him about a project for starting up the manufacture of some"notionally" secret weapon at Ford'e factory at Dagenham, where there area certain number of crypto-Communists. The idea was that this specialwork, which would be screened off, would become the subject of gossbp;that the crypto-Communists would be interested,and ultimately the Russians.Brook understood that Drew had quite properly consulted therelevant sections in this office, but he wondered whether L.C.S were notencroaching on our preserves. This seemed to him to be a Btraightcounter-espionage job. I said that I thought Drew probably had somethingmore in mind and that his proposal was really a development of a formerscheme which had been agreed to by the Chiefs of Staff. It had been feltthat as we were unable during the neatt few years to mass Sufficientgroundforces in Western Union to cope with Russian aggression, we might try andpersuade the Russians that we had a secret weapon of such devastatingeffect that they would be unwise to risk the possibility of startinganother world war. Admittedly, the possibilities of achievingithieobject by the means suggested seemed pretty remote, to say nothing of thetime, labour and cost involved. It was, however, for the L.C.S to deciwhether it was worth while trying. We had the closest possible relationswith Drew and ve should, of course, do anything we could to help him,provided his prwect did not place too great a strain upon our resources.Fromthestrictlycounter-espiomgepointofview,Isawnomeritin the proposals, which at best would only lead to the provocation of acertain number of crypto-Communists at Dagenham and the identity of someRussian, probably already known to us, to whom they would be reporting.We had, I thought, other and better fish to fry.I spoke to Brook about SIGINT. I said that we were now representedon the Deputy SIGINT Board, Which assesses priorities, and that we had aliaison officer who was persona grata with sections of the organisation.We were getting everything we needed: within the limits of SIGINT'S resource!we were not, however, represented on the SIGINT Board, although we were thegreatest users of its products. The reason given was that the Services andthe Foreign Office made a contribution to the organisation, either financial.or with equipment and manpower. This was not so in our case. It was,therefore contended that if we vere admitted to the Board, a claim mightbe made by all other users. We were not worried about representation onthe Board in peace time, but we had a strong feeling that in time of warpressure would be exerted by the Services to ensure that all their resourceswene used for obtaining operational material, and that the needs of counter-intelligence would be neglected. During the var it had been largely dueto the initiative and pressure from our Department that, somewhat late in thday, counter-espionage material had been intercepted and a special sectionsetup to deal with it. In any future war the remedy seemed to be in ourhaving an allocation from the Treasury, which would be handed over toGINT for use in the development of our work, We should then have a stakethe organisation and a seat on the Board, which would enable us tosee that our interests were safeguarded.Brook seemed to agree with what I said and will bear the point in mindwhen he visits Eastcote.Lastly, I talked to Brook about the relatiins between the Home OfficeandtheForeignOffice.ItseemedtomethatsinceSovietRussiaandworldCommunism were subjects from which no Government Department could now divorceitself, there was a danger in the fact that the Home Office were notrepresented on any of the Interdepartmenta Intelligence Committees; theyworked rather in a vacuum, and consequently when matters arose whichvitally affected them and other Departments of State, they had no framein which to put them. Their line of thought and action seemed to be out ofharmony with that of the Foreign Office and the Chiefs of Staff. Therewas,moreover, an embarrassing tendency on the part of the various committees onwhich we served to use us as their agent in dealing with the Home Office,whereas in fact the matters in question should really be the subject ofdirect discussion between the Under-Secretaries of State in the ForeignOffice or the Service Departments and the Under-Secretary of State at theHome Office.Hrook seemed to agree entirely with what T said, He had indeednoticed it himself and, as an old Home Office man, he was convinced that thehighee staff were too much rooted to old-time liberalism and the protectiontheir Minister in the House of Commons. He agreed with me that theyought to have a senior officer - for preference Murrie, an Assistant Under-Secretary of State w who; either through attending Intelligence committemeetings or by receiving papers, should keep the Home Office in the pictureof international affairs, and So enable them to deal more intelligentlywith any questions which might arise. I told imtthat I had spoken rathertentative both to Newsam nd to Reilly on this subject, but that the latterhad found it rather difficult to know how best to set the ball rolling. Bra(36..said that he, too, would find it difficult, but that it was his firmintention to talk to Newsam.We had a meeting on war planning.It was agreed that we needed ashort-term and a long-term plan. On the short-term lan Irvine shouldbe detailed, if necessary, to the post of Becurity 6fficer with theSupreme Commander, Western European Forces. Later we would considerNeil McDermot for this job. Hanley would be nominated as our representativin the War Room ,and, as soon asn our Theatre Security Service had beenapproved by the J.I.0.1 we could enter into joint consultations with S.I.S.about S.C.I. units. Hollis would move into B. Division on a temporarybasis to assist Dick White; his duties being taken over temporarily byFurnival-Jones. Kellar would take charge of D. Division, dealing withaliens, as an Assistant Director.Horrocks presented charts of B and D. Divisions on a war footing,which were agreed. They included a new grade of Assistant Director forB. and B.2 in order to take the burden off D.B. While we all agreed thatthis woulld be necessary in war time, we thought that the new grade, ifapproved, could be used only very sparingly in peace time: the danger ofhaving another grade is that the organisation becomes less flexible.Horrocks says that the new grade, if accepted by the Treasury. in principlenow, will bring us into closer line wit th Civil Service grades and make iteasier to apply the Chorley recommendations.29th July.Hollis is worried about the na'ture of enquiries that we are receivingfromtheF.B.I. One is concerned with thetwo British subjectsapplying for posts with Atomic Energy in the U.S. and the other concernsaccused of being a spy by Senator McCarthy.As regards thethe F.B.I. want sort of loyalty testinterrogations, and it is necessary to tell them that we only employ directinterrogation when we have very good grounds for doing SO otherwise, weshould become the object of serious criticism.In the case ofeven President Truman has denouncedSenator McOarthy's accusations and enauiries in the United States havefailed to bring any evidence to support McCarthy's statements.If wenow start making direct enquiries in this country, there obviouslygoing to be tied up with all the mud surrounding senator MeCarthyUnfortunately Hoover is taking a personal interest, since he doubtlesswishes to have a dig at the state Department. My one aim between and object ourselves ibnot to exacerbate At the the present same tirne rather I can strained see that relations we must point out politelyand to the the Americans F.B.I. that we are not one of their field offices and can onlyconduct enquiries here on our own lines.THISI A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC F RECORDSACT 19582010137.3lst July.ORIGINAL THIS IS A COPYRETAINEDACT 1958 RECORDS2oLOI obtained the D.G's approval for all the measures which we hadtentatively agreed on on Friday in connection with war planning.I attended Ronnie Hove'e celebration dinner given by Wing CommanderHulbert. I sat next Marcus SIEFF, whose father Israel SIEFF, was alsothere. Ronnie certainly has some queer friends!Ronnie was a bit naughty about discussing my work in frontof youngSIEFF. In fact he went no further than to say that he thought that weought to go in for much more publicity; whether the Yard was efficient ornot, it had a name which was extremely valuable. Of course the answer isthat there is every difference between ourselves and the Yard and thedisadvantages of being a public department far outweigh the advantages.I did not argue the mtter, for obvious reasons.lst August.I lunched with Victor. He said that he thought that in any futurevar he would be likely to suffer frustrationand to make himself unpopular,owing to characteristics that were well-known to us both! He had, thereforedec eced that he might be better placed in some dob under Tizard. I saidthat, much as I should regret his not being with us in any future war, ifthere was one, I thought he was right and that we might find it difficultto give him the scope that he would want. He could, however, be extremelyuseful to us if he were working with Tizard.Kenecd'hu, the new Secretary of the S.I.C. came to see me and stayedfor a considerable time. He is very Voluble; but earnest, about his job.Irvine had told him that in the normal course of events he would not havemore than a few hours work a weelc: this clearly would not suit him andhe is looking round for ways 0f stimulating the organisation to greater andbetteractivity.Thisisallverylaudable,butTamnotquitesurewhereit is going to lead us. He talks of fortnightly interim meetings. Heasked me quite frankly whether T thought that people lihere were worried aboutFrench security. I said that quite definitely they were and that thepresence of Communiats in Government Departments was a serious source ofanxiety. He said that quite a lot had been done to memove themnunofficiallybut that nevertheless there were some quite highly placed operators still inposition. I said that such a situation was bound to act as a kind ofblight upon the exchange of information. He quite realised that this was aserious matter and wa's much interested by my explanation of the workings ofthe purge system here. He has during the last few months been in adepartment of the Ministry of Defence, dealing with cold war propaganda, butthat department has not got much further than considering ways and means. Hesaid hat he personally was seriously worried about the defeatist atmospherecreated in France by the Peace Campaign. He was quite certain that if awar arose now, France would not fight. I told him that Tthoughtthemostimportant work for the Committee was in connection with war planning. He138.agreed and said that he was going 'to do his utmost to get over the impassethat the French situation created. He thought important that the heads 0organisations,or at least their deputies. shoulld be present at S.I.C.meetings This is a sad blow and I can only hope that his views on thispoint do not prevail!THIS 1S A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 Apr 2010Graham told me about a purge case of onein the C.R.O.Hewas in the Party from 1933-1944, since when there is very little information.Leisching, however, wishes to purge him and to do SO while the Prime Ministe:is responsible for the affairs of the 0.R.O. Graham says that thereisvery little likelihood or the three advisers giving their support,butLeisching wishes the P.M. to overrulle them. This case may well endinthe P.M. giving a ruling which is contrary to his own instruction.Strang, on the advice of Bevin who received a letter from Lond Jacksan,has asked us to investigate the case of Ian JACOB, responsible for foreid.brgadcasts at the B.B.C. Neither Strang nor ourselves think that there isa vestige of truth in Lord Jackson:' S allegations, which So far we have nothad in detail. We do not intend to carry out any detailed enquiry.2nd August.At the Appointments Board to-day we selected five candidates.Holmes is going over to Northern Ireland to interview awhose name was found in HALPERIN'S diary.wife-i said to be aCommunist.Murrde told me about M/CCARTNEY. He said that Peter Thorneycroft hadwritten to De Freitas, the eParliamentary Under-Secretary, pointing out thatMACARTNEY was in the habit of frequenting the House of Commons, in particularthe bar, and that pe ople were often somewhat indiscreet in his presence. Healso pointed out that MACARTNEY appeared to be hanging on to Lord Strabolgi.I said that none of this surprised me!3rd August.Jimmy Dixon came to tell me that the Police were trying to get astatement from one of "our girls,ofwho is convenientsituated between two of the Soviet Embassy buildings Kensington PallaceinGardens. She apparently witnessed the scene the other day when the139..Faseists broke some of the windows of the Embassy. I said that there wasno harm in her making a statement, or even appearing as a witness; if wetried to call off the Police she would immediatey be regarded as a S.B. orM.I.5 agent by the 1ocal station. Dixon thought that S.B. might subsequentlyto Burt.try to employ her ab an agent. I said that if they did that T would speakThe D.G. tells me that at the J.1.C today Perrin announced that wewere sending a delegation to Washington to discuss Ruasia's progress in theatomic energy field. There was likely to be a discrepancy of views, since itwas understood that the Americans believed that the Russians might be in aposition to wage a major war within the next twelve months. The Americansestimated the Soviet production capacity far more highly than we did, althoughon what evidence nobody know. It is quite possible that they have beeninfluenced by De Couroy, or that they find it convenient to engage: in wishfulthinking in order to get the necessary appropriations from Congress forstepping up their own production and for the manufacture of the hyarogen bomb.I had a talk with John Marriott to-day. He does not feel tha t thenew organisatior proposed for B.1 really meets B.2's demands. He thinks,and T am inclined to agree, that there still ought to be a section carryingthe duties formerly performed by B.1.F. namely, the investigation Df theunderground section of the Party and all likely Marxians.I discussed with Spencer our military, naval and air ceiling in theevent of war. It seemed to me that we had not made sufficient provision forexpansion in the Colonies.The F.B.I. and C.I.A. have surpassed themselves by asking us to put aH.O.W. on some man in Brighton whose daughters are said to be illegally in theU.S.A. Johnny Cimperman appear to have got the Brighton Police to interviewthe father, who gave the appearance of being reluctant to disclose thewhereabouts of his daughters. It was thought that a H.O.W. might provide theanswer. In askin B for this enquiry, it was made clear that no security issuewas at stake. We have replied that in those circumstances it is quite impossiblefor ns to impose a H.O.W. since the Home Secretary would refuse his warrant.We have been given no background to this case at all.Lith August.I had a war planning meeting to discuss our military ceiling both hereand in outstations. It is extremely difficult in advance to calculate whatvi1l be required. It will be even more difficult to decide what rank theofficer should hold, since this invariably depends upon the rank of theopposite numbers with whom they have to deal. We have decided to step ourrequirements both for existing staff and for new staff on the home front; wehave accepted the figures of S.I.M.E. and S.I.F.E. and we hase considerablyincreased those of other overseas stations, taking into account the doubling ofexxisting staffs and the creation of new posts in Bermuda, British Guiana andBritish Hoiduras.1ill has had a diseussion with Perrin, who over the weekend isendeavouring to get agreement with the Americans on an estimate of SovietRussia's atomic bomb potentialities. The Americans on some informationy thenature of which is not known to us, are inclined to believe that theRussians140,are much further advanced than we think. It may be that the Americans areworking on information obtained by the F.B.I. from GOLD and others arrested,ot that they have been influenced by de COURCY. We, on the other hand, arenotinclinedtobelieveintheseextravagantestimates-indeed,vethinkitpossible that although the Russians have had an atomic explosion, they ha venot necessarily made the bomb. The effect of the information received by theAmericans has been once more to create a somewhat uncomfortable atmosphereof the necessity of a preventive war. Perrin has been briefed with all ourinformation about De COUROY.Derbyshire has done me good work in regard to E.V.Ws. He haa hadatalk with the Latvian Consul here, who seems to know quite a lot about his ownnationals. While he thinks that the me jority of them would be loyal to thiscountry, he is positive that there are a certain number who are definitelydisloyal, and he knows of a woman, Anna YAKOBLEVNA SKALBERG, who is an agent forSoviet propaganda among Latvian refugees. Our fiels show thatthisw.omanisin touch with various members of the Soviet Embassy, who are providing her withCommunist literature for distribution. The Latvian Consul will provide uswithreliable interpreters for use by Camp Commandants, or by the Police. Derbyshinris now going to approach the LIthuanians and the sthonians. Meanwhile, hehas seen the Poles and has a considerable amount of information about LeftWing Polish associations. He isalsooseeing SKOROPADSKI about PolishUkrainians. From what Derbyshire tells me, there is obviously going to be aJob for a fairly responsible officer to tackle the whole E.V.W. problem.Logically, this officer should form a Beotion iin B..I talked this matter over with Hollis. While he agrees, he feels thatin the present state of affairs B. Division cannot take on any further burdens,unless they are broken down into sub-divisions or unless a new Division iscreated. We shall have to discuss this with Dick when he returns.I notice in Anglo-American planning papers that considerable importanceis now attached to Persia and that attempts are being made to reach agreementon the stop-line which should be imposed.5th August.A return which has been got out by B.1 shows that the total number ofCommunists in the Civil Service is estimated at about 14,047, of whichroughly one-third are in the G.P.0.There is to be a World Peace Conference in London in November, with alarge ttendance from abroad. An endeavour is being made to bring in asmany non-Communist elements as possible. Graham is anxious that we shouldcall a conference not later than September to decide what the poliey is to be.The matter will be more difficult to deal with, since a number of delegateswill not be Communiata. It is arguable, I think, whether alban on theconference here might not cause it to be held in France, where its effect wouldbe far greater. The fact that such a conference is being phanned may bean indication of Russian nervousness, but in these matters i.t is alwaysifficult to tell whether the basic motive is aggressive or defensive.Evidence seers to be increasing., which points to the Portsmouth incidentbeing due to some defect in the depth charge due to the instabliity ofTorpex. Although the fourteen depth charges loaded at Dene Hill werelabelled as having been inspected, it has been admitted that the labels wereput on before the inspection was carried out. They had been lying at DeneHinl for several years. The Admiralty are naturally reluctant to face thisissuce, since it means the withdraval of all Torpex if there are reasonablle141.grounds for thinking that existing stocks may at any time ignite fromspontaneous combustion.8th August.I saw Brigadier Mellor and Colonel Barton to-day. I told Mellor thatI had looked through the files and that I had also discussed his complaintinsomedetailwithHollis.Icouldfindnothingtosuggestthatwehadin any way endeavoured to persuade the Ministry of Supply or the War officeto withhold from him information about individuals in establishments forwhich he had a Police responsibility. The fact was that we were in anextremely difficult position. The Ministry of Supply and the War Office,for reasons of their own, clearly did not wish to pass on all informationthey received from us to their Superintendents. I could see, therefore,that they would find it difficult to pass information to the W.D.C. which walnot given to the Superintendents. It was impossible for us to pass theinformation direct to the W.D.O. since it related to employees of theMinistry of Supply and the War Office and we had to be guided by theirwishes. It seemed to me that under the present arrangement Mellor wasgetting from the Ministry of Supply and the War Office a considerablenumber of name s although whether he had al of them I could not say.I made it clear to Mellor that if he was not satisfied, the onlythink he could do was to take the matter up with the Ministries concerned,and that he could be quite sure that we should not be in any way obstructiveIf we had an anxiety, it would be that if a dead set were made to keepunder observation all the Communists about whom we had records, the securityof our sources might be prejudiced. It was assential that if any observatiwas kept by the W.D.C. it should on no account come to the notice of thesuspect. Mellor assured me that he had always exercised particular carein this respect.Mellor repeated his former statement, that when he went to theMinistry of Supply and the War Office they had told him that M.1.5 ob jectedto his being given the names of Communists in establishments where he hadaresponsibility. I told him quite frankly that this was not true. Heasked me Whether I would mind his telling Jaggers that he had spoken tome on this point. I replied that there was no objection whatever.I sincerely hope that this is the last we shall hear of thismatter.9th August.I had a two hour meeting at the Home Office with Newsam in the chair.Harold Scott, Philip Allen, Cornish and Oakley were also present. Hollis,Graham Mitchell and I represented this office.We estimated that there are about 980 men and 100 women forinternment. when the flag falllsl one third of them were in London.Newsam thought that particulars of these British subjects should beseen by the Home Secretary, who would have to state on oath that hehad considered each case individually; there would not be time for himto do this immediately before the war and, off the record, nobody remotelybelieved that he would look at them now! However, the formality has tobe gone through and B.1.A., who are already overworked, will have to getout lists as soon as they can.For enemy aliens it va's estimed that there might be at least1,500 men and 1,300 women plus 150 Soviet citizens, but I made it clear14e.that as nobody had really sorted out V.Is, it might well be that thesenumbers would have to be added to.British women are to interned at Holloway and Manchester. HoldingCamps are to be established at Ascot (2,000) Rhyl and Epsom. The polilare to supply the Cormandant and the Deputy Commandant will be from thePrison Service. They said that we might wish to provide a welfare officerwho would really be an intelligence officer. Two permanent camps are tobe established in the Islle of Man, with 4,000 in each. I said that weshould want welfare officers in both these camps.With some reluctance it was agreed that we should have both 020 andHuntercombe. The Deputy Commandant should be a Home Office nomineee andweshould have military guards. Both these camps are filled up with Borstalboys at the moment, and much work would have to be doneon them before theywere fit for our purposes. It was made clear that the two camps werenecessary, since owing to the Geneva Convention an individual who had oncebeen in 020 could not go to another camb without tllirights under theConvention I mentioned the desirability of an isolation camp. Althoughno concrete proposal was made, Newsam seemed to think the idea was sound.The purpose of this camp would be to hold aliens wishing to return to theirown country for a sufficient period to render their information out of date.Lastly, I drew attention to the probable influx of aliens froin theContinent at the outbreak of wan. This influx had been considerable in1940 and the L.R.C. was not designed to cope with it. People would arrivein fishing boats, rafts, rowing boats and other kind of craft, and there wouldhave to be some sort of organisation for segregating them and possibly forscreening them. Newsam was rather inclined to play this lown at first, bitI got strong support from Harold Scott.I had a long talk wi th Courtenay, who has returned for a few weekshe is likely to cut out a considerable amount of dead wood. The case isfrom Australia. He takes a favourable view of Colonel Spry and thinks that notreally progressing very much and it seems doubtful whether it ever will.Meanwhile, if the anti-Communist Bill is passed, it will be extremelydifficult to bring Communists under its terms without disclosing sources ofinformation, since there is the right of judicial appeal.TTHiIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDNDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4)0 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958. Apa 2010lIth August.Malcom Cumming has told me about the a individual Ukrainian concerned E.V.VI. case, hassbeen inthatLincoln, asked to from supply which certain it appears information the Military about Attache, aerodromes. aided by We a also member have of a hiscurrent staff, is Polish trying case, to bllackmail where a Pole into supplying similar information.143.Hilhl has talked to me about a case relating to COLLET'S Bookshon.,who have bein trying to purchase 4,000 worth of maps, obviously on behalfof the Russians. These maps cover the east and south coasts of theindustrial areas. We have stalled for the moment. It seems thatStanfords are the only people who could supply these from stock and we aretherefore suggesting to the J.I.C. that all demands on ordnance survey shou:be serutinised by the War Office and abnormal demands turned down.12th August.Information from Portsmouth indicates that the dockers concernedhave now confessed to have ied in their previous statements in order toprotect WEBB, the man who actually handled the depth charge whichignited. Apparently they allowed the depth charges to fall over on theirsides before rolling them int position, and that immediately thisparticular one felll over a flame was seen, not from the prima hole but fromsome other part; it is t erefore quite possible that the casing split andthat a spark was caused through its striking an iron rivet in the bottomof the barge.There has been another case of sabotage on board the Theseus., due tosail for Korea on Monday. The compass wires have been cut. Holmes isinvestigating.14th August.Perfect has visited all the East Coast Chief Constables in whoseareas American aerodromes are situated. They have been warned to let usknow of any gossip about stoels of atom bombs.I saw Burt this morning about a tendency by the F.B.I. to ask us tomake loyalty enquiries over here on lines practised in the U.8. While,of coure, it was of the utmost importance that the F.B.I. should not thinkthat we were ganging up, I felt that we should speak with one voice.Burt saw the implications and assured me that he entirely agreed with ourpoint of view and would act accordingly.I also asked Burt to call off the police fromoneof our secretaries living in Kensington Palace Gardens. The policewant to call her as a witness against certain Fascists who broke thewindows of one of the Soviet establishments last July.This IS A COPYIN DEPARTMENT UNDER FETAINED SECTIONORIGINAL DOCUMENTACT 1958(4) OF THE UBLICRECORDSAprd2010144.8th September.When returning from Irelandafte my holiday, I took theortunity of staying two days in Dubllin and of making contact with theBritish Ambassador (Laithwaite) and theAlthough there is, of course, a good deal of talk aoth indiplomatic circles and in the press about the possibilities of getting ridof partition, no really serious moves are being made, or are likely to bemade, ln the near future. Suggestions have been put forward by the Ministryof Foreign Affairs that the British Government should take a positive handin bringing about a settlement between North and South. The BritishAmbassador's retort to this was "What sort of an answer do you think theywould get and what view do you think the other members of the CommonwealthWould take of such proposals?". There was clearly no answer to this and thequestion has not been pursued.There is a certain amount of anxiety about Eire's positionin any future war. Clearly the idea of the majority of the oliticiansistoremain neutral. While they think that we might be content with thenorthern ports, they rather wonder whether the Americans will not bulldozetheir way into the southern ports.There is, however, a desire to be helpful in meeting thevarious requests that have been put through the Ambassador for certainmeasures of co-operation in time of war, e.g. censorship, control ofshipping, etc. The Irish Government do not, however, wish to put anythingdown on paper, as they are afraid that if there were a change of Governmentthe information might be used against them.I asked the Ambassador whether anything had been said aboutrouteing of communications through this country, as was done in the last war.He said that he had not touched on this question but that he weuld-bea itin mind if a suitable occasion arose.COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDI had several long talks withDiwe ahscussed the situati onas regards:OF FHE PUBLICO RECORDSACT 1958 Apvil Qo1o(a) The I.R.A. While about a year ago the I.R.At had beenwritten off as completely dead, it had during recent months shown some signsof activity, although these were not in any way regarded as serious. Thereare four I.R.A. units in Dublin, involving about 160 members, but, with theexception of Cork where a small unit was believed to exist, the total member-ship for the whole of the rest of the countryvoul not amount to more than abou150, thus making a total of about310. This did not, apparently, includeindividuals in the North, about whomseemed to think the Ulster Police werefully informed. Numerically he did not believe that they amounted to verymany.Drilling was going on more or less openly in the vicinity ofDublin, but nobody thought anything of this as it had been ya rt of the lifeof the country forhindreds of years and had very little significance.While the I.R.A. had a certain number of arms, it was not thoughttt they had any ammunition. In February last they had succeeded ingettinghoud of a dump of about 200 Thompson machine guns, which had been stored inabottle factory within a stone's throw ofloffice.Thecasescontainingthese arms had been found by some of the employees, who, wishing to enrichthemselves, thoughtrthaththetleRetnawoul provide a good market. The I.R.S.,115,however, considered that the arms belonged to them in any case. Theyaccordingly kidnapped two employees of the bottle factory and took thearms away at night in lorries. The Dublin Brigade also have about a dozenBren guns, but ammunition is lacking in every case.Cowan's Anti-Partition League is not taken seriously, although thepossibility of its being penetrated by the I.R.A. and subsequently controlleby them is envisaged.(b) Communism. The Irish Workens' League is small and ineffectivebut the recent activities of TWeedie are considered to be somewhat suspiciouAsagenttotheQhioBrassCompany,Tweediereceivedmonthlycomrssionfrom the United States aounting to something like E2,000 a year, and therehas recently been talk of the Irish Workers' League buying a house.Whether these payments are merely a Cover for the transmission of funds,or whether they have any real commercial significance is not entirelyclear, although it is difficult to see how Tweedie'e evices could reallybe worth E2,000 a year to the Dhio Brass Company. Tweedie has apparentlmadd contact with the London representative of this firm, who is situatiedin the firm of Kinnon (?) in Victoria Street, London.This information has, I understand, been reported in detailwith a request that we should make enquiries.The only obher bit of inforation which might possibly havesome significance is the arrival of a foreigner from Paris to visitof the Irish/U.S.S.R Cultural Organisation.Particulars ofthis individual have been, or are being, forwarded to us.told me that a request had come through officiallyfrom the Admiralty here for naval reporting in regard to ships fromsatellite countries. He said that he thought this request could befairly easily met and that most of the data required was already available.mentioned that ome Irish member of a team of histohiansat Cambridge had talked to him about the publication of German ForeignOffice documents which were being examined. He had intiratedtothatthere were likely to be some rather sensational revelations as to thepart played by certain Irish officials during heacwan. He had toldthat he could not give him the details, as he felt that this would be abreach of confidence.I asked, therefore, whether it would be possibleto bootleg him an advance copy so that he might warn the Government a fewweeks before publication. I said that I would 1o0k into this and let himknow.THIS IS A COPYof course, knew of certain officialls who had acted in ETAINEDORIGINAIhighly improper way in connection with the GOERTZ case, UNDEHSECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIO RECORDSIn the strictest confidence,Itold me thats: (a) Plan. fpril 2010KATHLEEN for the attack by the I.R.A. combined with the German landing at'Derry had been written by some official of the Ministry of Trade andIndustry who had been consulted at the time. When, however, GOERTZ foundthat the I.R.A. were all at sixes and sevens, he tried to interest certainmembers of the Irish Government in the proposals. Carney, the Irishrepresentative in Madrid, had evidently been talking optimistically tothe Germans about the warm welcome they Would get if they landed inIreland and Generall O'Duffy had been in communication with a GeneralintheIrishArmy,clearlyGeneralMcNeill(?).Meanwhile,McCrory,theaged Archbishop had been approached by certain associates of GOERTZ with aView to his influencing the Irish Government to encourage a German invasi onofthe North. MeCrory had actually gone down to Dubllin with this object[4G.in view but had received a rebuff. It was possible that details ofany of these instances might come out in the German document.Ipromisedthat I would look into this question and, if possible,bootleg him an advance copy of any further publications.proposes to pay us a visit some time between now and Christmas.Dn my return frorn leave found that we had 236 H.O.Ws and 192telechecks opernting. I asked Colonel Alllan whether this was taxing hisresources too far. He said that, with the exception of King Street.aprobably the District Committees of the Party, we could take it that allthese cheeks were being dealt with in a fairly comprehensive manner. Inthe case of O.P. H.U., it was of course necessary to be somewhat selective.came to see me this morning.He had a message, which hehad received through an intermediary, fromto convey unorrroialiyto S.I.S. and to ourselves. It was thatwas "on hie way out andthatformer head of the Surete and now a Prefect was to takehis place for a limited period.(4) OF THE RECORDSagreed with me that this perhaps meant that19582010was to endeavour to reconcile the point of view of the Surete and the D.E.Calthough the choice did not seem to be a particularly happy one. Mean-while, Moch of the Ministry of Defence, had askedto resign.had refused and had said that if he were dismissed, he still hadhis dossier about the political scandals surrounding theand otherincidents and would use them.principal lieutenant,lis on indefinite leave andno longer has any executive powers inD.E.C. He has not been attending the office during the last six monthsbut is still on full pay!is a little worried about: the new Secretary ofthe S.I.C. who never stops talking and is Dull of rather impracticableideas about putting new life into the organisation. He says thatis a careerist; he is a Sous-Prefect and hopes one day to bea Prefect. He is not, therefore, likely to risk antagonising anyone whomight be of assistance to him in the future.Nothing veny interesting seems to have been going on since I havebeen away, except new developments in regard to the Washington leakage.Eastcote have clearly been doing some good work on aterial which haa nowbeen made available to them. Geoffrey Patterson is paying a shont visitto this country. Although the position singe the FUCHS case has slightlyeased, he still only has one contact in the Bureau. HooverisawayinCalifornia and it is hoped that there may be a chance when he comes back,if he is in a good temper: The D.G. has asked to see him if he goes toAmerica to attend the Colorado Police Conference but has 80 far had noreply to his letter.Apparently Hoover's attitude with regard to thecase isbased largely on a desire to be able to tell Congress that he hasinvestigated every spect of the case about which they may have informatiorHe has turned over no less than ten principal agents to make enquiriein the U.S. and elsewhere. He is neither pro nor antibutjust wants to enhance his personal reputation by being able to answer anyquestions about tae matter which has featured s0 prominently in the publiceye.147.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINEDNDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACI 1968.Apr2-01011th September.Charles Haydon came to see me. I gather that some progress has beenmade with the Federal Security Service and that agreement is shortly to bereached about the appointment of someone to run it. A further pointhasarisen in connection with permission being granted to the Germans to runa Secret Service. Haydon feels that the only thing is to get Americanagreement and to g0 ahead; if the French are consulted, they will certainlysay "no'. Haydon says the Germans will run, and are running already,something of the kind and that we woulld do better to go in with them andget the benefit of anything they do, rather than pretend that we do notknow that it is going on, or try to close it down.I lunched with Geoffrey Patterson. He told me a lot about hisdifficulties in Washington. He agreed. with me that the only thing withHoover was to take his kicks and hope that things would right themselvesin the course of time.At the D.G's meeting, when I was in the chair, Shaw said that theAmericans, through diplomatic channels, wene enquiring about the security.of certain key points in the Colonies - bauxite in British Guiana was acase in point. The Amnericans either wanted to consult in London aboutthese matters or to send a joint comission to investigate, or, alter-natively, to end a commission on their own. The Colonial Officer wereworried about this and the D.G. had offered to tackle the State Departmentwhen he was in Washington. The Colonial Office have accepted this offer.It seemed to us that in some ways the matter might be better deal't withon diplomati lines. Clearly we did not want ajoint commission, andstillless an American one; we whould have to say that the security ofthe Colonies was a matter for the Governor, but that our Overseas DefenceCommittee was considering V.Ps in the Colonies and that in certain areaswehad a Security Officer who woulld be participating in local defence plansIn practice it seend to us that there was very little that could be doneatthe present juncture. Luke will, I gather, be seeing the D.G. onthis matter on Thursday.12th SeptemberI had a long telephone conversation with Howard of the Home Officeabout E. E.V.s. We ane having another meeti.ng on Friday. Having gotreturns from the Police, I thought that the nexxt step was to try andarrange for locall Commandants of camps and hostels to procure the basicinformation about E.V.Ws that we required. We can assist them bygetting reliablle interpreters, as faf as vie were ableHoweodxthe48.Where Wa were dispersed in billets, it would be for the Policeto obtain the basic records. Meanwhile, I am told that a case has justarisen of an approach being made by the Soviet Embassy to an alien, who isto conduct propaganda in E.V.W. circles. This alien will be working forus and we may in that way get to know more about the methods employed.Howard mentioned to me that there was a move to abolish controlsbetween this country and Ireland: the idea was to get the Eire authoritiesto coITaborate in letting us know about the arrival of undesirable alienswho would be on our Stop List, and that there would be a mutual under-standing that those who came from Eire would be accepted back there if theywere found to be undesirable, and vice versa. To reinforce this, alllaliens coming from Eire woulld have to register within ten days.I explained to Howard that the idea of a ringed fence was notpractical. Our opposite number in Eire placed no reliance upon it,since there are not sufficient personnel on the ground. Moreover, weknow that the Irish are more or less indifferent about the aliens whoenter their country, and any arrangement made with them would be subjectto political consideratinns( (?) at the moment. Registration within tendayis no real safeguard, since we shall be unaware that the man is in thecountry at all.I had a long talk with Kim Philby. I do not think he is veryhappy in America he clearly feels that he is not really get ting enoughscope. I thought I discerned a fly thrown over me in the form of asuggestion that it was really unnecessary for us to have a Washingtonrepresentative, and that he could carry the whoe business, but I may havebeen wrong. I certainly gave him no encouragement - in fact I told him thawhatever the flow of information, I was quit convinced that we ought tohave a man in the Western Hemisphere.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT ER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSAOT 1958 Aprl 2o1o.14913th September.At the J,1.0. to-day a report was handed round from the Colonial Officeto the effect that half a dozen Chinese, who had been arrested for criminalctivities in Hong Kong, had confessed that they were members of thetionalist guerilla forces. There seemed to be some suggestion that theywere being at least encouraged, if not financed, by the Americans.and I said that we Would be very surprisept if C.I.A. were behindthem, and that inthe absence of any positive evidence it would be difficultto suggest to them that they were not keeping to their bargain.thought, however, tha O.P.C. might quite possibly be up to something andthat although they were a part of C.I.A. they could be approached.Baker-Cresswell referred to the possibility of German rearmament andasked what could be done to vet officers of the armed forces if Germany werepermitted to reconstitute her Army, or to form a contingent to work with theWestern Union nations. While it seemed to me that the only records wouldbe the old M.I.19 C.S.D.I.C. records, I doubted whether the work involvedwould really be worth while, since it seemed to me that it was extremelyunlikelytobeeffective,wouldmerelycauseirritation,andwouldalwaysbeevaded if the Germans weres inclined. It is difficult to see wha't lcindof a record would constituibe a bar.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 Apr 2010Iwent to see '0'. He was pleased about the appointment ofBedell-Smith as head of O.I.A. and thoe ight that this might do something toreconcile C.I.A'S point of view with that of G-2.He asked me about Norman Brook'e enquiry., which had cuased him andhis staff a good deal of work. I tolld him what the results were hereand tha't we had found him a very satisfactory person to deal with.'C'asked whether he had said anything about interchangeability of staff.Isaid that we had of course mentioned the integrated units and had alsosaid that some form of integration would take place in London if ve both gotinto the same building. We had not, however, discussed any general inter-change.1Lth September.At the J.I.C. this morning Wallinger, our Minister in Budapest gavea talk. He said that there wer certain basic facts which should be bornein mind they might seem elernentary but they were important. There wasno doubt in his mind that Hungary had absolutely no independence at all;even in minor matters he thought that they had often to refer back toMoscow. Secondly, a gradual and ruthless Sovietisation of the wholecountry was taking place. The influence of the Church had been seriouslyimpaired by its latest agreement with the State. The peasants were beingollectivised and there were signs of a strong attack on the remainingsocial dernocrats. While it might be said that 80 of the population wererevolution. While thene were sound roots in the ground, plants respectedout of sympathy with the Government, there was no prospect no of a counter- wouldever be allloved to flower.Racosi (?) was probably the most50.Stalinist among the satellite states, altough in some matters hevas not quite 8O doctrinaire as others. All economic decisions weresubordinated to political considerations: we had been conducting tradenegotiations,and So had the Arnericans, and these involved as a quid proguo the release of bothbut on the opening of the warin Korea all discussions had ceased.Wallinger said he could not describe the feeling of depression andfrustration which surroundedy work of himself and his staff. There wasvery little opportunity of obtaining intelligence or of normal discussionwith anybody official or otherwise. It was only possible to play a ratherunpleasant game of poker with Beret, the Jewish Under-Secretary in theHungarianForeignOffice.Alltha'thisstaffcoulddowastoreadthenewspapers and keep their eyes open when travelling about the country.Movement was on the whole unrestricted, although supervision is elievedto be constant if not apparent. I gatherethat a good many of the staff,i.e chauffenrs, servants etc. were Hungarians. As regards the Army,Wallinger said he did not think that there were any senior officers whowere thought to be politically reliablle enough to take command, and that newcadres had not really been effectively trained. In spite of all this, thereare st1ll a fen jokes going round the cafes in Budapest. When potatoe queuesbegan, one man said to another: "I hear that there are American Fortressesflying over the country, I wonder what the reason is?". The other repliedthat they must be dropping potatoes in order to keep the Colorado Bettlesalive! Another story was about an Inspector who was visiting one of theschools. He asked two of the pupils what their great ambition was; theyeach said that they wanted to be a pilot a fly one of the latest Sovietfighters. A third said that he would like to kick President Truman. TheInspectorwasmuchimpressedandcongratulatedtheheadmasteronhavinginstilled such idalogy into his pupils: he was disappointed, however,when he asked the reason. The boy replied: "Well you see, if I could kickPresident Truman. either President Truman woulld have to be here or I shouldhave to be in America. The American Minister reported this story backto Washington and added that as long as this kind of thing was going around,there was still hope.Des Graz came here this afternoon and saw Geoffrey Patterson and myself.He has been to Washington and Bermuda and is thoroughly satisifed with hiscensorship plans., which seem to be fairly far advanced. He is a littleworried about accommodation in the event of war and has asked Pattersonto keep this in tnind. There will also be the question of accommodation forus in Bermuda, where there will obviously be a fairly big job owing to theairline which will be passing through Bermuda from SouthAmerica. The traffiin the last war was roughly about 800 a week.COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDINDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION15th- 17th September.OF THE PUBLIO RECORDSAOT 1958 April 2010I attended a course at Uoreester rcester-College College, Oxfoni beenwith several speakers from outside. I found the wholething extremely interesting and I am sure the institution is a very goodone.The first speaker was Professon Popper, who started by saying thathe vas surprised that the pull of Marxism vas not stronger than it was.The ides of a supreme deity ruling over a finite universe having of beenseverely questioned of science, by and modern its claim research, that Marxiism history with could its be offer predicted, power mustwishing to help those in distress. To put things in their proper perspectivbe to expected the man to exert a tremendous pull. Marxiam also had the appeal of1S1.it began with the philosophy of Hegel, which held that progress couldonly come through discussion. You had a thesis and an antithesis whichproduced a synthesis, but Marxian theory rejects discussion and the thesis,therefore, becomes the synthesis, since there could be no antithesis andprogress is impossible.Professor Popper then discussed: (a) dialectics, (b) economicinterpretation of history, and (c) political theory. According toMarxian theory theproducereconomic and social changes which resultin an ever-widening. gap between the capitalist cllass and the workers;ultimately this must result in a revolutionary clash. Marx held thatthis was inevitable and that it vas, therefore, better not to resist itsince there woulld thus be less bloodshed. Ruthless extermination ofall opposition was necessary, since in the long run it would cause lessbloodshed. In any case capitalism was causing the death of thousandsof workers every day and revolution, though blopdy at the outset, wouldlead rapidly to the milienium and peaceful conditions. Marx was disturbedto find that his doctrines were not Working out in practice in Englandand began to search for an explanation. He finally concluded that a stateof revolution had not been reached, as the British workers had exploitedthe Colonial workers. His beliefs, therefore, would work themselves outto their logical concllusion only when the gap between colonial workersand their white capitalist employers reached the point where revolutionwas inevitable. Professor Popper held that the Russian revolution hadproved the fallseness of the economic interpretation of history, sinceit did not arise from industrial causes but was imposed upon the ignorantmasses by a handfull 0f intellectuals. He belleved that Marxian doctrinecould ony be attacked by modesty and the pursuit of democratic ideas.In other words, humanism was the only effective counter weapon. He hadalways found it impracticable to argue with Marxists.The other speaker was Professor Katkov, who spoke about the "SovietMantt. He said that it wa's wrong to get the idea that the average Sovietcitizen had any political convictions at all; he was wholly preoccupiedwith trying to exist. The State told him that he had to weild a pick,drive a motorcar, be an engineer or a doctor, and if he wished to exist,the only course was to conform. During the last thirty years he hadcome to regard it as the business of the state to provide him with whatevervocation suited his qualifications. When he came but of Russia he wasinclined to judge the new State by its ability to provide him withemplloyment in his particular calling, whatever that might be. Katkovcited the case of a trombone player,W who on arrival here had been toldthat (presumably on the advice of the Musicians Union) alien tromboneplayers were not wanted and that, therefore, he should become anagricultural worker and go to Australia. He had replied that if thiswas the case he would return whence he came: he realised that theconsequences would be serious and that he would undoubtedly be placedin a concentration camp, but he seemed to be consoled by the possibilitythat there might be a band in the concentration camp in which he couldplay the trombone.This was interesting from our point of view, since it provided anexplanation for the peculiar behaviour of the Soviet doctor who could notunderstand that in order to practice in the U.K. it was necessary forhimnot only to pass the British Medical Association examination, which wouldtake him frorn two to three years, but also to become proficient in theEnglish language.(tkov was asked many questions about emigre groups and the bestmethods for encouraging defection. He thought that the Russians would be152.mone likely to defect to an emigre movement - such as that of VLASOV,if the latter were stilll alive- than to a foreign Government. Hethought emigre groups should get together and endeavour to choose aleaderof standing. Someone suggested that these groups might quarrel,to which Katkov replied:"o course they quarrel - why should they notquarrel -- everybody quarrels!" He thought it important that such a groupshould have a very definite policy worked out, but that in conductingpropaganda in Russia. by means of broadcasts or leaflets, no attempt shouldbe made to say what this progrramme was they should merelly be given tounderstand that everything had been taken care of. His reason was that ifa programme wene broadcast, it would imnediately become the subjectofdiscussion which would be followed by heavy repressive measures.Katkov had some authority to speak on the subject of defectors,since he had recently made a tour of Germany and had long discussionswith newcorners from Russia and ex-members of VRasov's Army.18th September.Drew came round to tell me about a defector who signed a letterfor ALEXANDROVITCH and addressed it to Air Commodore Cousens, one ofthe Directors of Plans. He stated that he wa's employed by themeteorological departent a't Leningrad,an that he was over here tosee the Birmingham Exhibition and wished to defect.I understand that a Colonial Office Security department is to beestablished, presuably on lines similar to those of the Foreign Office.I talked to Joe Spencer about accommodation in peaice and war. TheD.G. whom I consulted, agreed that it was essential that in wartime weshould move the Registry and certain of our personnel to the country, andthat steps should be taken now to earmark some sort of accommodation throug!the Padmore Committee.Isaacs, the Minister of Labour, has made a stupid speech aboutCommunist plots. It i8 likely to recoil on our heads. He had little orno evidence on which to base his statement it was connected wi th thebusmens' strike.19th September:The defector incident mentioned to me by Drew yesterday is "duck soup"A letter, obviously from the same author, addressed to the Director of PlanWar Office, was passed on to us and we nov have a confession from thesecretary of the Director of Plans that the whole thing was a practicaljoke designed to get the Air Ministry and War Office representatives tomeet outside the Junior Carlton Club with melon hats and red fllowers intheir buttonholes! B.2 are not too pleased as B.6 have been fullymobilised to cover the meting!A man called Shears, late of the Malayan Security Service, and nowStipendiany Magistrate in Singapore, came to see me about one, ELIAS, awealthy jewish barrister who had been erployed on security duties during153.the war in India and wag very anxious to get into our officer. Ittranppired that ELIAS had already made some attempt to get into S.I.F.E.Shears merely wanted to say that he knew ELIAS well; that he wasanti-Zionist, wealthy and wholly reliable. If we wanted any furtherinformation he would be pleased to give it. I thanked him and heleft.Personally Indnthot think that we should in any circumstancesemploy ELIAS.Major came in to see me before returning to Malta. He hadno particular business to discuss. His job is a fairly straightforwardone.Thistle and Derby came to talk to me about V.Vs. Derby canprovide interpreters if they are required.20th September.At the J.I.C. to-day we discussed a paper on Pakistan. ThePakistan authorities appear to be Somewhat worried about the spreadof Communism and the spread of Soviet activities in Karachi, buttheir apprehensions do not appear to be based on much evidence.It was also mentioned that the Chinese Communist armies are regroupingon the Indo-Chinese border, but whether this is preparatory to an entryinto Indo-China is not clear.Hollis a nd Perfect came to see me about an alleged sabotage caseat Chatham on one of H.M. ships. We are asking the Admiraty toallow the Kent Police to assist as we have nobody available.T discussed the staff position with Joe Spencer to-day and,after going into the whole matter very carefully, he finds thatwe have only one vacancy that we can fill in this financial year.Dici is worried about the commitment for E. V. Ws being in B.1.G.I said that logically I thbught they were rightiy placed in thatsection, since the potential alien 5th Column in this country was asmuch a B.l prnmitment as the C.P.G.B. On the other hand, I fullyunderstood that they had many other fish to fry. If thetituted anembryo E. Division and passed the problem to them, we should have tohave someone of ability to carry on the work that Thistle has beendoing.21st September.came to see me. Heisabut the position is omewhat precarious.an he is anxious if possibleto get back into intelligence. He wondered whether there might beanichefor him here. I told him that I did not think there was theslightest chance, but sometimes we heard of jobs outside which mightbe up his street and that I would certainly bear his name in mind.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIODOF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958201o154.I had a discussion with Dick and Kellar about West Africa andappointment of a S.D.E.C.E. representative in Aocra. We decided thatwe should first CD-ordinate our policy with S.I.S.Thistle has has a satisfactory meeting with Ruck and Howardof the Immigration Department about E.V.s. A start is to be madein Lancashire and Cormbs, who handled E.V.Ws in Germany, is to be incharge of the party of Immigration Officers who are to conduct theinterrogations. For the moment no interpreters are required.At the J.I.C. tp-day it was agreed that the Services should goto their own Establishment branches about personnel they thought suitablefor purgeing, and not to the Chiefs of Staff.A proppsal was made by Drew for encouraging Services personnel tojoin the Communist Party for L.C.S. purposes, but this was turned downfor the moment.Menzies, the Australian Prime Minister, has told our HighCommisstoner about his recent visit to Japan. He said to McArthurthat while he would support the U.S.A. in Korea, he thought the movewas wrong; we ought to make up our minds what is important strategicallyand stick to it.Thisitle tells me that observation: on Mrs. SKALBERGS led her to thehouse of TERESHENKO, one of the Directors of Hambros Bank who worked inS.0.E. during the war. Mrs. SKALBERGS stayed there for three hours,having previously taken a good deal of probaganda literature to the PostOffice for despatch to o.V.Ws. The reason for her visit toTERESCHENKO is not clear, but it is presumed that she was having atalk with some member of the staff.22nd september.Dick, Roger and I discussed the embryo E. Division, but did notmake a great deal of progress. I said that if anybody were detached totake on this job, it would have to be a person with considerablequalifications, and that logically at the moment E. Division was rightlyplaced as a section of B.1, however burdensome this might be. There weretwo potential Fifth Columns in this country; one British and the otheralien. B.l were dealing with the Conmunists as a political party andsifting them for B.2 if they were spies. In the same way B.1 should siftthe alien population for B.2. The problem of E.V.Ws needed someone ofThistle's calibre if it was going to be done properly.I had a meeting withandAlec Kellar,Derek Hamblen and Clayton on policy in West Africate discussed thequestion of the D.E.C. representative at Accra. and ORIGINAL S, Sdereed DOCUMLN RETANED withour viev that this appointment should be permittedINDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958. ferd 2010I took the opportuhity of mentioning tothe presentproposals for combing E.V.W. population in this country, as Ithought that possibly we might come across some S.1.8. recruits. toseemed to think that this might be a matter Of some interest S.I.S.ISS.I had a talk with Holmes.He is wvorried about the presentarrangement by which provircial Police Forces are to deal direct with theYard in regard to formullating a conspiracy case against Conmunists worlingin the ports, and against those concerned with road haulage to and from thearts. This scheme was put into force at the reguest of the Attorneyreral , the D. of P.P. and the Home Office. Holmes thinks that itmay encourage the Police to deal with the Yard rather than with this office,and that the Yard may ultimately set up a duplicate colllating centre.23rd September.Norman Brook has seenthe Left tlinger working in the CabinetOffices, and on the whole has formed a favourable impression. Oneremarktofhas rather worried us. He said that it was a matterof opinion as to the degree to which the British Communist Party is thetool of wholly subservient to Moscow - this depended upon one's politicalorientation.said that he accepted Marxism, but had never thoughtit out to its logical conclusion. Brook thinks his beliefs are in asta'te of suspense and have no influence on his actions.hasundertaken to speak to Brook if he ever senses that a conflict of loyaltiesisarisinginhis mind. Brook does not think thatis a Communistor ever a sympathiser.We are not altogether satisfied viith his,since we feel thatshould have been sent away to make up his mind precisely where hestood. He may feel later on that he has a conflict of loyalties, by whichtime he will go away with a good deal of highly secret knowledge.Roger had a talk with Cimperman on the subject of manganese. At theinstigation of the Department of Defence, Washington, a high officialof the Manganese Corporation in the U.S. had been sent over to see hisBritish counterpart here and suggest a visit to enquire into the securityof the manganese mines on the Gold Coast.Cimpermanwasinsistentthatthis visit should be kept from the State Department. We told him thatthe State Department had already raised the matter through diplomaticchannels, as Gold Coast manganese is apparently the only source outsideRussia.Vle are going to see one, Coward, of British Manganese before he goesto the Gold Coast, and arrange with him to get into touch with Stephens.25th September.I discussed the question of the reorganisation of the Aamiralty DockPolice. with Holmes and Hollis. We agreed that the short-term and long-termtpolicy suggested by Perfect was a mistake, and that on no account couldthe Metropolitan Police take charge. It would be better to decide at thestart that the local police should take over, but the Working Party seemsto be packed with those who have a vested interest in private pplice forces,and I doubt whether we shall get away with it.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENTRINDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONOF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 Aprl 2O10($6.of C.I.A. has been over talking to Graham Mitchellabout a proposal from his Head Office that the Communist Party should beclosely watched for indications that the Russians are about to make war.He got a clear answer, that if the Soviet Government were intending tomake war, the last people in the world they would tell would be, theC.P.G.B.26th September.I had a discussion with Dick and Roger aboutWe aregoing to e-establish contact with Hewison and, if necessary, Brook,with a view to resolving the doubts in our minds.I gave lunch to the S.I.C. to-day.held forth at Somelength on Communist activities in France. He said the real dangerwasnot the French Communist Party, many of whose members were basicallynationalist, but a potential 5th Column of something l1ke 11 millionaliens. He thought that by paying too much attention to the FrenchC.P.9theFrenchSuretewouldbe"takingtheireyeofftheball".itwas for thia reason that the French had been carrying out extensiveraids; their idea was to "ballayer le terrain'tDick did not feelargument was wholly convincing, butrather an excuse by the French for inaction against their Communists, whopresented them with an extremely delicate political problem.I. had a talk with Haldane Porter about the Planners' paper onoil in the Middle East and Far East. Halda'ne Porter was worried becauseno mention had been made of our security aison with oil companiesin the Middle East, and other political factors. While I agreed withhim, I did not see how we could go back to the Planners or Chiefs ofStaff at this stage. In any case, aur action would be somewhat academic,since in the event of trouble at least a Division would be required, butin fact only a rather scrappy Brigade could be got together.27th September.It has been decided to refuse admissior to any individuals wishingto attend the Peace Congrees in November who have engaged, or are likelyto engage, in activities detrimental to the internal securit of industrialpeace, and that this. also should be applied strictly. It has also beendecided not to allow foreighers to come to the U.K. in advance to organisethe conference. LAEITTE and five Soviet citizens were turned down onthese grounds.The above was a Cabinet ruling.Holmes tells me that as regards the Dock Police, the Home Officeare Going back on their previous view, that the Police should take over.Some compromise was now suggested.I spoke to the D.G. about our war H.Q. and the movement ofpersonnel in the event of war. He agreed that we should get on withthis at the earliest possible moment and to consult the Padmore Committe:I passed this on to A. Branch in writing.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINEDoughton is leaving to take Dp his job in EN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 April 2010I5.28th September.I spoke to Gainer at the J.I.C. Directors meeting to-day aboutAMOS and General MORGAN, who are running a Digest and were offeringormation about the illicit export of arms. I sadd that provided itwas understood that there was no quid pro quo, I could see no harm intheir feeding in information which came to their notice to the Departmentof the Controller of Export Licences, where it could be properly assessed.Franklin of the Foreign Office attended the J.I.0. in connectionwith the F.O. telegram to Washington about the Korean situation.Thetelegrarn was concerned with the Possible reactions of the Russians andChinese if the Americans advanced beyond the 38th Parallel. Thisanxietyhad been largely brought about by Pannikar, the Indian Ambassador inPeking, having been hauled out of his bed in the middle of the night tospeakto CHUEN-LI. The latter had told him tha't if the Americans crossedthe 38th Parallel, China would be bound to act. Nobody was very clearwhether this was a bluff or not.There is a certain amount of disagreement in the U.S.A./U.K.Intelligence appreciation of Russian indications.The Americans feelthat war is imminent between now and 1952. We do not feel that thereis a serious possibilit until 1952. The Americar view is that theRussians may want to attack before the build up of N.A.T.O. forces iscompleted in 1954. our Foreign Office and the State Department's assessmentagree, but G-2 is in violent opposition. C.I.A'g views do not coincidewith either. All these departments have their own economic section andeach has a different viewpoint. The meeting in Washington is probablythe first occasion on which they have everig round a tablle together.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED29th September.IN DEPARTMIENT UNDER SECTIONAOT 19583 (4) OF PUBLIC RECORDSApri2010Hollis hasagone on a week's leave. The D.G leaves for Americato-morrow.I spoke to .0.S. aboutHe agrees tostaying here,subject to Magan't views.158.2nd October.Holmes talked to me about the Dock Police. The Home Office aretaking the view that the responsibility should remain with the Admiralty,but that the Dock Police should be properly staffed and trained bya regular Police Force.rang me up about the D.G's visit, about which hehad read in the papers. He said that he would like to draw the attentionof his H.Q. to the D.G's presence in Washington, in case they could be ofany assistance.Itoldhimthathewascertainlyatlibertytodothisand suggested that his H.Q. should get into touch with Patterson, who would:know the D.G's movements.Air Marshal Elliott sent a telegram about a dinner that he hadwith Jessup, M. Moch - the French Defence Minister, and Shinwell. Mochhadbeen extremely defeatist. The French are objecting to the establish-ment of a Gendarmerie, and indeed to any German rearmament.3rd October.Ken Millls and Graham have information that GREY, of the financedepartment of the Communist Party, has a number of dollars brought inhere illegally. The Customs would be quite right to search his premisewhich they have power to do. If this money is for the World Peace Congresethe prosecution of GREY might be valuable from the propaganda point of view.It was decided to consult the D. of P.P.. but the latter did not think thatthe case was good enough as it stood and there was, moreover, always a riskthat we should not find the dollars.The Chief Constable of the Isle of Man came to see me. He drew myattention to the excusions whi'ch ran from the Isle of Man to Dublin duringthe summer months. It would be perfectly easy for anyone t get (int/o thecountry as a member of one of the excunsion parties. ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDINDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIOYOF THE PUBLIC RECORILith October.ACTAprl2010At the J.I.C. to-day. we were told about Nehru's anxiety, due toa converation between his Ambassador in Peking and CHUEN-LI, that if theAmericans advanced beyond the 38th Parallel, the Chinese, and possibly alsothe Russians, would intervene. This matter has been discussed by theChiefs of Staff. Sir John Slessor had taken a strong view, that the riskof Chinese intervention' was a really serious one. He did not think therewas a case for advardng beyond the 38th Parallel, since wherever thefrontier was there would. be guerilla activities across it.Dick saw the D. of P.P. about the question of GREY, when it wasdecided that nothing could be done. The D. of P.P. said that theprosecution of the gas strike leaders had been somewhat muddled, sinceJack TANNER had never been told. It appears also that Isaacs made hisstatement about a Communist plot without any prior consultation.THISI A COPYORIGINAL159.IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONOF RECORDSAgrey-haired and impressive, who appears be the"Queen of Passport"' in the U.S., came to see me withShe waganxious to know if we had had any cases of forged American passports. Shewas being pressed to re-validate all American passports, but before doingso had decided to visit countries abroad in order to establish how farthis was really necessary. I told her that we knew of no such cases,although in the past we had known of cases where American passports hadbeen obtained by improper means- in particular by the presentation of afalse birth certificate.5th October.At the J.I.C. to-day a paper fro the Chiefs of Staff was considered,which instructed the J.I.C. and Joint Planners to revise their papers inthe light of the latest warning about Chinese intervention received fromthe Indians. Sir John Blessor's views have been accepted, and it seemsthat our advise to the U.N. is that no-one should go beyond the 38thParallel except Koreans. The Americans apparently wish to go beyondthe 4oth Parallel, which would leave nothing for North Korea exceptmountainous country.Prefessor Blunnt compalined that he had not been informed aboutaCzech unheralded arrival. I said that it was our practice to informthe department most concerned, and to rely upon that department to informothers, if this seemed necessary, after interrogation. Blount said thathe was interested in any aircraft, in spite of the fact that this one hadturned out to be an old Dakota.Ronnie Howe and I went to see Sir John Anderson, now Chairman ofP.LA. Burt was also present. Anderson said that he was anxious toensure that the inside informatior which his Dock sergeant was given waspassed on to the Police. Burt replied that this liaison was excellent,and told me afterwards that it was his informant in the Dock Committeewho was passing information to the Dock Police through the B.B. sergeant,ut,with his usual tact, he did not mention this to Sir John Anderson!Anderson said, too, that he had read reports about the Postsmouthsabotage incident and also speeches by Ministers. Of course ne knew agood deal about the speeches by Ministers and he realised from longexperience that they did not always mean what they said. We all smiledand gave no answer. I said that as far ae knew there was no sabotageplanned, but that we always t ought it possible that some disgruntledindividual, or some C.P. member. acting contrary to the orders of his H.Q.,might commit such an act if he saw a suitable opportunity. With that themeeting terminated.Jopson. came to see me. He is now 60 and can stay on as a Professorof Slavonic Studies at Cambridge for another five years. He feels,however, a little restless and if he could find suitable work in London withus, or with any other department, would be glad to accept it.I said that it was just possible there might be sufficient to keephim busy in G.C.H.Q. or S.I.S. and that from time to time we might haveone or two things where we should value his assistance. I also told him,very confidentially, that there might be some question of setting up aService school for teaching Russian; I would explore all these possibilitiesand let him know.160.6th October.Isaw Sir Thomas Lloyd. Some complaint had reached hisMinister from Fenner BROCKWAY that he had been followed by the policein Uganda and that instructions to this effect had been given by Hall,the Governor, who was on leave in this country. Fenner BROCKWAY quotedthe number of the telegram alleged to contain these instructions. Isaid tht the telegram certainly was not ours, but that I would makeenquiries as to precisely what telegrams we had sent relating eitherto Fenner BROCKWAY or to MUSAZI, who was to travel with him.9th October.I lectured to Colonial Police officers.In the afternoon I saw Sir Thomas Lloyd and handed him a copyof our telegrams to East Africa in connection with BROCKWAY' visit. Itwas clear from our telegrams that our real interest was in MUSAZI, whomwesuggested might be worth observation. We pointed out that he wouldbe travelling with BROCKWAY, and later we informed S.L.6. Nairobi thatMUSAZI had abandoned his visit and that BROOKNAY would be travellingalone. We had also informed Khartoumn, where the 'plane was likely toland en route. There was nothing in our telegrams to suggest thatBROCKWAY should be kept under observation. Even if there had beensomething, it would not have been wholly unreasonable in view of thetrouble a man of that kind might cause in Uganda at the present moment.Lloyd told me that in fact the Uganda Police had taken it uponthemsellves to keep BROCKWAY under observation. He did not seeminclined to blame them in SO doing. Nobody had apparently been ableto trace the telegram which had been mentioned by BROCKWAY to the MinisterI suggested that as it had a U.P. prefix, it might have been aninter-pobice message from the Uganda Police which had been given awayto BROCKWAY by some native clerk. It seemed to me important to get tothe bottom of this.Lloyd kept a copy of these messages, which, he intended to show tothe Minister. I emphasised that we did not wish/to go any furtherand would like them subsequently destroyed.I left for Zurich at mid-day to attend the Mendelssohn wedding.lth October.I returned from Zurich at mid-day, when I had a talk with Dickand Roger. There haB been a certain amount of trouble over a statementby the Ilford Conservative member, who had said that on information hehad received from .I.5 he knew there were several Trotskyists in the locELaboub Party. It turned out that in fact his information had been passedby an S.B. officer. It was made clear to the Prime Minister's officethat M.I.5 were not concerned, and the P.M. s0 repted in the COPY House ofCommons.ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIO RECORDSACT 1958 fpv 2010,Holllis mentioned the publicity that had appeared in the press about161.a projected purge of Communists from the L.C.C. We were rather intheark-about this matter, having only a letter from the Chairman, addressedto the D.G., and accompanied by a list of names for vetting. We finallyagreed that Hollis should go round and see the Chairman and explainto him that in view of the publicity, we could not proceed any furtherin this matter until the D.G's return, and that it was essential that weshould have our hands clean if any question were raised in the House.I attended a meeting at the Foreign Office on 11.10.50, at whichReilly took the chair, Barton represented the Colonial Office, and Cottonthe African section of the Foreign Office. Jack Easton was present onbehalf of S.I.S. We are to be supplied by Jackson with a copy of theminutes.I put forward all the arguments which I have already advanced infavour of the project:(a) whatever we might think of the D.E.C. as a producingagency, we had to work with them here and Paris, and elsewhere.We were also collaborating with them through the S.I.C. In collaboratingwith them - as indeed with other foreign Governments - we tried not tothink of intelligence exchange in terms of a balance sheet, but to giveall we could consistent with security and to get back as much as wecould from those with whom we were in touch.(b) We had recently - and with good reason - been forced toturn down a request by D.E.C. to appoint an officer to Hong Kong. Unless,therefore, there were overriding reasons, we were anxious to meet theirrequest in West Africa.(c) It was possible that a l1aison with D,E.C. might producebetter results than a liaison with the political sections of ColonialGovernments, since D.E.C. had a mandate to operate in alll colonialterritories, regardless of the Ministry under which they came in Paris.I could not see, therefore, how a report by the new British Consul inBrazzaville, Mason, was likely to affect things.(d) I could not see why the Colonial office should beapprehensive about the appointment, since if it was the intentionof the French to report on subversive movements in British Coloniesin Weat Africa, they already had a Consul in Accra who had probablybeen doing this for some time.(e) A.D.E.C. liaison officer in Accra might just possiblyimprove the flow of information between ourselves and the French, andmight well save us a number of Journeys between Accra,aBrazzaville andDakar.Cotton seemed to be full of a good deal of prejudice against theFrench. Firstly, because Wikeley, our Consul in Leopoldville, hadreceived a rebuff from Bourge, the Chef de Cabinet in French EquatorialAfrica, last April (Bourge had said, that on instructions from Paris hecould not communicate any informatio about political conditions in theColony) and secondly, because Coat, the I.R.D. representative,hareceived no co-operation and had been regarded as a spy.162,I said that I was not altogether surprised that the Frenchregarded Coateas a spy, since the Franch might well say that we alreadyhad a liaison officer ealing with Communist matters in the area, andthat Coateruposition, therefore, was somewhat difficult to explain.Barton said that the Colonial Office would be worried at havingaD.E.C. representative at Accra, as he might obtain information aboutbarious movements in the Colony which would ultimately reach Paris andleak to the Russians. This seemed fairly remote, particularly in viewof para (d) above. Reilly said so, and obviously felt that thisobjection could not be sustained.supported our view, but were anxious, as was also Cotton,that if the D.E.C. appointment was to be allowed, we should at least sayto the French that, if and when occasion arose, we hoped that no objectionWould be raised to the appointment of an S.I.S. representative in one oftheir colonies.Reilly in the chair found himself in something of a difficulty.AsChairman of the J.I.C. he would like to see D.E.C's request granted,but as a representative of the Foreign Office he felt rather reluctantlyboundtocompromise. Two decisions were made:1.that the Colonial Office should get on with consultingGovernors, and2. that I should seeand inform him that I had met withconsiderable difficulties owing to security issues affecting theexchange of information with the French, and in particularover the attitude of Brazzaville,t any sort of exchange withthe Foreign Office representatives, and over the mission ofCoat of I.R.D.It was felt that this might cause the D.E.C. to make representationsto the Ministry concerned and S0 improve Mason' positionCOPYI shall be seeingbut I regard the whole aSAINEDextremely insatisfactory.IN DEPARTMENT INDERSECTION(4) OF HE PLBLIO RECORDSACT 1958JuneQoloWhen I was at the Foreign Office I saw Geoffrey Wethered, whotold me about a telegram which had been received by the C.R.0. fromour Ambassador in Dublin to-day. to the effect that the former CzechMinister in Dublin, Major RUZICKA had invited the U.S. Air Attache toinspect the contents of his Chancery, as instructions had been sent toMiss HARTIG (who kept open the Chancery after RUZICKA'S resignation)to transfer the contents of the Chancery to London. In the absenceofthe U.S. Air Attache, however, the Military Attache accepted the fferand removed two ciphers which he had sent to Washington. Asthemovewas likely to take place within the next few days, Geoffrey wanted toknow if we had any interest in the matter.I said that on the facts as stated, I did not think that, evenif such a thing were possible to arrange, there was much likelihoodof obtaining any information of vallue from the Czech records in Dublin.Since Major RUZICKA and Miss HARTIG are both defectors and would probablyhave been regarded as unreliable, it does not seem likely that the Czech163.documents at the Dublin Legation will have much Intelligence interest.Clearly they have not been trusted and the decision to close down theCzech Legation must imply that it is serving no useful purpose. Further,if there had been anything of any importance one would have imaginadthat Major RUZICKA would have indicated where the particular documentswere to be found and something regarding their contents.The only possible action would be for the U.S. Military Attacheto question RUSIOKA on this point. If there is anything, theplattermight get Mias HARTIG to do the necessay.. I rather doubt, however,whether it is worth iit. John Marriott agrees that the matter is notworth considering. owing to the fact that there could not conceivablybe anything of interest now.12th October.At the J.I.0. to-day, Malcolm MadDonald, Commissioner General forSouth-East Asia, gave a survey of the situation in his areas Heemphasised that he had been out of touch with recent developments duringthe last two weeks.1.Korea.MacDonald said that he could not emphasise too strongly thestabilising effect of successful United Nations action in Korea. Hadthe invasion of South Korea been allowed to go by default, or had theAmerican counter action failed, the effect would have been disastrous.He did not, of course, minimise the difficulties which were likely toensue before a final settlement was reached, but SD far United Nationsaction had given immense confidence to the vast majority in South EastAsia who were struggling against Communist domination.2.Hong Kong.In Hong Kong morale was on the whole good; better, in fact than ithad been for a long time. From the defence point of view the Colonywas not at the moment regarded as a top priority.3.Burma.MacDonald thought that the situation had really improved and thatthis improvement was likely to be maintained. Militarily the Governmentwas stronger, and political authority had been restored in many placeswhere formerly the Government's writ did not runs THAKIN NU seemed tobe whoily on our side and inclined to rely upon support from the Westerndemocracies. It was vitally important that he shouid remain in power andbe kept from going into a Monastery.From the defence point of view, Burma should not be regarded a8 atop priority at the moment, since she did not provide the best road downto Malaya.4.Indo-China.MacDonald thought that Indo-China waB the real danger spot at themoment in South-East Asia. He felt tha the only policy for VIET MINHwas to try and force an issue there beeore the end of this year, when theFrench and the Vietnamese should be in a stronger position owing to thereceipt of arms and equipment from the Western democracies. He was164.worried by the French attitude to the problem, both military and political.When he had visited Indo-China about a year or more ago, he had beenimpressed by the Governor-General and Commander-in-Chief, Alessandri, whoseemed to have a positive plan for military action. Sincethe,however,Alessandri had become the Civil Governor and General Carpentier hadtaken over the military ommitment. The French had recently taken aserious knock, and he thought that there was a tendency to sit in theDelta and to refrain from taking any positive action to liquidate VIET MINH'Sforces in the hills.MacDonald had a good opinion of BAO DAI, whom he considered wasshrewd and an honest patriot. It was, however, important that he shouldreturn to Indo-China as soon as possible if his prestige was to bemaintained. He had started badly with only about ten percent of thepopulation behind him, but now had at leaat a fifty percent baclring.Nobody had so far come to the Surface who, politically, would be capableof challenging his authority or taking his place.BAO DAI had been in Paris for three reasons. Firstly, to visit hiswife and to allay gossip that he had become estranged from her - this wasimportant and it was even more important that he should, if possible,induce her to return with him to Indo-China. Secondly, in order topress his claims with the French for some progressive scheme leading toVietnamese independence, and thirdly, in order to take a holiday. MacDonalldfelt that it was of immense importance that the French should give BAO DAImore anlightened support and that if they failed in this it was justpossible that BAO DAI would not return, although before he left he hadexpressed his firm intention of B0 doing.5.Malaya.The Briggs Plan waB beiginning to take effect, but it was of coursedependent upon the build-up of the civil police organisation and thiswould take time. Meanwhile, confidence was being buillt up and he. feltthat by far the greater majority of the population were behind theGovernment.Recognition of China had at first given the Colony a serious Bet-badi,but gradually information had been seeping through to Chinese in Malayafrom their relatives, that conditions in the new China were not much betterthan they were before, and that in certain respects they were worsee Thishad had a considerable effect and had left the majority of the Chinesewith an open mind about the future of their country.It was generally accepted in Malaya that self-government was not apossibility for a good many years to come, and this view had been supportedby Nehru, who had said that self-government could not be achieved untilMalaya, Indians and Chinese were all working in harmony together.I asked MacEonald about the production of intelligence in Malaya andSingapore He admitted that this had always been a weakness, but saidthat the operation of the Briggs Plan and the efforts of sir William Jenkinwere beginning to bear fruit. The great difficulty was in finding suitablepersonnel for intelligence duties.There was a lot 0f leeway to make up.I had a word with Blount about unheralded arrivals. I gatheredthat he would be satisfied with the present procedure, provided wenotified him in the case of any aircraft that land in this country,as well as notifying the Air Ministry. In future we shall notify all16S..members of the J.I.C. by letter, but the department principally concernedwill be notified by telephone.I had lunch with DanHe asked me for a list ofIsraeli officials in this country, which I promised to let him have.He also talked to me about lsaacs' statement on Communist plots;this had caused a good deal of anxiety in the U.S. and naturally theywanted to know the truth. I said that in a way I was in ratheran embarrassing position, but as he received our regular monthly summaryhe woulld know the real position.Jack Mann talked to me about the distribution by the Scottish OfficeHealth Department of certain secret documents to municipal authorities.I said that he should let me know in greater detailnwhat thesedocuments were, otherwise it was difficullt to exxpress an opinion.Mann was rather anxious about the new arrangement by which ScotlandYard is to act as a reporting centre for infomation on the movements ofstrikers, etc. He said this had caused some confusion, as it seemed tobe a duplication of M.I.5's functions. I explained to him theimitations of the new arrangement, and assured him that it was notintended that this should Bo beyond the docks and transport workersand was only for the purpose of obtaining evidence for a court case.Dick is starting up a German section, as it is clear that.r that theGermans are to have their Consulates, commercial espionage at any ratewas likely to start before long. Klop has established a very goodliaison with the Germans here which we hope will bear fruit.I had a long discussion with Ken Mills about the suggested actionagainst GRAY, who is in possession of dollars brought in to swell thefinances of the C.P.I said that on the Whole I thought it was right to refrain fromtaking any action now; the finances of the Party had been a gap in ourinformation for some considerable time, and there now seemed a chance thatwe might become better informed. I was reluctat, therefore, to drivethe whole business further underground at this moment, unless there wassome major advantage to be gained, Since the money in possession of GRAYwas not for the purpose of financing the World Peace Congress, aprosecution would lose something of its propaganda value.13th October.Coveney came to see me. He said that whille he was quite happywhere he was, he woulld not like to miss an opportunity of joining thestaff of M.I.5 should the occasion arise. T said that I knew of noyacancy at the mornent, but would bear his name in mind.This IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 19582:2010(66,Roger is sending Irvine to Washington *xashingken for thetripartite talks on French security which are to take place shortly.Alec talked to me about technical aids for Colonial services andfor the Persians. I sadd that as regards the Colonies, I thought weought to be very sure that sufficient security could be achieved to maketechnical aids profitable before we started to lecture on the subject.As regards the Persians, I gather that Malcolm Curnming could give somewholly innocuous talk.Holmes told me that the deliberations oft the Dock Police have nowreached an advanced stage. It had been agreed that certain regular policeof Ticers should be drafted in, and that there should be close liaison withthe local police. Proper records should also be kept. He should alsohave a liaison with ourselves as heretofore.14th October.Hanley came to talk to me about KIRCHENSTEIN, who seema to beidentical with a man called KLEGES., who some time ago had an office inParis. The Americans are re-opening the case and want as much informationas they can get from us.16th October.I saw the Chief Constable 6f Durham, who has just taken over hisnew job. I told him something about the work of the office. He seemeda pleasant and co-operative person.17th October.Baker-Cresswell came to see me about, MINCEMEAT.HesaidthattheD.N.I.hadheard,fvenyconfidentiallly,fromGodfrey,thelateD.N.I.,thatDuff Cooper was writing a novel, the basic form. of which was Plan MINCEMEATD.N.I. had written to Duff Cooper who had called at the Admiralty and hadbeen seen by Baker-Cresswell. Duff was apparently somewhat irritated; hesaid that he had consulted Johnny Bevan, and certain other securityauthorities in the War Office, and that they had seen no bjection.Moreover, Winston had freely recounted the story at dinner parties.It seems a little odd that if Duf'f wanted to do something of thiskind he should not have consulted his old department. It looks as ifDuff and Montague had got together; the latter has always been anxiousto publish MINCEMEAT.Johnny Bevan is clearly not in a position to give the "all clear"as he is no longer in Government employment. It is quite possible thathe may have said that he could see no particular objection, but that isnot quite the same thing.I told Baker-Cresswell that as the story was entirely a metterforL.C.S.astherewasnoC.E.interestinit-inspiteofthefactthat we had elaborated very considerably the mounting of the plan.Wehad, however, already intima to L.C.S. that we would give them anylegal advice they might require.167-The plan was designed to mislead the Germans about the place ofattack: in fact to make them think that Sardinia and Greece would be objectivrather than Sicily. To carry this out the body of an unknown individual,who had committed suicide, was obtained from a Coroner through tthe agencyof Sir Bernard Spilsbury. This body was dressed up in a Major's uniformwith the identity of "Major Martin". He was carrying despatches fromGeneral Nye to General Alexander which in nogvery positive terms pointedto an attack on Sardinla and Greece. He also carried innumerable otherdocuments, including letters from his giri-friend, a photograph, theatreticket counterfoils, cheque book, club membership card, etc. etc. Hisdespatch case was strapped on to him. Ostensibly he was supposed to havebeen the victim of an air crash in mid-ocean: in fact, his body was takenfrom a submarine and floated ashore off the coast of Spain, nean Cadiz.The plan worked 100, since the body vas aashed up and t he documentswere examined by the Spanish Police. There vas evidence to show that theenvelopes had been tarpered with. and the letters rolled up and extractedsideways from under the flap. Later we saw their contents being transmittedon the isos from Madrid to Berlin. The despatch case and the documentswere eventually handed over to our Consul, and the body was buried viithfull military honours, a wreath being despatched from notional relations -"Pam"' and "Dad" in this country.18th October.I saw Newsam to-day, when I handed him'a copy of our note on theSheffleld "Peace" Congress. I also showed him the folder enclosing a listof the more important delegates. I explained to him that the presentproposal of the Home Office, to stop only those delegates who were likelyto engage in espionage or in creating industrial disputes, meant virtuallythat none of the delegates would be refused leave to land, and that thisseemed to go slightly against the spirit of the Cabinet ruling. It seemedto LS that the security issue, outside any general boost that the conferencemight give to the C.P.O.B., might be slight, but that the internationaleffect of the conference - whicl quite cllearly was being organised in a reallbig way -- might be considerable. It would be difficult, for example, forWestern Union, who had banned the confe nference in their countries, and alsothe U.S.A., to understand our action, and they might well draw the wronginference from the fact that the conference was to be held in Great: Bri tain.Newsam took the view that to stop the delegates would only lead toendless telegrams of protest which would receive publicity, and that thebody politic here was quite capable of absorbing the virus of the conferenceand throwing it off. There were really only two things in his mind: firstlythe maintenance of the principles of freedom of speech, etc. and secondly,internal security, which he did not onsider to be a risk. He was notreally prepared to consider the international effect, and expressed the viewthat he did not think we should be affected by what the Americans thought.The British Government had made clear its position, both to the WesternUnion countries and to the United States, and that should be sufficientD allay any apprehensions.I said that while this action had been takcen in regard to Governments,people, would understand our action. I furtherit did not follow that the peoplle of Western Union stressed countries the or canof the conference being held in sheffield, where it might well disturb theminds of those working on the rearmament programme.168.I think thet Newsam will bring out note to the notice of the HomeSecretary, but I am certain that the will not recomme nd any change of policy.Murrie (who was present?) said that when. the. Home Office representatirvisited the Polish Acting Consul. with the request that he wouldaccept Some 10 Poles engaged in various forms of espithageSfeORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONS (4) OF IEPUBLIC RECORDS19th October.ACT 1958 Jure 2010At the J.I.0. to-day we discussed a paper for the improvement ofIntelligence on Soviet Russia. One of the measures suggested was theclassification of all deserters as defectors, in order that they could behoused in better conditions and SO encourage others. We said that wewould accept this, subject to some regulation in the flow and some limitationin numbers.I told the meeting that we were examining E.V.Ws, and that possiblythere might be some recruits amongst them for M.I.6.Reilly mentioned the World Peace Congress, scheduled to be held inLondon on November 13th. He said that the Foreign Office were not satisfiedwith the present decision and intended to reopen the matter in the Cabinet.I told the meeting that we had, in the light of additional facts, acts,submitted,a note to the Home Office, recommending that at least the bulk of the delegatshould be stopped, but that Sir Frank Newsam held the vist that we should onl,give the Congress more publicity, and that the body politic here was quitecapable of absorbing the virus and throving it off.We then discussed various papers on the subject of defeetors.Charles Haydon, representing Int. Div, Germany, undertook to have an enquirymade about the possibility of carrying out rehabilitati work in the BritishZone, although he was not too sanguine about the possibilities. In anycase, he would have to have a considerablle staff with the requisite knowledgeof Russian.Therewerealsopsychologicalfactors:adeserterdidnotliketo be accommodated with other deserters - at any rate not in the initialstages -- and, generally speaking, the Russians were nervous about beingrehabilitated in Germany, which they felt was too near the Russian frontier.I asked that whatever the outcome of his enquiry, an officer should beappointed in Germany and, if possible, in Austria, who would be entirelyresponsible for all the nuts and bolts of defector work; such officers to beplaced in direct touch with our representative carrying out this work here.Hutson of the Home Office was present and suggested that the Ministryof Labour should be broached, so that suitable trades could be taught todefectors and desertexs, offering them some prospect in this country whentheir training is completed. The C.R.O. undertook to approach New Zealandand Canada on the question of resettlement.Aworkingcommitteeistobeset up, consisting of I.R.D., M.I.5/6, the Home Office, and the War Office.Chineae defectors were then disoussed. It did not seem likely thatthere would be a great many, since the tendency of the Chinaman was to remainin his own country and to conform to the majority view. He might, however,bepreparedtoacceptabribeandremaininsitu.Iaskedthat,intheevenof rehabilitation, being necessary the position should be clarified asregards financial responsibility.I.R.D. then explained the uses to which they had put defectors inGermany. First, an attempt waa made to get a man to broadcast immediately.Thereafter he became a kind of news peg for other propaganda; he might, forexample, have been in a forced labour camp. Later he might make acarefully169..prepared broadcast, or write articles for the Press.The Committee thought that I.R.D. should have a representetivein Germany. I made it Clear to the I.R.D. representative thatthere was no greater security in bringing a man to this countryunless there were ways and means of getting him into congenialwark: it was just as easy for him to desert to the Soviet Erbassyaf it was to recross the frontier into the Eastern Zone of Germany.I sawin connection with the appointment of an SDECErepresentative to Acora. I said that in regard to the appointmentwe had met with certain difficulties. Firstly, Dur Consul inLeopoldville, Mr. Wikeley had visited M. Bourge, the Chef de Cabinetin Braszaville, last April to discuss an exchange of information,but had been told that on instructions from Paris, no informationof a political kind relating to French Equatorial Africa could begiven. Secondly, Mr. Coate, after a diplomatic exchange with theQuai torsay explaining his mission. had gone out to Brazzavillein an endeavour to obtain a wider picture of Communist activityin West Africa generally. He had found the authorities thereextremely unforthcoming and was ultimately withdravn as there seemedto be some suggestion that he was acting as a spy. Lastly, Imentioned the reports that had been appearing in the local press,alleging that British spier were operating in Equatorial Africa, andadded that they had further aggravated the situation, since, as hisorganisation would well know, there was no foundation whatever inthe allegations made.I toldin view of these incidents, that the view held bythe Foreign Office was that unless there were a change of heart andsome indication that the local authorities were prepared to collaborewith the new Consul-general, Mr. Mason, who had just gone out toBrazzaville, little advantage could result from the appointment ofan S.D.E.C.IC. representative in Accra, one of whose duties would beto obtain from the B.D.E.C.E. representative in Brazzavilleinformation regarding subversive individuals and movernents.was clearly ignorant of the political difficultieswhich had arisen between ourselves and the French in Brazzaville, buthe said at once tha he did not think that they were wholly relevantexcept on a tit-for-tat basis, since the S.D.E.C.E. was entirelyindependent as an organisation and was not subordinated to localpolitical considerations. The S.D.E.C.E. representative inBrazzaville would be his own master in the matter of transmissionof information to ourselves. As regards Coate's visit,hecouldwelll understand, in spite of the diplomatic exchange of correspondenbefore the visit took place, that the French authorities would bepuzzled by Coate's mission. They would understand the position ofa Consul who would clearly report on local conditions in thecountry/wl Which he resided. They would also understand the functionsof H.I.5 and M.I.6. but they would find difficulty in fittingCoate's roving commission into this pattern.said that he was going to Paris this week-end and thathe would do his best to see if there was not some way in which hisorganisation could induce the local authorities in Brazzaville tobe mone forthcoming in their dealings with Mr. Mason.I then toldthat, as he well knew, there was a sort ofgeneral malaise about French security, and an anxiety that informatiabout subversive movements in British colonies might leak back to thI7o.Russians from Paris and so cause the latter to pay more attentior to thesemovements than they were doing at present.did not entirely seethe force of this argument, since our liaison on these matters both inDakar and Brazzaville was already agreed, and the present proposal fora representative of the S.D.E.C.E. in Aocra was only to facilitate itsworkings. He did not think that if at some future date M.I.6 felt thatthey coulld profitably appoint somebody to work on similar lines in oneof the French colonies, S.D.E.C.E. would raise any objection.I shall be seeingon his return from Paris next week, whenI shall hear the reactions of his Headquarters to our conversation.20th October.came to see me with a long questionnaire about CommunistParties all over the world. He said he had not the heart to pass a copyto Graham Mitchell, but he hoped we might be able to do something for himintheMiddleEastand Far East. He clearly was not in sympathy with thewhole project and more or less apologised for passing the buck to us, whichhe said he va's bound to do on instructions from Washington.There seems to be some idea in the American mind that a close studyof underground activities of Cormunist Parties will indicate to themwhen, where, and if the Soviet Government intend to make war. Their realanswer, of course, is that the last people whowoulld be told about Russianintentions would be the C.Pa, and particularly the IGISPIG.ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINEDNIDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION2lst October.OF E PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958one2010Easton andcame over with the latest news about thedisappearance of PONTECORVO, a scientist at Harwell. On informatiaithathad been receivedin March of this year, intimating thatPONTECORVO and his wife were avowed 6ommunists, a decision was reached,-an interrogation of PONTECORVO by Henry Arnold, when the former admittedto having Communist relations- to get rid of him and find some employmentfor him at Liverpool University. PONTECORVO went on leave at the end ofJuly or beginning of August and le eft the country with his family on acampingholidayin Italy. He has now been traced as far as Helsinki,where he arrived on September 2nd on a Canadian passport, which wasimpounded as it had no visa. His wife and children were travelling onSeedish passports which do not require a visa. PONTECORVO had not appliedto the Ministry of the Interior for the return of his passport and had notbeen heard of since.There are, apparently, three ways in which he could go from FinlandTo Russia vithout the knowledge of the authorities. These are; by Sovietship, by Soviet Aircraft from one of the military bases, or by O.D. caracross the frontier.It seems thet in 1943 the F.B.I. sent certain reports to BritishSecurity Co-Ordination. New York, indicating a search of PONTECORVO'Shouse, when Communist literature was found. Nobody knows what happenedto these reports, since the records of B.S.0. have been destroyed.PONTECORVO went from Rome to Paris in 1936, and from Paris, where itwas believed he morked for a time under JOLIOT-QURIE, to Oklahoma, wherehe was employed by an American firm. It was from there tha he wasrecruited, in 1943, into the British Tube Alloys contingent which worked124.at Chalk River. In 1946 we asked Canada for information about anyof the scientists who would be likely to be returning here; they hadnothing to say about PONTECORVO. He was taken on by Atomic Energyin 1946, and after two short visits in 1947 and 1948, he took uppermanent residence at Harwell in February, 1949. From 1946 to 1949our records showed no trace. Had we, of course, had the reports,we might have made further enquiries.COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION23rd October.HE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958Sune 2010T saw the Prime Minister to-day. He asked me about the caseof PONTECORVO.I said that PONTECORVO went from Rome to France in 1936, whereit was alleged that he had worked for a time under JOLIOT-CURIE. In1940 he went to California where he worked both at the University andin an American oil company. At the beginning of 1943 he went to Canadaas a member of the British contingent working on atomic energy. In1946 he joined the staff of D.At.En. in Canada. on 7th February, 1948,he was naturalised a British subject, in absentia, by the Home Office.It is believed that he had lready taken out first papers in the UnitedStates, but he had expressed a preference for British naturalisation ifhe could get it. In February, 1949, he came to Harwell. At that timethere was no adverse record of him in our files, although it was allegedby the F.B.I. that certain reports had been passed to British SecurityCo-Ordination in New York - a body on which we were not represented -and also to the F.B.I. representative in London.British Security Co-Ordination had been dissolved at the end ofthe war and a number of its records destroyed; those retained had notcontained the F.B.I. reports, but a natural inference is that SecurityCo-ordination would have passed on the reports to Canada, where PONTECORVOwas the employed. So far we had not succeeded in tracing copies of thereports in London. If they were received by the F.B.I. representative,he might well have taken no action, since the report had already gonetoNewYorkandthemanwasinCanada.Inpointoffact,thesereportssaid no more than that PONTECORVO was believed when in France to haveworked under HOLIOT-CURIE, and tht in a routine search of his housein the United States Communist literature had been found. Such a reportin the atmosphere of 1943 would not have been likely to arouse anysuspicior in Canada.On March 2nd, 1950, we obtained informationindicatingthat PONTECORVO and his wife were Communists. The Security. Officer atHarwell had a talk with PONTECORVO about this time, when the lattervolunteered the information that although certain of his relations inEurope were Communist sympathisers, he and his wife were not Communists.He realised, however, that he might be a bad security risk, and intimatedhis desire to obtain an appointment at one of the Universitles. Such anappointment, at Liverpool University, was subsequently arranged.PONTECORVO had left this country in July with his wife and family and hadnow been traced positively as far as Helsinki, where he arrived onSeptember 2nd. There was a press rumour that he had gone on to SovietRussia, but this was at the moment unconfirmed.The P.M. then asked how far PONTECORVO had had access to vitalinformation. I said that, according to the answer to the Question tobe put down in the House to-day, D.At.En. and expressed the view that forseveral years PONTECORVO had hardly had any contact with secret work,12having been mainly concerned with cosmic ray projects. In the earlierperiod of his appointment in Canada he had been employed on pile work.I explained to the P.M. that on the information available, there hadbeen no grounds for bringing PONTECORVO before the purge committee andthat, therefore, D.At.En. had concentrated on eliminating him amicablys0 as te avoid, if possible, the course which he has now apparently taken.This course could not have been prevented unless there had been evidenceof an indictable offence; in fact there was none. It vas impossibleto say whether PONTECORVO had comcditted acts of espionage here or inCanada which might have made him feel that he could only be secure behindthe Iron Curtain, or whether he had gone to Russia from purely ideologicalmotives.24th October.T saw O'Brien, the Colonial Secretary at Gibraltar. He seemedthoroughly sntisfied with our D.S.O. I spoke to him about the LocalIntelligence Committee, and the proposal that our officer should takethe Chair. I explained that while normally we preferred not to do this,we had agreed in the case of Gibraltar, where the circumstances appear tobe exceptional, that if we were not in the Chair there was a risk ofduplication of the D.S.O's work. I told him that the suggestion, of whichhe had not yet heard, was that the Committee should meet about once a month,or more often if necessary, and that it would have no executivepoweit was merely a liaison Cormi ttee.ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDINDEPARTMENT UNDER25th October.3 (4) RECORDS2p1oGraham has brought to notice the case of three people upLancaahire:who is on one of the American aerodromesandThey appear to have obtained nformtion in relation to thearrival of certain dumy atom bombs at Liverpool. As one of Dayson'sinformants is C oncerned, we are sending Skardon up to obtain furtherparticulars.has apparentl remained on the American aerodrome,at the request of Dayson, who is in touch with him through his informant.26bh October.I made a statement to-day about the PONTEOORVO case at the Directorsmeeting of the J.I.6. but, ovling, to the very heavy agenda, it could notbeaveryfullreport.TheDirectorsexpressedanxietyaboutthewholeposition. It was understood that we should be consulting with D.At.En,as to whether anything could be done to prevent further occurrences of thiskind, and we were asked to let the J.I.0. have our recommendations.27th October.I had a discussion with Dick& Roger about an analysis of thePONTEOORVO case, in answer tn the J.I.C's request. Dick and Roger willbe producing something.Perrin hes told Dick tha t Portal who disllikes Civil Service contruof D.At.En., intends to get rid of anyone who is in any way tainted, andthe Ministry of supply refuse to act, he will make it clear to the P.M.that he cannot any longer accept responsibility. Portal is suggesting173restriction of movement and power to dismiss at one month's notice.The restriction of movement was what the Directors of Intellig ence haduppermost in their minds yesterday. I explained to them that it wouldbe extremely difficult to make such restrictions effective; firstly,scientists would find them irksome, and the more important of them mightwell refuse to serve under such conditions. Secondly, a British subjectcould leave the country at any time and, although there were technicalpowers by which an alien could be refused leave to embark, they would havto be justified up to the hilt: a mere statement that he might be goingto Russia, or might communicate information to a foreign powers becausehe had secret knowledge, would not be sufficient. Any agreement amongBcientiats to conform would merely be distasteful to the good ones andwould not prevent the bad ones from leaving if they were determined todo S0 they could go on a Soviet ship, on a Czech aircraft, or by privateaeroplane - like Syaney Stanley.30th October.I discussed with Haldane Porter the course for the Persians.Itseemed to me that we ought to know more about the set-up in Persiabefore we started talking to them, otherwise we might be sating our timein trying to teach them methods which they could not implement. Ithought we ought to try and getback here.IhadawordwithJack Easton about this, but after consultation the seemred tothink that a questionnaire telegram toweud be sufficient.NDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION31st October.(4) OF PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958une 2010T had lunch to-day with Anthony when he told me that PADGHAMwas exercised in his mind about a statement in the file of the Puu\tzestablishment branch of the German Foreign Office, that, owing to hisrelations with Willy SCHNEIDER, he had been bllackmailed into actingas a British agent. He appears to be considering some court actionto get the position regularised, and wondered whether it would be possiblefor anybody from this country to give evidence to the effect thathe Voluntarily decided to assiat the British in their fight againstthe Nazis.I told Anthony that I woulld consider the point and let him know.The Cabinet have now completely reversed their policy about theWorld Peace Congress., to be held here on November 13th. They havedecided to exclude the whole of the Executive Committee, members ofthe I.F.T.U. and the W.F.D.Y., in adiition to certain other categories.Information coming in shos that considerable sums of money arebeing transferred from Paris to finance the Congress, in addition tothe 630,000 originally received. A further $200,00( is likely to beavailable. Graham Mitchell asked me whether,: the light of thereversal of the previous Cabinet decision, we should go on with ourpreparations in Sheffield. to cover the Congress, which are in effectconsiderable I felt that in view of the importance attached to thisCongress, it would still be necessary for us to render a report uponit, even thought the principal delegates might not be there. It wasdecided, therefore, to continue our preparations.The P.M. 1s proposing to make a statement to the Press Associationto-morrow and we have provided a short paragraph on finance (?), whichshould not jeopardise our sources.14.We had a discussion to-day on preparations for the CommonwealthSecurity Conference. B. and C. Divisions have been asked to state thesubjects on which they would prepare papers. 0.S. will will considerthese and put up a programme: for the Directors to finalise.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RE TAINEDVDEPASTMENT UNDER SECTIONACT (4) OF 1958 EPUBLIC June RECORDS 2010lst November,I gave a talk to newly-joined officers on the history of the office,from 1891 onvards when Captain Edmonds, (General Edmonds, if he is not dead,the author of the History of the FiYst World War) was the recipient in theWar office of all information dealing with espionage. When visitingBerlin and Moscow and after hi E return, he gathered that the Germans hadopened a section of their Intelligence Service to deal with England. Ittook over 18 years before the decision was reached, in 1909, to set up asub-committee of the Committee of Impebial Defence to enquire into thewhole matter. By that time, however, all sorts of scares about spieson the East Coast were rife, and of course all German officers during theirleave period had reconnaissance assignments. People vere publlishing bookslike "The Riddle of the Sands" and the play, I think by Du Maurier, called"The Englishman's Home" was causing considerable alarm and depicted aninvasion and the shooting of innocent British subjects outside their homes.The C.I.D. Sub--Committee decided to appoint Captain Kelll, and, on the basisof a report that he put in two years later - working more or less on his ownin rooms in the Temple - resulted in the Official Secrets Act of 1911, there-imposition of the H.O.W. and the beginnings of alien registration.The H.0.i. was hotlly opposed by the Postmaster General, who argued thatin any case it woulld produce no resuilts as spies did not communicate byletter. In the event he was proved to be wrong, since on the ou'tbreakof war 211 out of 23 German spies were arnested and the whole organisationbroken up. Kell's section, which was originally called M.0.5 became M.1.5acting for all three Services and establishing a close liaison with the175.Police. Before the 0.S.A. of 1910, espionage was not even a felonyand the Commissioner of Police had refused to have Spies followed, as hethought his action might lead to awkward questions in the House.In 1917 the functions of 0.2 as it is to-day were taken over fromthe Ministry of Munitions.I then gave a brief account of the work be'tween the two wars. whichled in 1931 to the branch of Scotland Yard, to which I bellonged' being takenover by M.I.5. I then traced the developments up to the outbreak of war,and the subsequent activities until the department was taken over, in 1946,by the present Prime Minister.I then said a fev words of the principles on which we conduct ourwork and on the channels through which our information is fed into theGovernment machine.I attended a session of the Immigration Officers! Conference to-day,when the question of a Home Office letter on the subject of touristsbeing landed unconditionally.was discussed.With regard to the possibility of an alien leaving on thelast day of his three months and coming in again for a further threemonths without the necessity of having to register the ImmnigrationOfficers pointed out that it would be normal practice for them to bringsuch cases to notice.T drew attention to the fact that if, as seemed likely, furtherattempts were made to withdraw Immigration control from the western portsfor traffic coming from Ireland, no such notification would b possible,since there would be nothing to distinguish an alien from British subject.The old back door would then be open and the period before which registratiwas necessary would be three months instead of two. For other reasons,however, the Immigration officers reacted very, unfavourably to the HomeOffice proposals; they felt that the effect of stamping every asspontwith a three months time condition would reduce the Immigration service toa rubber stamp' organisation. They had been training their juniorofficers for some time to use their intelligence in the granting of timeconditions, and the only effect of the present proposal would be todiscourage them from conducting a careful interrogation,and 80 from gettingto know more about the travelling allien population.The Home Office undertook to reconsider the matter.3nd November.Ronnie Howe asked me to lunch. He had one or two things he wishedto discuss With me, after which he told me that he had just had a visitfrom Johnny Cimperman. Cimperman told him that the D.G. had asked himwhether he would be prepared to tell the Lord President what Hoskins,the "Daily Express" erime reporter had said in relation to the onders thathe had received from Beaverbrook to write articles showing that M.I.5 wasinefficient. Being anzious to help the D.G.. Cimpermnan had said that,subject to the Bureau's approval, he would be prepared to do this, althoughon reflection he WaS in soe doubt about the dvisability of such a course.Ronnie told him that he thought he would be most unwise even to suggestsuch thing to the Bureau, since he would be bound to get the answer thathe should not be mixing himself up in British politics. Moreover', the126-Bureau might well think that M.I.E as a department should nat have madesuch a request. Johnny had decided to go back to the D.G. and explainthe delicacy of the position, sugeesting that he shouud not intervene.This he subsequently did. and the D.G. readily accepted his view.Meanwhile, I had a call from Norman Brook's secretary, Marshall.Norman Brook had been surnmoned to see the P.M. at Ly 'clock on this verysubject and was anxious to have the D.G's views. The D.G. saw Marshal,to whom he explained the whole circumstances. He had been attendingadinner the night before for South African Pollice and had sat next toGordon-alker, with whom the proposed articles in the "Daily Express" werediscussed. Gordon-Walker was highly incensed and undertook to inform theLord President.Marshall thought that the only possible way of dealingwith the matter would be a question te be asked in the House, to which theP.M. would reply, giving facts about Hoskins' approach and Beaverbrook'intentinn to find fault with M.I.5 regardless of the facts.We came to the conclusion that this Could not be done withoutembroiling Cimperman, and that even if it were possible, it would probablynot stop the publication of the articles but would merely cause them tobe mone venemous. It woulld therefore be better to leave things aloneand deal with the articles afterwands if necessary.These views were transmitted to the P.M. by Brook, who agreed thatno action was the better policy.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 ure 20106th November.I gave a lecture to faur Persian officers, two from the Police andtwo from the Persian G-2. The senior policeman, was about thetoughest looking individual I have ever seen7 rather short and inmenselybrond, with drooping eyelids and B sinister expressiont- None of them127.understood much English, S0 I had to go very slowly and say everythingat least three times! I tried to give them a rough idea of what theSecurity Service was like and what it should do. I began by tellingthem that it should be wholly non-political and merely concerned withthe security of the State, regardless of the Government in pover; otherwisit could have no stability and no continuity. This did pot, of course,mean that it was not entitled to investigate the activities of politicalparties which advocated the overthrow of the State by unconstitutionalmeans. T renlised from the expressions on their faces how unpracticalthey felt iny suggestion was! However, on the whole they were quiteenthusiastic and may have absorbed one or two ideas.Hollis, who followed me later, tried to talk to them aboutsecurity in a more detailed way. He tried to explain that in dealingwith aircraft there were certain parte of the machine which neededsafeguarding by various security measures. whereas the machine as a wholemightnotbe classified as secret. He opened by saying that the wings,for example, were not secret. When he had finished this subject, theChief of Police, who had been writing copious notes (backwards, in Persianheaved a great sigh and said: "How many wings you say?"!lRoger then passed on to the classificatior of doouments - top secretsecret, confidential and restricted. and, after a 3 iscourse on thissubject, the Chief of Police heaved another sigh and said ratherpathetically "Please, you say more about the restricted"!At Malcolm Cumnming' lecture on technical aids, which involvedshowing them the crudest form of microphone, which was of no practicalvalue,b nevertheless effective. It amused them alll intensely and theywere unanimous in saying at the conclusion: "Please, you come back andplay more tricks"THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL ALDOCUMENT RETAINEDINDEPARTMENTI sincerely hope SD.(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 19582otoWe discovered, rather tardily, tha one of the G-2 officerswasanex-agentoftheAbwehr.S.I.S.hadknownthisbuthadsaidnothing. Thistle had interrogated the man on the frontier during themay, and at the conclusion of the interview the agent had made thetypical Persian remark: "I swear on the Koran that eighty percent ofwhat I am telling you is true"! This was an encouraging start for usalll!I had a talk withwho is over here for discussions withS.I.S., the Norwegians, and I believe,a also the Swedes on 8.0. activitiesin any future war.Joyce SMITH and BERNAL have been searched at the port on theirreturn from Paris. It was thought that they might be carrying fundsfor the Peace Congress. Nothing was found. other coupiers are to goalmost daily and will receive similar treatment.7th November.T had a visit from the Chief Constable of Leicester City, whoseemed pleasant and co-operative.ia.At the J.I.0. to-day, the view was expressed that the Chinese werestill not out for a major war, in spite of the presence of Chinese troopsin Northern Korea. I told the Committee about the rather sensationaltelegram that we had received from Hong Kong, to the effect that theChinese were going to declare war upon the U.S. on the th November.Iurged that it should be treated with the utmost reserve.While I was at the meeting, the B.M.' office rang about theincident reported in the Preas that, the firm 0f POWELL and DUFFERINhad closed its works, pending a reorganisation, The inference was thatcertain scientists who were Comunists wene likely to be discharged.The PIM. seemed to have a "Nobody tells me" complex. The facts are that,for some time Atomic Energy have been wishing to place a contrast with thisfirm, and had sought our good offices in an approach to the management. toserwhat could be done. We did in fact tell Fdote, one of the Directors,about the Comruniste in his employ, but we made no suggestions as to actioHe has evidently taken the matter into his own hands.I gave a talk to two Pakistand officers., Major Sidigui and Major Arif,on the work Df the ffice. They both seemed intelligent and interested.They were articularly anxious to know what we did about Soviet officials,of whom they now have a considerable number in Karachi.They wonderedwhether there was not a possibility of cutting them domn.I said that we had gone into this question here, but had come tothe conclusion that as foreign trade was a state monopoly, it was difficultto reduce the numbers as long as there was a trade agreement. As regardsAttaches, there was no point in reducing them as iong as the Trade Delegatioexisted, since they could quite easily reappear disguised as engineers.I saW Newsam in the afternoon.I told him,too, that we were searching couriers butiso farwithout result. BERNAL had now gone to Prague and was presumablyconsidering whether it wais going to be worth while holding the conferenceat Sheffield at all. Newsam thought that we ought to try and get theFrench to stop their delegates from starting. I did not, however, givehim much encouragement - indeed, it was difficult to see why the Frenchshould be expected to do this when the Home Office woulld surely be apposedto any sort of reciprocal action here.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDNDEPARTMENT UNDERSECTION3(4) OF EPUBLIC RECORDSACT 19682olo1A.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER RSECTION3 (4) OF EPUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 une 20109th November.At the Directors meeting of the J.I.0. to-day, the D.N.I., who tookthe Chair, referred again to the question of restricting the movementsof scientists, whether British or foreign, who wished to travel abroad,He thought that such restrictions should extend to a11 scientists workingon defence, and also to outside consultants.Young, who was representing D.S.I. pointed out that his departmentwere often anxious that the right type of scientist should be allowed to80 abroad, since he would have an opportunity of finding Dut what wasbeing done by foreign workers in his field; he had in mind a conferenceat Leningrad forrastronomers. There was apparently some suggestiorthat Collonel Stratton, a Professor of astro-physics, might attend thisconference.I made the point that if certain Professors were restrained fromgoing to such conferences, where others were encouraged, it would tendto pin-point the latter as agents of the British Government.The Ds of II. still seemed to feel that some method should be devised,by legislation if necessary, tp prevent British subjects or aliens withimportant defence knowledge from travelling at least without permissionand, with a view to giving this matter further consideration beforeinforming the Chiefs of Staff, they were anxiols for a statement on theexact position in regard to the Home Secretary's existing powers.I explained that we could let them have this information, but thatour constitutional position was a slightly dellicate one if it came tomaking recommendation which might well conflict vith Home Office policy.There followed a discussion on the Security Service paper: "Employmentof Alliens and Recently Naturallised British Subjects on Defence Work'. Igather that the Admiralty have put in their views in writing on priorities.Only one was added by D.S.I., namely, electronics: this category may needdefining more closel. The Foreign Office thought they might have one ortwo foreigners, on naturalised British subjects, Whose cases they might wishto review. The Air Ministry did Raise the question of Czechs in the AirForce. To this latter proposal I gaid that we had a fianly good coveragefrom the espionaige point of viesv in regard to Czechs, but that to keep them18o.under observation or to review 111 their cases would present us withyet another formidable task, which was not likely to produce anysatisfactory results. I said, moreover, that it had always been ourpolicy - which had indeed been endorsed by the J.I.C. and the Chiefs ofStaff - to advise against the employment of aliens in defence work, andthat in any case the matter should only be considered where thequalifications were exceptional and nobody of comparable ability wasavailable. In spite of this, a large number of aliens were working onvarious reseanch projects, and it was quite impossible to do more than keepa very limited number under close observation if there was prima facieevidence to warrant such a course. The real answer was to get rid ofthem and cut our losses. I allso made it clear that, in order to reducethe vetting problem to manageable proportions, our policy was to buildup the best records ve coud about Communists and those associated withthe Party, to discover their place of employment and inform the departmentconcerned. The vetting of hundreds of thousands of names was theonly alternative, which was not in our opinion the right answer; it merely.stamped the machine and would cause the ecords on which the actual vetwas made to become progressively out of date.2.A proposal was made by the D.M.I. that Ambassadors in certaincountries should be "cosmicised" This vas vetoed on the grounds tha tif this policy was carried out, the Portuguese and other Ambassadors wouldhave to receive simillad treatment.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL LDOOUMENT RETAINE DOOUMENT RETAINEDDEPARTMENT ER SECTION(4) OF RECORDSACT 195820105.J.I.B. mentioned that there was a report on a secret clause in theRusso-Afghan Treaty, by which Russia would supply arms to Afghanistan.Although this might be an indication that Russia had no aggressiveintentions against Afghanistan, it might well mean that she wished toencourage the Afghans to create troublle with Pakistan.6.The D.N.I. said that he had heard from the First Lord that thePrime Minister waB now considering the question of the publication ofDuff Cooper's book onPlan MINOEMEAT. It was clear that in stating thatGoebbels had already reported on this operation in his diary, he hadfurther misled the authorities since the reference showed only a certainscepticism by Goebbells in a conversation that he had had with Canaris.Duff Cooper is now quoting 'ot as being one of those who gave hisapproval to the publication of the book. 'or says that as he was leavinghis club, Duff Cooper told him about his interview with Baker-Cresswell.'a' had made no comment.81.7. proposal The that D.N.I. diplomatic is putting relations up a paper should to be the Chiefs of Staff with aIn this he recelved the support of the Other Ds. re-established oi I. He said with Spain. thatSpanish ports were of particular importance to the Navy and that thethepresent impasse was a serious matter.came and brought his two new officers to introducethem to the D.G.andThey were accompanied by the two outgoing officers,both of whom are going back.Roger and Hill talked to me about MINCEMEAT. Hill had a letterfrom Admiral Thomson regarding an approach by one, Jenkins, of the "EveningStandard" with an official request to interview Ewan MONTAHU. in relationto Duff Cooper's book. Thomson had replied that nothing should bepublished in regard to this interview without its being vetted by theapproprir te authorities, including himself. The real anser, of course,was that MONTAGU shoulld not see a representative. of the "Evening Standard"at all, since being an Admiralty official he should not discuss aconfisential matter of this kind.I rang up the D.N.I. and tolld him this in case he would want to giveMONTAGU a warning. He told mne bif fithe the record that MONTAGU was extremelyincensed about Duff's book and was proposing to move the D. of P.P.to bring an action against him. Presumably MONTAGU would be thecommon informer. If this is really 80, I have maligned MONTAGU inthinking he was the person who inspired Duff to write the book. Meanwhil,of course, a synopsis of the book has been published in the "SundayExpress" and the obvious inference drawn, that aince Duff was officiallyassociated with the Security Exeoutive during the war it must have beenbased on fact.THIS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDNDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONOF PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 line 2010Dick has attended a meeting at the Home Office, who are altering.their policy once more about delegates to be admitted to the PeaceConference at Sheffield. The total number of delegates to be admittedis not to exceed 500; it is, therefore, necessary to work on a percentagebasis. This meane that some of those who have received visas will beturned back when they arrive. 230 only are to be admitted from non-visacountries. out of 390 Frenchman only 100 wil] be allowed in, and out of100 Italians only 30 willl be allowed in. Three-guarters of thedelegateefrom other countries are to be eliminated.We had made it clear that we can nd longer accept any reaponsibilitywith regard tD those who are let in or kept out. It is cleer that if theHome Secretary is asked in the House why he let in X and kept out Y, hewill have no answer.182I lunched with Anthonykhis about bringing an action against the German Foreign Office.ideaHe said that PADGHAM had non given upThis IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958ure 2oloIt was agreed that in the Middle East and Far East no problem ofAmerican integration would arise; it would merely be a question of liaison.Thematter is to be considered in greater detail.The Peace Cornmittee are all at sixes and sevens, and the samea remark great might shortage easily of apply funds to and the all British sorts Government! of people, including There is old evidentlyEva RECKITT, are being asked to give guarantees. Bob STEWARTappeansto Have a cache somewhere in the country and is going to ColIect themoney to-mornow. POLLITT has given him a guarantee that it will bereturned, but Bob isevidently slightly sceptical.I have read a paper on the recent discussion of the Chief's of Staffin Washington. It seems fairly clear that if trouble broke out in theMiddle East, the Americans would not be in a position to do much for twoyears, although they might send a small strategic bombing force. Equally.,in Persia no very great asistance vould be forthcoming. Nobody seemedvery clear about the oil situation: the Americans were remarking thateveryone they asked seemed to hold a different view. The na tter is,Igather, to be carefully examined to see how dependent both ourselves andthe Americans would be on Middle East oil in the event of hostilitiesbreaking out.Our position in Hong Kong was explained. It was made clear thatwe intended to fight, even though it was admitted that the Colony wasquite indefensible against an organised army.lth November.I came in this afternoon to see how the "peace" room was gettingon.It was cllear by then that the Conference in Sheffield had beenabandoned and that there was to be a meeting to-morrovi, and P protestmeeting on Monday. The delegates would then leave for Varsaw, wherethe conference. would be held on Thursday.183.I had a talk with Ruck. He seemed thoroughly satisfied with thearrangements made here, but not too pleased about the vasoilllating policyof the Home office, which ha 9 clearly caused his officers an infinity oftrouble.13th November.At the D.G's meeting to-day I raised the questio of grading thisoffice as a V.P. Horrocks had suggeated that we might be graded 10. Hollis,however, feels that we onght to be la, at any rate untill such time as wehad been able to make provision for document in the country. This raisedthe question of a house in the country. Clearly nothing has been done,in spite of the note T put in several months ago, after discussing the matterwith the D.G. Horroeks was asked to proceed as early as possible and allsoto consiider the numbers of staff who could be evacuated.The D.G. has just returned from a Cabinet meeting, when our paperon positive vetting was discussed and also a paper on whether extra powerswere necessary,As regards positive vetting, Winnifrith appears to have done extremelywell. As Chairman of the Working Party', he told the Gabinet that it wasabsurd to expeet M.I.5 to do their job properly if Ministies did not acceptgreater responsihility when taking people on for employment; there were manyenquiries which could ine made within the Ministry, and in such cases - butonly in special cases - some positive enquiry might be conducted by the localPolice.The paper was accepted, subject to the proviso, that if local enguirieswere thought necessary we should have the sanction of the Minister, who vuuldinform M.1.5; M.I.5 would then notify the Chief Constable concerned.Chuter Ede asked that in any such cases he might also be informed.llth November.Colonel Darling came to see me while I was out. He is the Chiefs ofStaff representative on the Dixon Could War Committee. He returned my copyof "Animal Farm", He said he did not think that he could do anything aboutgetting Walt Disney to make a cartoon. The book has, of course.. had a verywide circulation but that is not quite the point.He saw Roger Hollis, who regarded him as being particullanly offensivelHe wanted a copy of the paper we were preparing for the J.I.0. on the legalposition in regard to the control of movements of British subject and aliensemployed on important defence projects. Apparently the Dixon Committee- arewriting a similar memo.Mackenzie, the Secretary rang me up later - I thought somewhatapologetically - to explain Colonel Darling's visit. He said that hisCommi ittee were considering the matter mo from the point of view of themovements of foreigners to Prague, Moscov, or elsewhere. I said I apubtedwhether our memo would be much help to him, but that I would certainly lethim have a copy unofficially.Mitchell and Ken Mills failed to get into theConference of the British Peace delegates to-day. TheAssistant Commissioner of Sheffield wat, however, admitted,but nothing was said which would warrant any action. there isto be a proteat meeting to-night, which Grtham hopes to attend.184.15th November.san Graham this morning, just back from Sheffield. He gotin to the Conference with the ther Police representatives, butwhen credentials were checked he and several others were asked to leave.The Assistant Commissioner then consulted Rothwell, who waa n-chargeof the hall, and the two of them had a consultation with BERNAL, IY esultingin a compromise. The Assistant Comissioner and one member of his sitaffwere allowed to remain. The proceedings ere quite orderly and nothingwas Said which necessitated any action. The protect meetingintheevening was rather a damp squib.At the J.I.C. today the Chinese situation was debated. The WarOffice view is that the Chinese forces already encountered were a kind ofcover force for the Chinese main build-up in the reservolr area. It isestimated that there are now about Chinese troops in Korea.Nobody18 at all clear about Chinese intentions. and the Comittee still feltthat it was unlikely that they would make any sort of declaration of war.Nobody knows what MacArthur's intentions ane, Or how confident he 1s ofbeing able to clear Northern Korea. There is very little informtion aboutthe extent of Russan assistance, neither iB it known whether the recentvlaiit of Chuen-Li to MDacow waB in order that the Russians might encouragethe Chinese to be more aggressive or to exercise a restraining hand uponthem.In the midst of these imponderables, the Foreign office pressed fora paper to be written on the Chinese conception of their ability toengage in war with the United States. The Services said that logisticallysuch a proposal was out of the question, and that in the absence of anyinformation as to what might be in the Chinese mind, any such reportwould be pune erystal gazing. The Foreign office still wanted the taskto be attempted and intend to put forward a first draft and ask the J.1.0.to clear it.The Air Foree spoke about the Ruasian M.I,G. sevel of which havebeen shot down, but rone apparently within the U.N. lines. From such dataas has been received, including photograph, a moek-up of the machine hasbeen made. The experts calculate that has a speed of 545 knots, whichfaster than any machine in the air oP are likely to have in the immediatefuture. The data is. however, lacking on its manceuverability; it doesnot appear to be able to turn very quickly and it is for that reason thatthe Hustangs have been able to deal with it. Nothing 18 known of itsfireplatform (7). It is being produced at a considerable rate. There are500 in the aatern Zone of Germany, and there are likely to be about 800at the end of the year. Ita engine is B modification of the nene, whichgoes to show how stupid we were to Bell nene engines to the Rusaians, eventhough they were out of date. At the time we recommended against thisproposal, on the grounds that it was teaching the Russians their A.B.0.in jet propulsion. and the question of obsolescence was not relevant.Elmhirst, who was A.0.A.8. (I) at the time, was all in favour of lettingthe engines go.Ross asked me after the meeting to let him know OWhate arrangementswere being made to aBs1st the Gemman Consul in his tasi of granting visas.He thought that if he did not get some list to work on he was likely tobe severely handicapped. I said that I knew certain disoussions had beer:going on and that,as far as we were concerned there was the difficultpoint Df giving information about British subject. On the other hand, itBeemed wholly logical to allow British agitators to go to Western Germany.T indertook to make enquiries and to let him have further particulars.185.General Briggs is over here and a paper of his on Communism in theFar East is going to be discussed by the Chiefs of Staff on WVednesday.Sick made a claim for Simkins and asked whether his return could beexpedited. He is sorely in need Of an experienced officer to look aftersome or his juniors, who from lack of kno pledge or experience are committinga number of errors which might at any moment get the office into serioustrouble. De Quehen is apparently quite ready to go out earlier, andHornocks will explore whether it is possible to get a passage for Simkinsin the New Year, if not before.Lastly it was decided to recruit at least two mone officers and tonold an Appointment Boand as soon as possible.16th November.The D.G went to the J.I.0. to-day, when there wan a discussion onMINOEMEAT. Drew is still fussing about whether Duff legitimately hadaccess to Plan MINCEMEAT, and he wants us to ask J.0. wheither he everdiscussed it. There is apparently no question of 8 prosecution.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSAOT 1958. Tune 201026This IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONACT 19583.(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSLine 2010I had a meeting ith D.B. D.C an 0.S. about the ComnonwealthSecurity Conference, and have agreed terms of reference. We thoughtthat it Was better hot to give leetures but rather to invite discussion.There is slight difficulty in discussing Russian espionage, since the onlycase in Australia is of course based on extremely delicate sources, whichcoulld not be the subject of discussion with any of those present. lethought, however, that if we haa a Word with Spry we coulld obviate anyembarraasment.Admilyal Godfney, war time D.N.I. came to seit me. He is writingu a huber of monotrephs on naval intelligence work for the D.N.I. andwas thinking of writing one on decention and One on double agents.Hesaid he had disousned the matter-withrey who viewed the proposalfavourably except that he would like copies of the one written ondeception. He then asked me whether ve had anything written up on ourdouble agent cases ho ch he could study. I said there was a pamphletwritten up and that I would arange to male it available to him at the1.0.5. officer. This seeired to me to be the best way out, as clearly ICould not huind him a copy of a Ton Secret document to orlc on at his on home187.Ross of the Foreign Office rang up about the granting of visasto suspects going to Germany. The German Consul was shortly taking overand Ross waS not very clear about the procedure. I told him that, asmatters stood at present the Germans were going to be given the CentralTravel Bureau index, containing some 32,000 names, compiled by Int. Div.Germany. Vle had a few names on this list, but were not worried aboutits being given to the German authorities for use here in the granting ofvisas. The present British Permit Office was to continue on a reducedscale and would have a special list from us 08 about 100 namee of aliensand British undesirables:. Before grenting a visa, the Germans would checkwith the Permit Office and, if there was an adverse record, would be ablleto withhold the visa pending instructions from their Government. Meanwhilthe facts would be committed to the British High Commissioner in Germany,through Int. Div. who would pass them to the German Government, who inturn would give the Consul his final instructions.Ross seerned to think that the Permit Office oughtalso to check agai!the Home Office Suspect Index. I explained that no foreign Governmenthad this index and that.s far, there had been no check by the Permit OfficeMost of the names on the list wene criminals and share pushers, and therewas a certain objection by the Yard to giving such names to foreign powers.since it precluded their chances of getting rid fundeeipables. lesaidhe would consider this point.THIS IS A OOPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION17th November.(4) OF THE EPUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958une2010Victarcame to see me. He said thatan atomicphysicist, who worked with our tearn in Canada and at one time withJOLIOT-CURIE, would be repared, if he were given a list of scientists,to put a cross against any whom he thought doubtful from the politicalangle. Victor thought that we should be well advised,: me could manageit, to get hold of some reliable personalities in the scientific worldto sound out their fellow workers. He said that while Arnold might be agood Security Officer, he would always have difficulty in finding outseientists' political views, because he could not talk scientific jargon.It was when you entered into conversation with a sclentist on a subject ofmutual interest, his political vievs nearly always became apparent one wayanother. I said I agreed that this might be so, although it would nothave applied in the case of PONTECORVO. who was regarded by his fellowscientists as 100j reliable. nthbughtl, however thatwe should be veryglad to submit 11st forto look at.20th November.At the D.G's meeting to-day we discussed the question of an S.L.o.eingpoated to Nigeria. We all of us felt that four officers in WestAfrica in the present circumstances was rather a luxury, but nobody couldsay with any omnfidone, on the basis of first-hand knowledge, what was reallyrequired. Tin-Eye kept on telling us that we were sitting on a seethingcauldron, but ve never got anything positive in the way of evidence.Itseemed; moreover, that he had ideas about running a network of agentshimself, and this seemed to be going rather outside our functions. Therunning of agents in an ASrican Colony was really a matter for the Police.In view of all this uncertainty and the probability that ShaTt would notbe able to visit the Colonyeuntil the late Spring at the earliest, the D.G.has asked me to go out before Christmas.(88Wild came to ser me. L.C.S. are posting two officers to the FarEast and the British Defence Committe think that the rank of Brigadieris rather out of balance for the senior officer. This appears to beview of M.I.6 and ourselves, who in the military hierarchy woulld onlyrank as Lieut.Cols Wild was rather worried about this, as he saidhe doubted whether he could get anyone to go out to do a job of that S010with a lower rank, and conseauently lose pay. I said that we had noinformation from S.I.F.E. but that a Brigadier did seem to me to be alittle out of balance. In point of fact, I should not worry too muchif the man was made a Lieut-General! I feel very sceptical about hispowers of doing anything useful, but I suppose somebody has got to try.I had a talk with Kellar about my visit to West Afriea. T amanxious to see everyting that is cominp in from Nest Africaan as faras possible, everything that hasrcome in during the last to months.I also propose to look at the out lette? book. In this way I maygeta better idea of what is going on.X2XS6N6Vebede)Perfect came to see me about the course for Police Officers. whichbegins to-morrow. He wanted to know how far officers were to go ingiving details about our sources of information. I said that on thewhole I thought that they should not discuss H.O.W Ws and telephone checks,at any rate unless they were specifically asked. We had divulged thesesources to certain Police officers on the basis of the 'need to know'fin any particular case, but I am sure the less the subject is discussedin a general way the better. There is already too much talk aboutit in the Metropolitan Police, who run checks for criminal purposes.I gave lunch toHe told me thataccepted whatI had told him about the appointment of one of his Officers in Accra.Whille the official reply might not be very helpful, since the Frenehstill did not understand the reason for Coate's visit, he would certainlydo everything he coulld to smooth things over in Brazzaville and to seethat Mason, the British Consul, got a fair deal.told me that everybody war in the dark aboutposition. He had first resigned, but on reflection had come to theconclusion that he had no veny good proppects in the business world.Although he would like to be quit of S.D.E.0.E. in some ways, it seemsthat he would rather like to remain, for politica] reasons. Meanwhile,the Government, having got over the Revers scandal and being ocapied withIndo-China and Korea, are clearly inclined to let things drift.is still paid by the S.D.E.C.E., but now haa a job intheMinistry of Information.a close ally ofremainsin the S.D.E.C.E. but apparently has nothing to do.The whole positionis about as unsatisfactory as it can be.A COPYORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINEDINDEPARTMENT UNDER SEGTION21st November.ACT 1958 RECORDSSune20roMartin Charteris came in to say that there is a proposal thatPrincess Elizabeth should visit Weat Africa in the Autumn of 1951.He189.asked me Whether I thought there Vas any sendous risk involved. T saidthis would of course be a matter for the Governors, but taking a veryand that she might well have a tremendous success. One could, however,superficial view, I should have thought that it would have been all rightnever be sure about the odd lunatic. I made it clear that the securityarrangements would be entirely a matter for Special Branch of Scotlan Yard,in conjunction with the local police.Dick, Perfect and I lunched with the Chief Constable of Dorset,Major Peel-Yates. He has junt produced rather a useful intormant whohas settled in his area. The man was formerly a high official of thebecame disillusioned and has now retired. We haveestablished direct contact with him and hope to get some useful informationThe man's name isI gave a lecture to Detective Superintendents, which was the finstof a series given to o.fficers of this rank, on the assumption that theyultimately have the responsibility for S.B. work, and that if we couldcarny them vith us their own officers would get greater support.I confined myself to giving there ankaccount of our objectives,the principles on which we work, and the organisntion whi hich we had setup to denl with enemy Intelligence organisations, subversin ixecnavements,ansecurity.ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION22nd November83(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.20oI spoke to Strong about naturalisation. ie nave beenaEicedforapaper by the J.I.C., showing what the powers are to prevent both aliensand British subjects leaving the country, and that the general procedureisin naturalisation. I amn completing this paper to-day, sending a copytthe Could Viar Comtititee who appear to be interested in the same subject.Admiral Godfrey telephoned and asked thether I had sent over ourmemorandum on double-agents to L.0.S. I told him that I had.Howard of the Home office rang me to say that he was thinking ofapgreaching the Baitic Consul here on the subject of recruiting reliableinstructors in Slav languages. This wa's in connection with the workingParty which is considering the setting up of an Inter-Services Bchool ofSlavonie Liinguages. After speaking to Derby, I told Howard that theConsul was, as for ta 1 knew, a reliable person. I emphasised, however,that in recruiting nstruotors in a language, it was 01 paramountimportance that the instructor himself had a first-claas knowleage ofEnglish.I lunched with Van Moylland. He asked me if I Could say a goodwork for GOOSSEN. of the Department of Justice. who was going to Amnerica todiscuss drug traffic and smuggling. I said that I couladprobably dosomething, and subsequently wrote a linc to Cimperman.Wie gave a cooktail party for the Supeintendents attending thecourse. Most of them seem to have enjoyed thein stay and to have foundit profitable.(9o.23rd November.D.B. D.0. and I hed a meeting about staff requirements and thenes system of grading. We were all of us extremely doubtful about theestabllishment of new grades between Senior Officer and Direetor. Whilewe agreed that this Woulld provide opportunities for young officers, andsecondly, an incentive to join and remain in the organisation, we all feltthat it presented very serious problems. Firstly, the Senior Deputyor Assistant Director would have to be the next Director-designate, andthis WEIS a very difficult decision to make until a vacancy actuallyoccurred. Secondly, the more grades we made the more di fficult it wasto place officers in jobs which they felt to be comensurate with theirrank. Thie would particularly apply in the case of overseas officersreturning. In general, the more grades you make the more inflexiblethe organisntion becomes. We thought that while it might be usefulto have sanction for these grades, it might be unwise to use them now,and in any case they Would have to be used very sparingly. We had alarge number of new officers and it is early days yet to say who wouldultimately be capable of carrying really responsible jobs.THIS IS A COPYORIGINALDOCUMENT RETAINED RETAINEDIN NDEPARTMENT UNDER SEC SECTIONTHE PUBLIC HECORDSACT1958 June 2010I had a post mortem on the course with the Detective Superintendents.They all seemed to have been most impressed by what they had heard, althoughthey tthought the lectures might have been spun out over another two days,which would have given more time for questioning and more time for theofficers themselves to absorb what they heard without too much fatigue.They were extremely impressed by the two women speakers, Miss Bagot andMrs. Towndrow. They admitted that they had started prejudiced, but werelion over in the first five minutes by the obvious fact that both of themnotonly had a complete mastery of their subject, but knew how to put themover. Several of ther had the franknese to say that in the past they hadbeen ra'ther inclined to snigger when they heard the name of M.I.5, but thatthis course had entirely changed their views.28th November.Thistle told me that considerable progress vas being made in regardto E.V.Ws. He thought that probably about 3,0 of the cases might be ofinterest to us, but there might be certain doubtful characters-like thosewho haa served in the Rusrian forces during the war. There vereapparently Quite a number of these who had got into thig country disguisedunder various nationalibies. I said that I thought that the Hame Officewoulld always have to consider the possibility of a certain amount ofgeneral internment, on the grounds that Sllavs would always consider in acrisis whether theirmbread was buttered on thiis side oP that, and thatif the Russians were making progress they might well, as they did in thelast war, be swayed by a have of enthusiasm for the"ol countrym! Theproper course in an invasion crisis would be tD clear the deaks here bysending most of them to Canada191.We are getting further details of this conversation beforetaking the matter up with 'o'.29th November,At the J.I.C. to-day we had a long discussion on the situationin Korea, which is now critical. 200,000 Chinese troops ane involvedand have driven a considerable wedge in the lines of the United Nations.Ve were called upon to put up an interim report to the Chiefs of Staff.Ve had to accept the view that Chinese and Rusrian activitiee wereco-ordinated: that the Chinese had been building up for this offensivefor some time; that although they had bviously accepted the risk ofama jor war and had taken considerable preventive action. by air raidprecautions, etc. in Mukden and Peking, it eemed doubtful whether theywished, or thether the Russians would like them to have as their objectivethe clearance of the whole of Korea of U.N. Forces, since this would bealmost bound to lead to a world war. Although this possibility had tobe envisaged, an alternative was that the Chineser who had always objectedto the crossing of the 38th Parallel by American Forces and had, in fact,intimated through the Indian Ambassador in Peking, Pannikar, that if thishappened they would intervene- might have as their present objectivethe driving back of U.N. Forces to the 38th Parallel, after which theywould be prepared to negotiate. Whether they are in a position to carryout this commitment is another matter. They are believed to have verylarge reserves in Manchuria and there is no doubt that they are receivingboth advice and assistance from the Russians.The French are extremely nervous about the situation, whichis of course linked with Indo-China, where an offensive by VIET-MINH,supported by the Chineseand probably Russian advisers, may take placeat any moment. The American reaction has been to denounce the Chineseas agreasors at the United Nations.The D.D.M.I. (Johnstone) asked me again about the case ofNicholas STRAUSSLER, the tank expert whose services the British Governmentwished to use to an even greater extent than they are doing to-day.Johnstone said that SRAUSSLER frequently visited Hungary, and the WarOffice are anxious to have some assessment of the man from us.I said that iNe had, of course, knovn this man welll during thewar, but that he hed at that time been accepted in the absence of anythingknown againgt him.I had lunch with TAR today.THIS'I A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF OF THEPUBLIC PUBLIC RECORDSAOT 1958 who 2010192.I took a caseto Newsam. I also talked to him about theinternment of/5th Column here in time of war. T said that althoughthesorting out of E.V.Ws was proceeding satisfactorily, he wouldalways have to reckonit he fact that a situation might arise wheregeneral internrnent of all those who were not specially organised on warwork would be demanded by the military. I went over with him thehistory of internment during the last war, and the confusion that hadresulted when the general internment order was given, owing to the reversalof Home Office policy and the consequent occupation of all the reservedcamps by the military. It seerned to me that we ought to be prepared forsome clearing of the decks by getting these doubtful elements who mightwell sway thig way and that in accordance with the suocesses on failluresof the Russian Forces, out of the country to Canada. I told him thatDick of the R.O.M.P. had been specially charged with internment campsin time of wan in Canada, and that he had visited me here and said thatif we wanted to reserve accommodation, it should/done now and not at thelast moment. I told him that as this was a matter for the Home Office, heought to see Cornish, and I had in fact arranged an inverview afterspeaking to Baker. I do not know what the outcome of this was, but Ithought the matter was still in the air. Newsam exp essed his intentionof doing something about this, although I am not very confident tha: hewill.Newsam then asked me whether we had been having any conversatidwith Norman Brook. I said that Norman Book had of course been overhere and seen a number Df our Officers when making his enquiry into thewhole organisation. He also discussed the question of Ministerial control.I said that I thought his mind had rather been veering towards theMinistry of Defence. Newsam said: "No, he has had three talks withme and his view is thatyo tyou should come under the Home Office". He wasgoing to let Newsam have a copy of his draft report. I said thatallthbugh we did of course have certain definite responsibilities to theHome Office and derived certain of our files from the Home Secretary, weWere primarily concerned with defence. Moreover, he would have torealise that we now had a considerable organisation overseas which wasalso landed with defence planning, and in the Middle East and Far Eastwe wene an integral part of the British Defence Committee. Another factorwas that these organisation were partially integrated with M.I.6, althoughremaining still under our control -- the reason being that both counter-espionage and subversive movement had their roots abroad. Similar planswere on foot to achieve some measure of integration here in London, althoughthis could not happen until the new building in Horseferny Road wascompleted. In addition to the two organisations in the Middle East andFar East, we had stations in East Nfrica, West Africa, the Caribbean,Malta, Gibraltar and Ceylon, and liaison officers in Washington, Canberraand New Delhi. He would see, therefore, that the establishment andbalance of the organisation had changed considerably in recent yearsOn the other hand, L said that, as I had previously mentioned to him: sometime ago, it was undoubtedly necessary for someone in the Home Officetotake a wider interest in international affairs, since as at presentconstituted, they had no frame into which to put various questions affectingthem which arose from time to time.Newsam'e reply to this was: "Oh, yes - I know. I know -- I am goingtobe on the J.I.B."! T asked him whether he knew what the J.I.B. WaB.He blustered. I then explained its functions and the extent to whichit had taker over certain responsibilities from military intelligence.,and the reasons for its beting in the Ministry of Detenge. seemedtome that if J.I.B. were already there, there reraon whywe should not be there also.IN DEPARTMENT UNDERSECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 Sune 2010193.Newsarn seemed to think that J.I.B. would not be interested in ourwork. He himself in any case had always said thatt we ought to be underthe Home Office. It waB quite Clear to menithatthe had not the slightestconception of what he would be taking on, and personally T should viewwith horror any proposal that vould tie us up with the bureaucracy of theHon Office!I cannot imagine what Brook is thinking about. ClearlyNewsam's presence on the J.I.C. - which he is obviously confusing withthe J.I.B. - might be a ster in the right direction if he had the timeand capacity to cope with its problems, both of which I doubt. It isdifficullt to know what to do about this. a Newsam Was clearly in anafter-lunch and rather expansive mood and would be seriously embarrassedif we took his question up with Noran Brook. However, the latterpromised the D.G. to let him see his proposals before he submitted them,and it may be that we shall have to wait until we hear from him.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958Tune2010Alec and T went to see Sir John Machherson, Governor of Nigeria,who is home on leave. I told him that we were extremely hard-pressedat home and therefore in difficulties in regard to ending another officer9 SL.O. Nigeria. I thought a possible solution might be to S end theS.I. Accra to Nigeria and let Stephens carry S.L.O. Accra, assistedbywhom we had just sent out.Macpherson said that he quite understood our difficulties and thathe would not oresume to interfere with any of our administrative arrangementshe could only say that the presence of an S.L.0. in his rea would beextremely welcome, as he ften needed advice on security problems.I explained to him that we did not want in any way to duplicatethe work of the Police, on assume their responsibiltties Our role,asI saw it, was to bring to the Colony any information which might implycontrol of indigenous organisatione from the outside. Equally, we wouldundertake, as far as possible, to pin-point West Africans who came hereand got into touch with Russian or Satellite-controlled organisationsVe could also give advice on security matters of a preventive kind, althoughSome of that advice might not be applicable to local conditions.30th November.At the Appointments Board to-day ve agreed that a further SeniorOfficer post shouma hourutre-imade for C.3, the nev section to be formed underGraham Mitchell, deeling with departmental security. B.I B.2 and A.1.We thought that the responsibilities of Head of S.I.M.E. and Head ofS.I.F.E. woulld best be made by the granting of duty allowances to the holdersSethese posts, who nomallly woulld be of Senior Officer rank.It wan also agreed that duty allowances would be apyroprinte foron the present importance. Such allowances would bring the holders of the postsDeputy Hends of S.I.M.E. and S.L.F.E. for 80 long as these stations wereto approximately the ghade of Senor Officer.It wae not eonsidened advisable to make any recommendationsfor appointments to the manlo of Deputy Director.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958une 2o1oT spoke to the D.G. about my conversation with Newsam, which Ithought might provine the aneer to the present delay in regard toincreases of salary under Chorley for officers of Director rank andupyand.and Colonelcame to see me. They vonderedwhether it wvoild be poesible for uIS to inform the S.I.C. on how thisdepartment had been organised to meet its commitments during the war,both in this country and when it sent a contingent overseas.I said that if they liked to put forward a request to theSecretary, we would certainly give it consideration. I explained,however, that when we vent overseas we had not gone under our owncolours; we had merely provided officers who had counter-intelligenceexperience who would therefore be useful to the Army in the field.said he yas asking for this information,asof courBe S.D.E.C.E. had had no realy war time experience in counter-intelligence dnities.T think that any statement that we do make on this gubuectshould include some reference LO the Theatre Security Service.lat December.The conCommitter are reviewing Corounism at home and have askedthe D.G. to attend their meeting on Monday. Ve have done EL paper, drawingattention to what wre considered to be the danger spots in this country;they ame the armed forces, induntiy, teachers, and scientists.I telephoned to Bnigadier Johnstone, D.D.M.I. M. 1. and gave him 11brief resue of that he knew about Nicholas STRAUSSLER. He tola methat the Dipeetor of the Royal Armoured Corpsmiasanxlou Corpsm) to bringSTRAUSSILER into consultatione on new tank designs. Ag it was quite clear195.from our information that STRAUSSLER was now the U.K. representtitiveof Hungarian heavy industry, and visited Hungany from time to time,any question of employing him could not be considered. Joknstoneintended to SO inform the D.R.A.C.STRAUSSLER seemed to be the rather unseruoulous businesstype without any real loyalty to this country, and through hisability in tank construction will discover precisely what we aredoing and, if it is to his advantage, will pase the information onto the Hungarians and SO to the Rusnians.I had a meeting on West Africa, when we reviewed the whollesituation. I feel that I am now fairly well briefed.There is no doubt in my mind that a lange amount of paperis coming back here which the office does not really require. Itshould be collated in Yest Africa and only a periodical report sentin, unless any item seems to be of particular ungency. Above all,we should not receive telegrams about mninor riots, which are merellythe result of one black man disliking another. I shall endeavour topersuade Stephens to canny the S.L.0. job on the Gold Coast in additionto his wider duties, and transfer Rich to NigeriaThis IS A COPYORIGINAL AL DOCUMENT RETAINE[ DOCUMENTIN DEPARTMEN314)0F HEACII gatnered that both we and the 2oto1958ureAmericans are agreed that in time of war we shall have to have a basein Egypt but that in peacetime it would be possible to make otherarrangements.So far as it could be ascertained from the Chief of StaffCommittee, no proposal for joint action between ourselves and theAmericans have been made on the lines outlined in the report. Thisdoes not, however, Preclude the possibility that the Minister ofDefence may have had such proposals in mind, although he did notstate them at the Cabinet meeting on November 30th. There is areview being made by the Joint Planners at the moment of the possiblealtermatinesto Egypt,8 Israel was mentionedAs regards the rest of the report, the statements made arebroadly true, although they may be inaccurate in certain details.It is within Brook'e knowledge, from reliable sources, thatthe minister of Health is in favour of the Government going intoopposition, since he believes that they could make it imposeiblefor the Conservitives to govern and the Labour Government would comeback with a Bweeping majority within six months. He rather fanciedhimself in opposition.As regards future action, Brook would like Dick, in my absence,to go ovey' and see him in ten days time, and, in the meanwhile, let himhave any further reports of the kind. He would also like us toconsider whether any action is possible by the Prime Minister, and ifso, what form it should take.with his report on the Intelligence organisation. He said thatI three a fly ovor Brook by asking him how he was getting on he96.had finished his enquiries, but that he had not yet had time to writethe report. He did not think that it would contain anything verysensational. He did not volunteer any information-ab about Ministerialresponsibility, and I did not feel able to press him bhlithisaroint,which wais cleanly a delicate one.ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINDEPARTVENT UNDER SECTIONThe PUBLIC RECORDSLth December.ACT1958ung 2010I sal Luke, Goresuch, Johnson,an Barton of the Colonial Office,when I told them the purpose of my visit to est Africa. We discussedvarious probleme, including the matter of dstrsbutlon of Communistliterature. They mention d the quention of passports for west Afnicanstudents, whig they Were thinking af limiting to a visit to the U.K.although this presented certain difficullties since a restriction wouldobviously be resented by all, including the students who were in nosense communistically inclined.I said that T wondered whether this meaaure would be effectivein any case, since the Home Secretary had no powers to prevent a Britishsubject from leaving this country unless a charge were preferred againsthim. In any case, even if a West African student did have such apassport, he could always get on a Czach aircraft, if the company wereprepared to carny him. This one did not seem to have occurred to theColonial office.The only additional point which we had not already considered here,was a proposal that I should impress upon Governors the necessity foreachColonytoprovideabetterwelfareorganisntionfortheirstudentsin this country. I said thot while I had no doubt that they would beall in favour of such a proposal, they were amost certain to say tha'it theyhad no money and that the commitment was one for the British Government.This raised a storm of protest, and I was told that the marketingboards for cocoa and other commodities in Mest African colonies weremaking huge profits and coulld well afford to spend half a million on thewelfare of students over here.I went on to sse Pat Reilly, with whom I discunaed the questionof French rpresentation-in-Ac Accra. I told him whathad saidon his return from Paris. I also made it clear that while we did notexpect anything sensational from an S.D.E.C.E. liaison in West Africa,we had to get on with the French. Provided, therefore, that their officerin Acora could do no harm, it seemed to me politic to give;: them what theywanted. I felt that the Colonial Office argument, that an S.D.E.C.E.representative would be reporting about affairs in the Colonies and thatinformation would get back to the Russians, with serious results, was reallynonsense. The French already had a Consul in Aecra and were probablyreporting already.Reilly agreed with me. I said I would talk the matter over withStephens and let him know the result of my return.At the Directors meeting to-dsy, Hollis raised the questior of givinlists of suspecte to the German Consul, which is what the Foreign Officenov want us to do. We came to the ernelusion that we could not possiblydo more for the Germans than we vere prepared to do for the Americansand our other Allies. It was, however, quite clear that our lists wouldultimately get into the wrong hands. Hollis is going to replly on theselines.197.Holmes is a little worried about a lecture given by Fenton toPolice Superintendents. He thought Fenton was too inclined to leotureto them on points of investigation, which they either knpiv oir shoud Knowalready. I have asked Holmes to talk to Hollis.IN DEPARTMENT UNDERS SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS2lst December.ACT 1958.Swye2010I returned fror West Africa yesterday and came into the office to-day;where I found things fairly Slack.Before reporting on the office of S.L.0. West Africa, it is necessaryto say something, however superficial, about the local situation which formethe background to his work.The Administration are loyally endeavouring to implement the policylaid down by the Home Government, involving a fairly rapid progress towardsself-government based on European democratic principles. To the West Africansuch a policy implies little more than the right to manage his own affairsnov and to profit from the fruits of office. Some of the Administratimay regard the policy of the Home Government as right and inevitable, butfew believe that the West African will be mentally or morally equipped tocomprehend dernocracy, or to manage his own affairs, for a great many years.They take things as they come and hope that by careful handling controlcan be maintained, at any rate for some time.The police and the military see in this endeavour to uphold thefreedoms of the Vestern democratic system, a form of weakness leading onlyto disorders which they are called upon to suppress. They rarely emergefrom such encounters without severe criticism.from the local Press or fromCommission of Enquiry, whose findings they regard as unjust on accountthe prejudices of those who are appointed to take part. There arises,therefore, a sense of frustration among the forces of law and order, whofeel that a weak Administration is crea ing situations which the executiveforces are powerless to prevent and for which they have to incur the odium.It is in this atmosphere that the S.L.0. has to operate and endeavourto strike a balance.I should like to pay special tribute to the achievements of Tin-Eye,who for a considerablle period of his term of office has been working single-handed. There is no doubt that his energy and drive have contributedlargely to a general awareness of security problems by the Administration,the police and the military, and to the establishment of machinery for theCO-ordinatior of security not only en each individual Colony, but throughoutthe area. As far as I can ascertain, he has earned the respect and con-fidence of all the higher authorities in the Colonies I visited, and it ison this account perhaps, that they have in some degree imposed upon himobligations and responsibilities which are not strictly within the charterof an S.L.0. It was my task to see how far this position could be djustedwithout detriment to our work and prestige in the area.Before leaving this country I had seen Sir John Macpherson, Governor ofNigeria, on the question of our representatior in Lagos, and adquainted himwith our staffing problems. He fully understood our difficulties and, whilehe would not presume to interfere in any way with our administrative arrange-nts, he wished us to know that he would always be pleased to have anS.L.0. in his area.Chon.r my arrival in the Gold Coast I discussed with the Governor,Arden Clarke, the possibility of transferring Rich to Lagos; and leavingStephens to carry S.L.0. Gold Boast, withto deputise for him when198.he was -visiting the other Colonies or adjacent territories.CLatesSir Arden Clarke made a special plea that Rich should be allowed toremain as S.L.0. Gold Coast, at any rate until June, when the electionswould be over. He said that the eyes of all West Africe Would be onthe Gold Coast during the next six months and he wished for everypossible assistance on the security side that he could have. Richhadhis confidence and also tha of the other authorities with whom he wasin touch; he was, therefore, particularly anxious not to disturb thingsat this moment.In these circumstances, I did not see that I could do otherwise thanaccede to his request.On December llth, Stephens and I left for Lagos, where we spenttwo days with Mn. Foot, the Acting Governor. I met moat of the leadingofficials in the Administration, the G.0.0., and the Commissioner ofPolice.The agenda of our discussion3 a t Government House was as follows:l.Cornmunism - Co-ordinated drive against:-(with particular reference toabanning of iterature.bB.C.P. approaches to W.A students in U.Ke)Ertclusion of Comrunists from Government fandUniversity?) service.d) Communist capital from abroad.2.Immigration and Emigration policy;-(with particular reference to:a) naturalisation,b) visas for students,c) Eas1 German Scholarships.d) Prohibited immigrants.)3.Defence Plan - Progress of.4.Illegal arms traffic.5.Anglo-French cooperation in Security matters.While the present arrangements for handling these matters, throughvisits from Accra and direet communication with the Commissioner ofPolice, are satisfactory, I think we should retain our office in Lagosand aim at sending out an S.L.o.as soon as someone suitably trained andcapable of carrying the necessary weight can be appointed. I do not feel,however, that this is a matter of great urgency.on the Intelligence fron there are perhaps three matters which areof ajor importance for S.L0. West Africa.a)the importation of literature,b)the sale of steel tubing for themanufacture of Dane guns, andc) the transmission of funds - SO faronly a sum of $2,000 - from the W.F.T.U.to the Nigerian Labour Congress.199.As regards (a) the Gold Coast have proscribed certain publicationsand have held them up in the mails. They propose to do this more extensivelyin the future and are anxious for any assistance that we can give them.In Nigeria they are somewhat averse to carrying out this policy, butit is hoped that they may be persuaded to come into line at the conferenceof the Governors' Council whi.ch is to be held in January, 1951.As regards (b), the situation 1s certainly a serious one. Sufficientsteel tubing for the manufacture of a very large number of Dane guns hasalready been imported, and although powers have been taken to prohibit inthe future its importation, except under licence, little has BO far beendone to discover the whereabouts of eonsignments which have already enteredthe country. I have suggested to Stephena tha if no progress can be madein this matter, he should recommend the issue of an ordinance, making itobligatory for all the holders of ateel tubing to declare the amounts intheir posBeBsion to the police. Meanwhile, enquiries are going on bothhere and in West Africa to discover who is financing the importation ofthis material.As regards (c), it is hoped that enguiries here and in West Africamay lead to the detection of any other sums of money which may be reachingthe Colonies from W.F.T.U. sources.On may return to Acera T turned my attention to the internaladministration of the office, where it seemed to me that the burden of thework could be considerably reduced.(i) The fact that BO much of the security Work in the whole areabas been initiated by Stephens has caused his office to be regarded, to someextent, as a distributing centre with all the consequent work that this implies.A case in point was a despatch sent home by the Acting Governor of Nigeriaon the banning of Communist literature. No copy of this was sent to Monson,of the West African Council, in spite of the fact tha't he is responsiblefor preparing the agenda for the Governors' Council which is to disouss thismatter in January. It fell to the S.L.0's office to send a copy of thisdespatch to the West African Council.While the task is not an easy one, I urged Stephens taotfulllyto persuade the Colonies to give their own documents the proper distribution.(ii) While it is, of course, important to obtain information fromdjacent foreign territories, I think the French have more to fear from thegeneral trend of events in our Colonies than we have from the activities of theR.D.A. or other subversive organisations in theirs. In point of fact thereis very little collaboration between subversive organisations in Frenchterritories and our own Coloniesat the moment, although there is talk of ajoint conference in the early part of next year. An enormous amount ofinformation has been received on the activities of the R.D.A., which has beensent to London uncollated; it is carded extensively in Acora, translated, andgiven a wide distribution tD the Administration, the Police, the Militaryin the four Colonies, and to Consuls in adjacent territories. I expressedthe view tha if a basic paper were written on this subject, it need onlybenecessary thereafter to report monthly on any new developments of realsignificance. The same would apply to indigenous movements in the fourColonies.(iii) A considerable amount of time is taken up with ciphering anddeciphering telegrams. I told stephens that it was unnecessary to wire aboutlocal disturbanees unless they appeared to be of particular gravity. I think,too that some of our own tellegrains could go in the form of an air mail letter,which take on the average five days, OY else reduced to a bare mindmum and200.followed by an air mail letter.(iv) I laid down that the basic B. Dividion functionsin West Africa were:a) to supply information received from home oninternational movement which may have a bearingon the internal Situation in West Africa;b)to obtain from the Police, or other authorities,information which appears to link up with subversiveovements abroad, and to advise on its significance.c) To initiate on behalf of the Police or otherauthorities in West Africa, enguiries in regardto the activities of Weat African nationals in theU.K.d) To obtain from the Police and other official ormnofficial sources a general picture of the strength,leading personalities, structure and trends of indigenousationalist movement, particularly where such movemnentsare likely to be influenced from abroad.e) To exchange with adjacent foreign territoriesinformation on the movement of subversive individuals andcooperation between subversive organisationa.On the basis of (b), (d) and (e) above, the 8.1.0. West Africeshould report once a month, in accordance with the fblloiing pno fonmaas soon as basic papers on the various organisations have been prepared.11.International Communist Conneotions.a) Within West Africa.b) Outside West Africa.i Personalities and Organisations.ii) Funds.iii Propaganda and Literature.Extensive carding in Acors and begos; Selectivecarding in U.K.2.Indigenous Nationalist Onganisations.Strength, policy, structure, prograrme, leaders, trends.1) Gold 6oast. C.P.P. Ghana Calling Asan. Labour.ii)Nigeria. N.L.o. Likist Movement N.C.N.C. N.E.C.Y.O.N.0., Ex-Servicemen' movement.iii) Sierra Leone. As necessary.iv Gambia.As necessary.V French Territories. As necessary.vi)Liberia.As necessary.Very limited canding in U.K.Limited selectivecarding in W.A. (carding sheets on S.Fs), withprecatitions againt duplication with Police records.3.Arms Traffice4.Conclusions and General Remarks.to time, but the contents of the monthihy report should only deal, atThespro of feconrse, bersubgect to modification from any timerate SD far as indigenous movements are concerned, with any major201.alterations in policy or tactics which have occurred in the interveningperiod.I also gave general direction about carding.I think that when basic papers have been prepared, the monthlyrort systern established, and caring rationalisad, a considerable reductio!in the work should be effected. It ought then to be possible to runthe station with a competent S.1.0. in Aecra and another in Lagos, withS.L.0 West Africa to supervise and to visit the Colonies and the adjacentterritories. Meanwhile, the station can I think carry on quit effectivelyby direct communication with the Police in Lagos and a monthly visit of threeor four days by someone from Accra. We should aim, if possible, atappointing a suitable S.L.0. for Lagos sometime within the next si.x months.Stephens still thinks that it will be necessary to have four officers butI am inclined to think that when the rationalisation of the work at Acorabegins to take effect tis may no longer be necessary, and thacouldthen be withdrawn.I was impressed by what Stephens had done, but it was clear to methat through his personality and drive he had rather become the supremeSecurity authority in the area. I told him that while I understood that ithad to some extent been imposed upon him, it Vas important that a Governor,if he felt apprehensive, should first of all call his Commissioner ofPolice and his Administration, and that if he t ought that there was anotheraspect of the problem, namely, influence from outside, he should call usinto consultation as well. It was not for us to say whether in this orthat situation - which would almost certainly have arisen from indigenouscauses - that the troops should be called in. Such a situation had notarisen, but it might, and if so it was the kind of responsibility that weas an office could not accept. however flattering it might appear.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONOF PUBLIO RECORDSACT 1958 uno 2010The real danger in the Colonies I visited would seem to be the policyof the Home Government, to which we are now committed. It i.s mrisunderstoodby the West Africans and creates a spirit of appeasement in thethe Administration, and frustration in the forces of law and order.There iin fact a slight feeling that we are on the way out, and I cannot see that,if NKRUMA's.party, for examplle, in the Gold Coast gets to power after theelections in April, we shall not reach a situation where the Governor willhave to go on saying "no", which will cause the natives to say that theConstitution is a farce, or wher we shall have responsibilit withoutpower. A more or less black Cabinet would be creating situations whichwe shall be powerless to prevent and which will lead to disorder whichtish troops will have to suppress. There is no doubt in my mind that theWhat African native is wholly unfitted for self-rule; he is backward in evenypossible way. "Expatriates", which is the name now given to the whites,are not allowed to occupy. Government jobs which can be carried by lacks.You only need to try and buy a set of stamps up to 1/- at the Acera PostOfficeonahotafternoon;theplaceisaseethingmassofblacksmillinground the counter. After a long delay a black clerk will endeavour to add202.add up the sum; it will come out wrong, but it is better not to argueasthedelayandfrustrationwouldonlybegreater!Hethentellsyouthayou can buy a 21d stamp at his counter, but that a 6d one will have to bebought ellsewhere, and he ends up by giving you the wrong change. Againyoudonotarguebecauseitistoohot.Thetelephoneisequallyinefficient; it is much quicher to get into a car and go and see somebody.If Tin-Eye wants anything from the Post Office, he rings up the PostmasterGeneral!Then take a trop into the hinterland, where you will find a moderatelygood road, which has been constructed for several years. While it was beingmade one of the steam rollers fell over', but as there was no crane about toset it on ite feet, nobody thought of taking it to pieces and it was justbuilt into the road and tarmacked over with the roller sticking out at theside! The Vlest Africans are furious drivers, particularly when they aredrunk. All their transport wagons carry slogans - generally Biblical ones;one was seen the other day in a dilipidated condition, with its back stickingout of a house; the slogan on this vehicle was "Faith can remove Mountains".THIS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDINDEPRRTMENT UNDER SECTION28th December.HEPUBLIC RECORDS1958Nune2o1ocame to see me. He told me that he had attended certainsessions of the Congress of Religions, but had not been present at everymeeting as he was feeling rather sick at the time. He said that veryfew people turned up and the meeting as a whole was af little consequence.One of the delegates had made it clear at the outset that it was aCongress of Religions and not a political meeting. This may to someextent have damped the ardour of those who intended to make it s0. Meanwhi:from such enquiries as he coulld make,is quite satisfied thatAVYAK-TAMANDA (?), former secretary of the VEDANTA, Society, has clearly beenwon over to Cormunism. He has apparently visited Russia on a number ofoccasions and has persuaded himself that what is going on there is the"Heaven on Earth"' which his religious beliefs have caused him to look for!has apparently completed his studies under Dr'. Jung ofZurich and is now practicing analytical psychology. He is a Catholichimself. He tells me that most of his patients SO far have been frustratedPriests and Nuns, who have entered rigid Orders for which they weretemperamentally unsuited. Apparently the Church is taking a somewhatenlightened view of the whole subject.had received a notice from the War Office asking forparticulars about his Intelligence career and whether he was prepared toserve in a similar capacity. I asked Joe Spencer to let him know whatreply he should give, as I think we might use him again at the L.R.C.29th December.Major Freeth, introduced by M.I.1.A. came to ask for our assistancein a military exercise. It was apparently intended to infiltrate escapersand invaders (7) into the London area, through various "safe houses.It is Freeth'e job to detect this operation. His opposing commander isa Colonel Neame, who has a private business somewhere in the City. Freeththought that if we could follow Colonel Neame from his office immediatelyprior to the operation, we might be able to track down the "safe" houses.203.I asked whether this was "cricket" F Freeth seemed to think thatit was. We have accordingly undertaken to help him.F-EE