[94mA The National Archives (c) crown copyright Catalogue Reference:kv/4/469 Image Reference:1 POL F 53-24-90 SAV16 CD on 1 LIDDELL DIARTES co UA OSED S Form 924 SEE ALSO LIST INSIDE COVER Side Sornl No. Date SLAr Stn Serinl Noa Dito Serinl No. iai1cin Dantonntitin Date Denianuiion 4o a\ A6 a ade .2.1 23 s Form 960 POL F 53-24-90 FILCISAV6 FIE/R / SAVTO 71- : 13th May. I arrived at Heathrow at L p.m. from Malta. 15th May. I saw the D.M.I. about Colonel Stables's organisation in Hong Kong. He was quite emphatic that the 'I' Branch should not be running agents at all, and that the collection of all information regarding China should rest th the M.A. Nanking, and that for civil bucurity of the Island the G.0.0. should look 0 the D.S.0. He nstructed Hirsch to send CA wire to Malone, the new D.G.S.I. in Singapore, asking for his final views. I told D.M.I. that from what I had heard Malone entirely agreed with us about the definition of functions. We then discussed the J.I.C. meeting of yesterday on the future of SIME. D.M.I. seemed to think that some progress had been made. The crucial point was whether our officers should be handed over to S.I.S. as the troops witharew. He entirely shared our view, that a settled Security Service at the back of the armed forces in the Middle East was essential, and that in order that this organisation could function properly in war time it should control the outposts in peace time. realised, however, that the argument was a difficult one, unless it were admitted that R.I.S. were not by nature properly trained - qualified to carry out Intelligence duties. D.M.I. is 100j on our side. 16th May. We had a me eting on India with Dick, Vickery, Bamford and Vivian. I told them about my meeting with Patel, and D.I.BE ortunate L. remark that it would be better for us to start with a clean slate and appoint somebody who had no previous conneetion with the Indian Police or the I.C.S. This was deprecated by all, but it was felt that we should have to more or less stand by this arrangement for the first few months, when we might perhaps get it modified. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 fuqusi 2o1: It was agreed that we would select an officer and get him out as sson as the nececcary accommodation was available. Fforde of the Pallestine Police came to see me T told him what I had been doing in Palestine and the various projects which we had discussed. He does not entirely agree with Grey about the Military merely using their eyes and reporting on suspicions cire stances in a virtual way. He thinks that if they are deprived of the right of runnin agents, there may be a loss to Intelligence, since there are many people in Palestine who are prepared to talk to the Military, but do not like talking to the Police. I think there is some thing in this argument it exists in a minor degree here. Fforde said that he was shocked by the lack of knowledge and the lack of appreciation of the difficulties in Palestine that he had found in official quarters here. He said that our office was the one and 3 only notable exception. 19th May. At the D.G's meeting to-day I gave a general outline of my tour. I saw Trafford Smith this afternoon. I discussed first of all material and told him what arrangement T had made in Palestine. I thought that I had shaken the High Commissioner and, to some extent, the Police. Gorney, however, was rather in favour of the ect - in spite of the difficulties that T had enumerated. Trafford Smith thought it a good idea that a brief was being prepared: this led me to point out the vast amount of material that existed in Palestine and the feeling there that it was useless to send it to this country as there was nobody in the Colonial Office to digest it. I asked whether there was any possibility of forming a small secretariat in the Colondal Office, at any rate until the U.N.O. proceedings were over. Trafford Smith readily admitted that the Colonial Office hardly had time to digest what they got and that the sugges tion was a good: on the other hand, he did not quite see where the extra staff was coming from. He is quite ready to speak to Lloyd, but WO uld like his hand reinforce by a otter from Gurney. I said that Gurney undertaken to send a letter and that I nd telegraph to the p.S.O.Tr erderorro asten its despatch. ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 20th Max 4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 Auqust 2010 I had a discussion with erartes and Horrocks, at which Courtenay was present, about allow- ances in the Far East. It was quite clear that there were many anomalie's which needed adjustment, jus apare from some general guidance as to precisely what allowances were for and wha't was a legimitate charge on Security Service fimnas- 21st May. I saw 'C', to whom I explained exactly what my discussions had been in Palestine on the subject of and its use at U.N.O. He seemed quite satisfied with the line that I had taken. I also talked to him about the "Colony Trader" a ship which is now in Gibraltar and which is undoubtedly to be used for illegal immigration We had been asked by the Inter-Departmental Committee to put some sand in the wheels, nd the Governor had been told to delay the ship by every possible legitimate means within S power. 'c' said that he did not wish to carry out an S.0. operation from Bibraltar because the British it would were engaged demonstrate in this clearly kind that of thing and prejudice operations that he had in mind elsewhere. I said that I felt the straight- forward thing would be to put a Marine guard on board and let the Costa Rican Government and the Americans swueal. If they brought an action, 80 much the better. 'C' entirely agreed. We had a long meeting of the Appointments Board, when the staff position in the Far East and Miolale East was considered. We decided that Hugh WINTERBORN should be ade Head of S.I.F.E. but at the conclusion of his term wit with that organisatior should, if he desired to join the Security Service,rever to th scale of other officers who have recently joined. His position vis a vis ourselve 1s to be regularised by putting him on our Army 'ceiling' until he is due for his Army pension in two or three years time. FRIPP and HUNT are to go. saw Sir Thomas Lloyd about the "Colony Tradert. He was quite prepared for the action suggested and proposed to put it to his Committee to-morrow. He did not seen to think that Ministerial authority would be $5 necessary. 22nd May. Yesterday the D.G., at our meeting to consider staff matters; said that he had decided to make a change as regards the secretarial staff: he had not been satisfied with the way in which he was receiving his papers and he had therefore decided to have his own secretary in a separate room. I said I hoped that there was no suggestion that his papers were being deliberatet sin tracked, to which he gave no positive reply. I erefore raised the matter again the following dav I said that I had been disturbed by what h nad said on the previous day, since from the action he had taken he must have felt that I was in some way trying to usurp his functions, and that Miss Findlater was deliberately side- tracking his papers to me and, indeed, that other officers of the pre-war staff were also deliberately sidetracking his papers. I said that nothing was further from any of our intentions; our sole job was to brief him in all matters of importance which might be the subject of discussion at the J.I.C. or elsewhere. I quite realised there had been cases where papers had taken a considerable time to reach him, but every effort would be made to put this right. The problem, however, was not without its difficulties, 'since it was the practice in th office to join up any incoming paper with thu spropriate files: it often happened that the fill was in action and on occasions it might not e easily traceable. It also happened from time to time that a letter of importance needing action came in when he was out and got sidetracked in that way. Further, there was an immense turnover in the office of letters, many of which were addressed to him as a matter of form but with Which he need not really be concerned, since they were entirely of a routine kind. The D.G. said that he had in fact thought that some of he the was staff trying might to not run have the office approved and of were the way deli- berately keeping papers away from him. I assured him again that this was an entirely wrong impression, when he told me bLforget about the whole incident. The D.G. saw the P.M. He said that he had had reports from an M.P., Mrs. Gould, about Fascist activity at Hendon. The D.G. said that in a general way Fascists were at sixes and sevens and that he knew of nothing serit in Hendon; he would, however, make enquiries. He mentioned to the P.M. the question of the "Colony Traderl' and found him entirely in agreement with the course of action suggested. This I passed on to Sir Thoma.s Lloyd. At the B. Meeting to-day I gave an outline of my tour of the Far East a.nd Middle East. 23rd May. Catling came to see me this morning. He said that the I.G. would be arriving next Thursday. There were two points firstly, SHINDIER, who brad been associated with Conquest, was on his way to this country as an attack had been ma/ on his life. He was a German jew, aged 38 39, and formerly of the Berlin Police; join the Palestine Police in the 30s and raached the rank of Inspector. Gray would be interested in finding him employment with the Control Sormission. THIsI A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Hugusr 2010 7 THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 AugusT DOo 8 THIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 AMquse 2010 Catling came to see me. He had just got out of Palestine on three months leave. The IRGUN have been gunning for him for some time. I told him about the "Colony Trader!' on which, on instructions from the Colonial Office, a guard has now been placed. I saw Sir Edward Briages, on the D.G's instructions, and told him about my visit to India. He agreed that we should go ahead wit the appointment of a liaison officer in Delhi. He thought that it was possible that we might ultimately have to put one in the Punjab as well. I talked to him for some time about my visit to the Far East and Middle East, and in particula about the situation in Palestine. He asked me Whether in the course of my visit to the Midale East TI had been able to find any solution of the M.I.5./6 problem to which TI replied that infortunately T had not. I told him about the J.I.C. in Singapore and suggested that it might be helpful if the Chairman and Secretaries of J.I.Cs abroad had got some experience of the workings of the J.I.C. in this country. He felt that this mig. be difficult at the moment, but that when new appointments were made it would be an excellent idea. I talked to him about India and told him what our plans were. 29th May. 7 I had a word with FORBES, who is going to act as P.A. to the High Commissioner in Palestine and has been undergoing a short course. I told him about the "Colony Trader" and also about the proposed use of I 8lso mentioned my visit to Trafford Smith on the question of staffing the Colonial Office and the receipt of Policy reports. Trafford Smith had expressed the view that he was sufficiently staffed to absorb more materila and would be glad to have S e of the more significant of these reports whi he felt would be more telling than the ordinary situation vires. I asked Forbes to let Gurney know about this. lunched with Van MOYLAND. I had B long talk with TOLSON about the unit that he had built up in Calcutta. While I felt that he had had considerable Intelligence epxbrience, T did not very much like his personality. He struck me as being singularly undemonstrative. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENTIUNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 us 20(0 - id THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Auyus 2O 2nd June. T gave a talk to the A.L.Os on my. visit to the Far East and Middle East. 3rd June. We had a meeting with Colonal Adam, Hollis, Dick and Horrocks on the Communist Working Panty. It was decided that we should prepare a rather fuller note for the D.G. and that it would be preferable that he shoulld see Bridges rather than the Minister of Defence. At the D.D.G. meeting we diseussed manpower requirements innthe event of var, counter- sabotage in Palestine, and a suggestion that we should plant agents, or informants, in research establishments, and the new procedure for distributing of J.I.C. papers. I had a meeting with Dick, Hille Derbyshire about "SHARKEYI!, It was decided that I should speak to Craufurd; (b) that Haylor was allready warned; (c) that there was no particular poin in talking to Alley; (d) that Dick would speak to Douglas Roberts; (e) that Derbyshire should gradually extract himself without giving offence; (f) that we should continue observation on "SHARKEY" I/. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Auqusi 2oo Lth June. amended the J.I,C. when TI made a statement out my visit to the Far East and Middle Tst. We had previously had a disoussion th Trafford Smith on Quill'g report on Palestine. The outcome is an attempt by the Colonial Office to obtain the services of Bob NEWTON, a Palestinian expert, at present undergoing the I.D.C. course. NEWTON would take charge of the Secretariat and condense some of the many reports that the Police receive which have a bearing on the publicity of the Agency. This will take the pllace of Quill' idea of a J.I.C. which was unaccept- able to the J.I.C. London. J.I.C. London (Z felt that they could not usurp the functions of the High Commissioner to the extent suggested by Qu1ll. pointed out that many of the problems mentioned by Quill had already been the subject of discussion while I was in Palestine. For example, the question of finger prints. The High Commissioner had agreed in principle; the only question was whether any local regulation could be made against mass obstruetion. If such a regul- ation were imposed in thi.s country, ration cards and clothing coupons could be cancelled and would only be reissued after people prer sented themselves at locall police stations and had their finger prints taken - did simiie sanctions exist in Palestine? As regards the interchange of intelligence, I had the imp ression that this was going on very satis- factorily: there vas a daily meeting between the G.0.0. and his I. Staff, the D.S.0. The D.S.0. was in constant touch with the police and Ho were his subordinates. The D.S.0. saw the Secretariat and the High Commissioner at regular intervals. What seemed to me to be more necessary was an Intelligence Planning Board, which would concern itself with production and ascertain what ground was being covered by each pradiction agency'; where there were gaps; and cwho could fill them. I put this to the G.0.0. who had shown some doubt about its necessity, but did not turn it down. Before leaving I instructed the D.S.0. to call a meeting on specific atters, and I hoped that this woul ultimately become a general and regular practice On the general question of Palestine I said that there was clearly a feeling of frustration, owing to a lack of appreciation at home, par- ticularly in Ministerial circles, of what the authorities in Palestine were up against There was a great deal of information in the police files which never reached the Colonial office, for two reasons Firstly. there avere no research workers in the Police, who were engaged in dealing with day to day outrages.and srapndly because there was nobody to digest the material 13 in the Colonial office. This material, however, only had a bearing on the duplicity of the Agency; it did not relate to the day to day activities of the Irgun. What was really lacking waB positive information on what the Irgun were going to do next Friday. Only with, information of this kind wa s it possible to supprees terrorism. It was difficult, oP almost impossible, to obtain owing to the hostile or terrorised attitude of the population The Police clearly been let down over a long perios both in strength and efficiency, and it was difficult to build obtain em up information in the present through ircumstances. informants about To the Irgun, it was necessary to have been in control nn the of ground the f1o0w organisation and to as have its held activities some suppressing increaseat terrorism would be a system of The only other method of guards, for ich the present manpower was inadequate. If all roads and buildings were to be safeguarded, another two Army Corps would be necessary. I suggested to the G.0.C. that he should have a lLaison officer sitting in Police H.Q., as I felt this would create better understanding of each tlhers problems. I had done this at Gray's suggestion. The G.0.0. agreed, but could not at the moment think of a suitable officer. Later I gave a brief resue of what I had done in the Far ast, and I mentioned in particular the tisfactory arrangements for co-peration etween ourselves, M.I.6. and M.S.S. and the somehwat untidy State of J.I.0.( (FE), which I felt had grown too much. Off the record T had previously spoken to Hayter, suggesting tha future Chairmen and Secretaries should do a courBe with the J.I.C. in London before they went out. I could not go too far at the J.I.0 as Pendred had been the former Chairman of JI.C(FE) and was probably more responsible for its woolly state than anybody ellse. In talking about Cairo I drew attention to the undesirable activitiles of B.T.E., who were running agents into Cairo. T thought we shoud be able to settle this matter locally. 1u I had my first talk w th MANN, the new AvL.0. Scotland. I liked him very much. I think he fully understand the delicaey of his position and the importance of secret naterilal not getting on to Police files which are accessable to everyone in the Force. RIVETT-OARNAC has arrived over here for three weeks. He is apparently in need of a rest. On his return, L gather he 18 to be posted to one of the districts. This is a pity as he will no longer have his handoon Intelligence matters. He should, of course, be made an Assistant Commissioner 1/c Intelligence with direct access to the Comissioner. At present the Intelligence Branch of the R.C.M.P. in Canada is handicapped through being tiled up with the C.I.D: this means that before its problems reach the Commissioner, they gD through the hands of twe highly placed C.I.D. officers who know nothing about them. 5th June. M.E. came to see me about the General Research Section of L.S.I.c., the Head of which has resimned. It ia obviously a job which M.E. could do. and his presence there would pay us a large dividend. Theefficiency 0f the unit has been steadily deteriorating sinee the lquidation of R.S.8. I told him th we should more than regret his departure, bie that we should not think 111 of him if he applied for the Job. We had certain things in mind for him here, but owing to various obstructions 1t might not be possible to do anything for some considerable time. and he might well feel that he had a better future in L.S.I.0. -- if So, he ought to apply for the job. If he got it, we should concern our selves with the fact that a vital part of the L.S..C. y which mainly affeeted our interests. wa in competent and co-operative hands. If he was burned down, nobody here Would think the worse of him. He iB going to see Travis. 8ir Reginald Chaprtan, Govemnor of Aden, came te see mS He wanted to know about Antoine BESSE, a Frenchman in Aden, whom he wished to recommend for a decoration. He knew that BESSE was to some extent a rogue., but he clearly felt that there were political advantages in getting him decorated, provieed his record was not too black. As far as I can see, there is nothing too bad on our files. but they amply confirm that BESSE is a somewhat unpleasant rogue who can turn on the charm tap whenever it suits him. Chaoman was very friendly, and I am sre will do anythir help S.I.M.E. about which I spoke to him. Sichel rang me up about Whitney STRAIGHT. who is the Personnel Manager of B.O.A.C. S.I.E have some arrangement with B.O.A,C., into which Whitney STRAIGHT by reason of his position will have to be thrown. Sichel wanted to know whether they were on safe ground. I spoke to Tess (Rothechild), who said that as far as she knew he was quite anl right, although he had been through a period of infantile leftism. 6th June. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 fhgusi 200 1o THIS A COPY ORIGINAL DUUUfHIT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 AuqusI 200 17 The D.C. called a meeting, to discuss a letter Which he had received from Perfect. complainin tha't Head Office did not le ep mim informed. When we got down to detail there was an answer to most of Perfect's complaints, some of Which were due to his on lack of initiative: for example, he wanted us to collect from the Colonial Office. reports which the Governors send home and which might affect his work - the obvious answer was that there was little point and a long delay in this method: he ght to make arrangements locally to get copies of these reports. We were asked to draft a suitable reply. 9th June. T lunched with Derek Taneve, when I discussed with him the gueation of his can. He wants to buy it from the office; it is in a bad state and has done 75,000 miles. I told him to discuss the matter with Malcom Cumming. There is a proposal to bring over machine tool makers who have exdert knowledge Df high precision work. The idea is to deny their services to the Russians. While I agree that we shoulld not necessarily oppose the proposals we shoulld at least make it clear that it is eneratly desirable to keep that particular ndustry clear of aliens, whether Germans DP other nationalities. Experience had shown that the knowledge of the work of our echin co0l industry gave the enemy a knowledge of ou industrial mobilisation capacity and of detail constrnetion. In fact, if you wanted to acquin informationof this kind in rellation to a foreig power, you could not do better than to put your agents into the machine tool industry. We should also make elear that these. Germans: Would dissatisfied be free aents the who terms 01 their the etoployment were transfer their services elsewhere. Lastly, if our machine tool industry was filled UD with aliens at a time of crisis, there would always 1%t be a demand for their removal whether they were guilty or innocent. This has a dislocating effect on the industry at a moment when it shoul be at its highest point of efficiency, THISIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 AucusT 2010 19 THIS 1S A COPY ORIGINAL DOUUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 Gqusr Dolo loth June. Brigadier BOYCE, whom I had seen in Delhi where he vas D. .D.M.I. M.I. came to see me about employment. I said that TI did not know of anything at the moment, but if he cared to fill, in a form we would let him know if anything turned up. l1th June. Janet HOWE. who is a friend of Edward Renton, came to see me. She had been de-Nazifying the educationa] system in Austria. She was a lecturer in German and French at Kings College. T told her that I doubted whether there vould be tnyithing for herhere, but that D minsht find wort for her elsewhere. Dick and I lunched with Vickery, when ve dis- cussed the possibility of having a laison with Palcistan. Vickery thought that we ought to arrange things SO that the approach came from the Pakistan Government. I had 'Georgelenkin in mind, but did not kow whether the job would be accepatable to him. In any case WB all felt it would be a good thing to write to him and get his views. Lo At the Appointments Boand to-day it was agreed that we should offer the post of H/s. H/S.I.F. I F. E. to Hugh WINTERBORN, 13th June. I attended the J.I.C. Deputies meeting. The question of German experts for our machine tools industry came up. E said that whls we had no wish to oppose the project, if it were thought that the advantages outweighed the disadvantages. On the other hand, I thought the Committee should appreciate th dangers of filling up such an industry with aliens. I gave them the arguments previously mentioned (see 9th june) THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 2/ LATHAD, our D.S.0. in Tripoli, seemed ar intellirent individual who had for some time been working more or less on his own and building uD auite a good show. I explained to him that we had of counse taken over SIME and that Kellar had been extremely busy. I was sure, however, that he would pay him a visit as soon as possible. LATHAM knows Malay and Tamil and was formerly a rubber planter. He would be quite ready to stay on with US after his demobilisation in about a year: time and, if neceesary, to go to Malaya. l4th June. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Auqus 2010 Two members of the Stern gang have been apprehended in Holland, carrying bomb letters, eto. One of them has been identified by his finger prints as LEVSTEIN, whose prints were on the Colonial Office bomb. The other is : be meved to be the woman who placed the bomb. l6th June. Max Knight came to see me about the yearly donation to As something was due to him for services during the past war, I said I thought that we ought to pay, but that this probably ought to be the final payment. I To asked arrive Knight at a definite to ascertain decision who the on principal this point, aubscribers were to the Economic League and what services they got for their money. 27 Tape called at our request to heiy in the matter of housing in Singapire. Owing to soe mudale we are losing two houses on July 3lst. Page eventually agreed to send a wire to the C.mdin-C. asking him to give Winterborn all possible assistance. I saw when he handed me certain documents relating to Communist matters. Of special interest was a report on a number of Duitch Communiats, said to be in the employ of the French Deuxieme Bureau. I said that it would be interesting to know whether this was an attempt by the 2eme Bureau to do something for the Russiana, or whether they were using these people to get information about the international Communist movement. I was unable to tell whether the French Services had in any way been penetrated by the Communists. I thought, however', that they were fairly clean in this respect. asked me to let him have comments on the documents before the 24th, when he was going to Holland. This advance by raised quite a difficult aneation. We feel that the Duteh Police are a much better bet, and that we would like to conduct out OWI liaison with them through EDE came to talk to me about the proposal that he should be our liaison officer with D.I.B. in Delhi.. He is clearly not anxions to go. ames Robertson has just returned from the Midale East. He managed to see Alec Kellar in Greece. Alec is apparently convinced that Gerhold ought to remain at the head of B.C.I.S. which is doing extremely important work for S.I.M.E. The D.N.I. aOKXS who visited Greece, appears to be of the same view. 23 27th June. I had a meeting with Dick. Hollis, Tar. Mrs. Quinn, and Miss Russell King, about pur relations with the Dutsh.. It does not appear that we ane getting anything of any consequence Mean while Van Moyland 18 passing us quite important information which comes from the Police. We are prevented from recriprocating owing to Dur agreement with S.I.8. D.D.G. Meeting. I sav Maxwell on four points, to which he has agreed: 1. that if ve want to put a name on the Stop Hist we need not inform him until we actually want to use the line. 2. We can extend a telephone check from one number to another, Provided there are reasonable grounds for thinking that the ndividual in whose conversations we are interested is using more than one line. As regards 1. and 2. this id on the under- standing personally. that such cases are referred to me 24 18th June. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 hugus I lunched with Vickery, when I met CROMBIE, who Is iseth the Deputy High Commissioner designate for Burma. He undertook to try and arrange for accommodation for the D.S.0's S office in the High Commissioner's office. Brooman-Ihite came to see me. He is at present acting as Deputy to Teague. He generally in agreement about our pror posals for S.I.M.E. 19th June. courge at the jet propulsion research establishment. Etwas thought that infor- matlon mgith be extracted and that relations might be established Which would lead to British ubject going over to Russia. It 28 seemed to me that even if all this happened the results would be venv problematical. On the othee hand, the risks were considerable: there would be peoplle attending the course who would obviously talk far beyond anything said at the lectures, and there is little point in building up the RuseianB in the ABC of det propulsion: the more so since we wene simultaneously bringing over German technicians in order to deny their services to the Russians I had a meeting wiith Laithwaite on he.subieot of Burma. He agreed to our proposal that orree should be attached to the High Commissioner. He also agreed to BATTERSBY as a good suocesson to HUNT. He said that Burma would almost cebtainly go outside the Empire and ther there would be no transitory stare of Domihion status. The Burmans apparently wanted some compromise between going out of the Empire and staying in it; but thia was not considered to be feasible. He told me that the Burmans have now incinded the Russians on their list of nationalities with whom they intended to establish diplomatic relations. Colonel wild came to see me about the proposal for setting up the Hollis Committee and abolishing the W. Board. I said that, provided the Hollis Committee did not embark on any details but confined themselves to giviner approval or disapproval to the plana put un by the L.S.C., the system should work well. At the Appointments Board meeting, it was decided to make an approach to SKARDON, whose services wound be valuable to the office as a whole and in particular to B.1. It was also decided to make ar offer to Cowen and to Leave the employment of his wife to Winterborn, I had dinner with MACDONALD, who 18 going out to S.I.F.E, He is a likeable character and I 26 should say would make a good officer. 20th June. SKARDON came to see me. He nad previously seen Horrocks. who had offered him a job with us if the necessary arrangements would be made with the Police about his transfer and pension. SKARDON was cllearlv very much attraeted by the offer and had prectically made up his mind to accept. I told him that I thought he ought to consider the thing very carefully and feell quite sure that he was doing the beat think he could for himself. T said that we shoulld want his services in B.l. and that doubtlesse there were many other jobs of the kind which he knew on which we should want to employ him. I think he appreciated the fact that he had been asked to Join the office. 21st June. Admiral Godfrey came to see me. He said that he was making certain enquiries on behalf of D. D.N.I I. about relations during the war. He rather wanted to know whether we thought that they were Batsfactory, or whether they cDulld be improved in any way.. I said that I thought things had worked extremely vell: there had been a certain amount of trouble over an attempt by Bennett to create B bottle neck for all matters affecting the Admirality: this we O had strongly resisted, Since we felt that all sections of this office ought to be in direct bouch with their oppoaite numbers in N I.D. Godfrey entirely agreed. 23rd June. I wen't to see Burt. I told him about SKARDON. He said that he thought SKARDON would do Ll accept the job. While he t ouRht were it wise quite he woul extremely well, and that 11 he possible that he would go to Chief Inspector, promotion was 8O clogged at the Yard that there was not likely to be much chance of further2z promotion I then talked to Burt about certain cases of apparent leakage to the Press on matters affecting Palestine. I said that we were slightly worried about this. since we often passed him information from highly secret sources: if that informatior went into the general registry of S.B.. it was of course open to everyone at the Yard. Burt said that occasionally he kept papers in his safe, but that he did not like the practice as they were unregistered and unconnected with elevanit papers. He promised to look into the matter with Jones and see whether anything dould be done. He told me that privately e himself was somewhat worried. Ffoulkes came to see me before leaving for Palestine. I discussed with him certain points which had been left in the air and which related to discussions I had haa when I was in the country. T also discussed with him Gray's desire to develop the "mike". He will take up all these Doints on arrival. T went to see and handed him comments on the documents that he had previously given me. He said that he would try and clear up these points while he was in Holland. 2lith June. Group Captain Brodie, who has succeeded Peurce at the Air Ministry on the security side, came and had a tall with me on the general work of the office. He is an oldish man and may be all right when he gets into into the saddle. I saw Sir Raymond Birchall on the various points which T had raised with Maxxwell about the handling of telechecks, etc. He agreed to all the points and was wholly Co-operative. 08 THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Auqusi 2010 25th June. At the J.I.C. to-day Hawtrey'e memorandum was cormended, although it was not consider entirely suitable in its present form. I gathered that another memorandum on Somewhat similar lines, relating to Stalinte policy, was in the course 0f preparatior and would be out in a few days time. This is being prepared on non-secret lines with a view to its being given the widest possible circulation in Government circles. Since the events in Hungaary, it seers that consideration is likely to be given to the view that a wider publicity should be given to what are believed to be the long-term objectives of Soviet policy, and also to the conditions which prevail in Soviet Russia. At the request of the D.N.I. the suggestion for be the discussed setting up between of the the Hollis J.I.C. Committee and the is Planners to Sanders of the L.C.S. being present. Ir discussion, I think the D.N.I. was quite satisfied that the Hollis Committee was the best machinery for the purpose. The rest Df the meeting concurred. I do not think, therefore, that the discussion nex't week will cause any change in the present plan. The Chairman Wondered what in fact had been done to Lmplement certain suggestions which were made it the last meeting of the 'wi Board. One of these suggestions was that Wingate shoulld Doncert some plan with Sir Henry Tizard. the D.M.I. raised the question of Russian Defectors in the British zones of Germany and Austria. He said that he could get ittig help out of the Americans, who were passing al al the bodies on to the Britlsh after a short Interrogation. The numbers were increasing, and he was anous to find Some way of disposing of the bodies. He coud not send them back: firstly., because this woilld discourage other, and Becondly. because after interrogatio they woulld have vallnable information to impart to the Russlans. The Becretrany then handed round a note on the Ministry of Tabour scheme for bringing D.Pa. into this country. It vas suggested that possibly Rusaan dodefectore disguised as Czechs OP Balts could be included. papen is being prepared on the present atate of Russian prepareaness, which General Hollis wants for the Miniister of Defence. Roger Moore l0oked in. His only problem is connected with the entry of aliens into Northern Iredand from the South. There-wat firstly tle difficulty of deteoting these alliens. but if they were detected, the Home Office for Some obsoure reason would not allow a prosecution and gave orders that the aliens shoulld be registered, even though they had entered without a visa for the .K. I said that we would Look into this matter for him. Vivdan and H1 came to talk to me about the proposal by the Government Publication Section that Short stores of S.0.E. M.I.6. nd M.1,5. should be published. In our case the ZIC-ZAG story was suggested by the Var Office. I.I.6. appear to have half committed themselves. We told Viv that ad far aB we are concerned we did not intend to submit any stories, and that the ZIG-ZAG sbory was particullarily unatlitable, Bince it ilsellosed all Dur methods. Moreover, we had just prosecu'ted ZIGZAG for the publication of certain facts, and wene constantly urging the Press to adhere to D. Notice No.l. 3o 28th une. Tinena appears to be in serious trouble. The D.M.I. told Dick that two of his officers - one a dootor and the other an alien interpreter - wera to be proBeouted for criminal acts. It is alleged that the window of one or two of the celle were broken deliberately during the cold snell last winter and the prisonens were left with one blanket. In addition, somebody WaS in the habit of coming in neriodicalily and throwing bucket of cold water over them: frostbite had followed in one or two cases which had been followed by the amputatlonof the limbs. There is no reason to think that Tin-Eye himself knew that this waB going on, but as the officer conmanding he will certain be hed responsible. We have had to consider was the office interest is in all this. Tin-Eye is a commisbioned officer in the Army and for disdplinary purposes under the C.-in- C. We cannot, therefore, a8 he suggested intervene on security grounds neither did HiIl think it desirable that ye Should hold a watching brief for M.I.5.. sinde poeple might immediately say Iwhat has this got to do with ue? Our only fear is that people will BaV that this is how Camp 020 got their information during the war, and it would therefore be convenient if there were someone there who could unafficially ook after DuiT interesta. I telephoned to Tn-Eye, who had previously telephoned to Disk: T told him that it would not be in his interest, in ours, to intervene ir any way - in fact we have nd 00UB Btandi whatever: we were, hoveven. ready to help him on a personal basis. He sa1d that he had no counsel and he did not know when the court martial was to take place. T asked him whether he would like Cussen. He peeued to think he would and suggested we shoud consult Mar Rowe, a lawyer who had served n OSDIO and knew the ropes. seDke to the D.G. whe agreed to the course of action we proposed. He thought moreover, that the office would be Justified in meeting at any rate part of the expenses. 31 30th June. Dick and T had a meeting with Vickery and Bamford about the future of I.P.I. Dominion status is to come into force on August 15th, when the India Office will become a part of the Dominions Office. The India Office cannot then aot as a channel for I.P.I. communication with India. It was suggested, therefore, that Bourne. who has been agreed as the most suit- ble person to become S.L.O. Delhi, should come home for briefing at once and take up nis position in Delhi on August llst. On this date I.P.I. will be transferred to the Security Service, and all communication with D.I.B. will in future be passed by them to the S.L.O. through the High Commissioner We agreed that for the moment it would be best to leave I.P.I. as a unit. THIS IS A COPY lst July. ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENTUNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Auqust 2D(O: I had a talk with Boothroya, who subsequently. saw the D.G. He had come over from Germany a few days leave and had been asked by Stephens to come and see US and explain Stephens' predicament. I got hold of Cussen, to whom he gave a full picture. There have been two enguiries; one a military one -- though not a properly. constituted Court of Enquiry - and subsequently Superintendent Hayward of the C.I.D. now attached to Publlic Safety to deal with Black Market cases, had onduoted a more detailed enquiry. The procedure seermed in certain cases to be questionable: statements had been taken from internees and members of the C.S.DTI.C. I.C. 32 staff had Balsemmently been interrDeited oi these ateiehens: and in one case an oficer had been forced against his will to make a statement in his defence. Certain allegations have been made against to officers which are of a crbrninal lcind, and Stephens is likely to be court-martialled as the officer responsible. Oussen advised that Stephens shouna wait until he received notice of a court mantial. and should then state that he wished to communicate with Charles Russelll 2 Co. his solicitors in London, and to be represented. Cussen thought that if he took any action before, involving a visit to this country or getting legal aid from this country. he might precipitate action: this would be a pity as it might be that J.A.G, on considering Hayward'e evidence, would think that no large lay. Cussen is prepared to Give US the benefit of hi.s dvice here, but 1s not quite sure winether he will be available to talce thecase overseas. If he can do so, he certainly will. It is necessary to act through a solicitor. and Dick Butler, in view of his towledge of 020. is considered the most suitablle person. I have told all this to the D.G.. who had previously approved of my seeing Cussen, and subsequently approved of the use of Dicl Butler. He seemed to think that at any rate part of the defence should be a legitimate change on the office. in view of the fact thet oir good name might to some extent be at stake. It might. for examole, be alleged that what has been going on in Germany formerly went on in Camp 020. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 Aucusi D010: THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Gusi 2010 2nd July. I saw the D.G., who approved our arrangements with regaf to BOURNE going as S.L.O. India, and the taling over by us of I.P.I. as from August 1st. Dominion status becomes effeotive on August 15th. II discussed with Harry his C. Division memorandum, with which I agree. T am cer'tain that it would be a mistake to split up C. Division, or in any way to down-grade it. It should remain basically in charge of all preventive security. As regards his sucoessor, I thought TAR would probably be the best bet; an alternative was HOLLIS, who could i1l be spared from B.1. As regards Jo ARCHER, there is no very obvious suocessor. PAYNTER is not bad, but hardly laas sufficient experience, and COLLARD is too young. Harry thought that possibly Furnival-Jones could act as No.2 to TAR and carry Jo. Archer's job as well. The only difficulty is Cooldie, who will have to come under TAR, at any rate for everything except his wartime Port und Travel Control Group. Diok, with whom I have spoken, is in general agreement. He will, however, have to have someone to replace TAR. The only suitable officer that he can think of is Bill Magans A possible alternative might be George JENKIN, although it is difficult; to bring such a senior officer into an organisation like ours; he would, of course, be a tremendous asset, as he would stimlate pro- duction all round the Empire. 344 3nd July.. Dick White and T saw WAGSTAFFE. We both liked him and thought he would make a very siitable officer. I subsequently saw U'REN: he is an entirely different type and in a way a more forceful characiten. He has very good references. and I shoulld think woulld make a good officer. He had quite a lot to do with Intelligence during the wan and with the military in Burma (?). They were both subsequently seen by the Appointments Board and it was agreed to take Them both on. 16th July. I learned foh arrival that Disk had hadug to" leave for the Middle East as Alec Kelllan has had to go to hospitall. Since Aler is likelly to be on the sick l1st for some months, we felt that Magan would have to go as Head of SIME. Dick has complete powers to arrange what he can with the High Commissioner. Keillar suggested that either Dicin or, strangey, Horpocks should take over during his absence. We do not regard either as a sollution, since Diclc could not be spared and Horrocks Would not really be suitable. Clearly I think Kelllar does not vant to revert to the former position of Magan at SIME, and this is in a way understandable. In my absence a certain amount of progress has been made with regard to SIME. A fulll- dress letter has gone to Bridges which deals with the wider aspeets of the whole roblem. The Foreign Office, who hase received a copy, have raised no bjection, except to tale note. They have also written a memorandum to Bridges which is. on the whole, a fair statement, but at one place does make the erroneous assumption that we agreed to the witharawal of SIME from Persia and Turkey - in fact, of course., we had no jurisdiction over SIME at that period, and we did all we could to binge to maintain his post in Turkey. Persia was rather a different proposition, as ob ection was raised to any remnants of O.I.C.I. being left behind.f for higher political reasons. 17th July. I saw Sir Alexander Grantham, the new Governor of Hong Kong, with the D.G.. and talked to him out or representation in the colony. I Lod him of the various arrangements tthait had b in reached during my visit. He seemed to appreciate all our points,an I feal fairly cerain that he will give the D.5.0. full short. He mentioned the case of Kenneth BAKER, a Civil Servant, who has been wished upon him by the Colonial Office. Kenneth BAKER had already been in trouble in Mauritius. We told Grantham that BAKER was a member of the Comunist Party and that it must be expected that if he obtained information whi.ch he considered of interest, he would impart it to the party at some time or another. Grantham was very disturbed about this appointment and ne intended to mention the matter to Creech-Jones. He had been told previously that BAKER was a friend of Creech-Jones., but had learned subsequently that this was no longer the case. J NT came to see me. He did not refer very such to the past. I discussed his future and raanged for him an appointment with Dick Elis. He then talked to me about BATTERSBY. He didn't think that BATTERSBY was a Suitable saceessor,f for t Wo reasons. Firstly; the present BurmeseI.G. did not like Force 136, as he had received no recogniti for his services during the war. Secondly, BATTERSBY would not be very popullar owing to his previous association vitth Burmese Communists, who Were operating with Force 136. I said that T though the arrangements that ve had made wonlld have to stand or fall on whether Aung San & Co were prepared to accept BATIERSBY: they had a renutation for frankness, and I imagine that if 36 they did not like him they would say so. BOURME and I had unchn with Vickery, The lat er is being pnerared by I.P.I. for his mission to Delhi. We subsequently saV the D.G.; his terms of reference for BOURNE are being yorkced out by I.P.I. and letters are being written to D.I.B. the High Commissioner and Symon. Meanwhilel. T have received a letter from 'George' Jenkin, Which II showed to Vickery. Jenkin does not think the moment ooportune for an approach to Palcistan until the new Government is established. will watch for an opening, consult the Governor, and malce an approach, if we agree. In order to do this he is prepared to stay on a mon Or 50. He is also prepared to consider an appointment as our 2 aison officer if he is persona grata with Paklatan. He flet there was some slight doubt about this as during recent months he had been forced to be pretty tough. In spite of this, however, Palistan were apparently nibbling at a proposal to make him D.I.B. Pakistan. I have sent him a wire seving that we agree to his proposals and that cert in advances had already been made. I am following this u with a letter in which E explained that D.I.B. Delhi have asked whether they can pase to Pakistan such records in their files as affect the Pakiatan area, and whether we woulld be prepared to deal with Pakistan on a liaison basis under similar arrangements made with Hindustan. T.P.I. have replied in the affirmative be too41 these requests. THiS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED 18th July. IN DEPARTMENIT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS Derbyshire came to tell me adbut9sa Polish Huqust 20(0 conneetion with one MARKOWSKI, which seemed to be developing on satisfactory lines. E thought we ought to fade gradually out of the ta lked to him about "SHARKEY" and said that picture, although we ought to see what he had to say since his return from Paris. 37 I saw Howe and spoke to him about Skerdon. He was pension entirely arrangements cordial, could provided be made. the necessary He, in fact, thought the idea would be of mutual advantage. T saw Lennox and Courtenay, N.I.D. Courtenay had apparentlyput Lennox in touch with a Russian named MECHNIKOEE, who is Naval Air ttache. It did not Been to me that the conneetion was lkely to lead to anything - from what I could gather of MECHNIKOFF'E back ground, it was more likely that he would attempt to buy up Lennox, than that hennox Wo uild ever get an opening for buying up MECHNIKOFF. T told Lennox that T did not mind him doing this, (it was in fact difficult for me to object in the circumstances) provided he let us know what transpired at any of his meetings. 19th July. Butler came to talk to me about Stephens. He rather thought that we ught to try and get him over here. He felt that while his firm could help represent in the Stephens background, as this they would should prevent not actually him, ICK Butler, from giving evidence. He could arrange for another firm to handle the case, touch with that Stephens, our main but difficulty that I would was to try get and into think of a way of doing this. I went over to the Cabinet Offices, where I BaW Murrie and Burgess, the Establlishment Officer in the Cabinet Offices. They were worried about the case of Stephen BODDINGTON, who had been taken on by Lemaitre in the eoonomic plannin Beotion set up under Bowden. Boddington, who was an under-cover member of the Communist Party and had taken a considerable part in planning the party's economic policy, would have access 38 to information of considerable importance. We felt that he should be removed. I suggested that the Board of Trade might recall him. We did not wish to discuss the matter with Lemaitre who had, in fact, been responsible for taking BODDINGTON on, knowing that he had been previously conneoted with the Marx Memorial Library. We would prefer that Murrite should simply say that on information received, the Cabinet did not think that BODDINGTON was suitable for his present employment, and that the Board of Trade Mianted him back. BODDINATON was taken on without waiting for the resultor our vetting. He is a close associate of Arthur Ewing, also a Civil Servant employed by the Economic Committee of the Communist Party. 21st July. I Baw the Military Secretary and asked him to extend WINTERBORN's attachment to us until 1949, when he would retire from the Army. Meanwhile we should like him made a local full Colonell in his capacity as H/S I.F.E. We would take over his pay and allowances. The Military Secretary said he would like to refer this matter to his staff, but that he aaw no difficulty. 22nd July. Hunt came to see me, when we discussed the latest developments, namely, the assassinati of Aung San and five other Burmese ministers. Hunt was very concerned about the part played to by U certain British officers in suppllying arms the whole Saw, who waB Hunt bellleved should to be be at back the in back of coup. Rangoon by Sunday. He had seen Ellis, who wanted to see him again on his return in October. .D.G.Meeting (see folder) 391 Murrie and Drew came to see me about BODDINGTON. I got Hollis down, who gave them the full picture. It seemed to LIS all that there was a clear case for the dismissal both of BODDINGTON and EWING, in that they as responsible civil servants were actually assisting the Economic Committee of the Communist Party to frame its policy. Tt was th ought that the case would have to go up to Bridges, and possibly to Morrison, and it was agreed that if necessary we would B tate the full faots to the latter. 23rd July. sav the Military Secretary again, when I wi thdrew my original letter and substitute it with a request that WINTERBORN should remain on the military establishment of SIFE as a G.S.0.2.. and be paid by the Army until his retirement in 1949. This vas agreed and an undertaking was given to promote him to the local rank of Colonel. Reggie Gibbs came in to Bee me about certain seounity matters affecting atomic research and the provision of a particular kind of oke from Hollana, which was heing done through Shell Petrolleum Co. ibbs and half a dozen others had been asked to sign the Official Secrets Act form. Gibbs! point was that no suspicions would have been arouded if this request had not been made the business could have been quite normally explained. I got down Collard, who said that he would look into the matter: I think he will find Gibbs a useful contaet. 24th July. I sent to see Maxwell about PUTLITZE naturalisation, He said that he aav no vay of getting over the statutory regulation of yofive years residence. He might, however, be able to stretch a point if the various periods during which PUTLITZ had resided here were not continuous. He could not, however, include the period of his employment by the German Embassy. I said that we would let him know what the sum total of the other penioas was. He would then reconsider the case. 25th July. I attended the Deputies J.I.0. meeting this morning. A 150 cut of Military and Air Attaches was under discussion, with a Treasury representativ present. We were only ffeoted in SO far as A.M.A. Beirut was concerned. I said that Dick White vas in the Middle East and would be considering the case locally. We thought that it would he B great mistake to remove this officer; his Services were of considerable value to S.I.M.E. Beov Geoffrey Jenkins 18 back on leave. The leakage case in Egypt has blown up in a big way and someone is to go out from the Foreign Office to look into it. Dick Butler came to see me about a wire he had received through the War Office from Stephens, asking for legal representation This presumably means that Stephens is to be court martialled. 26th July. Cussen and Dick Butler came to disouss the Stephens case with the D.G. It was agreed that an attempt should be made to get Stephens over here, and that failing that Cussen shoulld go out during the next weekend. 28th July. Dick Whi'te returned from the Middle East. It has been decided that Magan sha1l take over SIME in Kellar's absence. Everybody in the Middle East regrets Kellar's departure, and there is no doubt that his stock and the stock of the organisation is very high. Bill Wright will take over in Palestine Kellar is on his way home by sea. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Aucusi 200 Vickery came to talk to me about Krisna MENON, to has been recomended by the Viceroy as High Commissioner for the Indian Government in 7on. MENON. is, of course, closely Evociated with POLLITT and PAIM DUTT: apart from this, he is a base intriguer and an undeirable from every point of view. I said that I thought we ought to oppose his appointment by every possible means. Vickery only heantof this matter by accident, although the India Office had known what was in the wind for a weekc! 29th July. Hughes came to see me before leaving for Kuala Lumpur. Bourne leaves to-day for Delhi. D.D.G. Meeting (see folder) 30th July. Vickery and I Bab/ Bowker, who is to be our High Commissioner in Rangoon. I told Bowker about our orrangements and also about the S.I.S. proposals. He seemed quite happy and was quite prepared to have our officer on his staff. Boothroyd looked in and I put him in toud with Dick Butler. He is prepared to give evidence on Stephens's behalf. 31st July. I saw Vickery, who suggested that he should write a personal letter to Pillai (?) about Krishna MENON'S appointment. This he could do as until to-mornow he 1s a servant of D.I.B. He proposes to state what he believes to be the full implications of this appointment and its effect upon our future l1aison. I spoke to the D.G., who agreed to this course. We covered a lot of ground at the Appoint- ments Board. As regards Ceylon, UREN'S name is suggested. A decision was reached to centralise the work of the three A.L.Oe in England in London. I pointed out the effect that this might have on Chief Constables - it was more psychological than real, and I emphasised the desirability of putting it across to them in the most palatable way. It had originally been proposed that the Home Office should send out a circullar. It was thought that Furnival-Jones should sueceed Jo Archer. Miss Hardman Jones came to say good-bye. 43 Kelllar returned. He does not look too bad, and T hope he may be fit within three or four months. 1st August. I discussed with the D.G. the desirability of getting tan opinion from Buster Mi1mo on the proposals of the International Red cross re civilians in time of war. The D.G. has agreed. 9th September. FRIPP came to see me. He has just arrived back from Singapore. He thought that, generally speaking, the ituation in Malaya showed some improvement, and that with the new constitution things might settle down. The new constitution not only restores a good deal of power to the Sultans, but gives them certain additional powers. Singapore remains outside the Federatin and it is the fear of the Malaya that they will be swamped by a Chinese invasion. On the other hand, the Chinese born in Malaya will have Federal citisenship, as will also those who have been long established and domiciled in the Colony. FRIPP has two jobs in mind. One in Java and the other in Malaya, He will take one or the oh r unless there is anything more attractive fos him in this country. He wondered, for example, whether the J.I.B. had any openings. I said that I would make enquiries, Bince even if they did not want a rubber expert, they might be very glad to get in touch with him and give him certain assignments if he was situa ted in Tavav Alternatively, he had thought of one of the colonial developent scheme, but he dnbbted whether he would be regardeddas young enough for this. He then outlined to me certain greivances about his finances. I asked him to cff put this in writing. 6th September. Vivian cang me up about Jane AFCHER. I said that I had not been able to see the D.G. as he would only be returning on Tuesday, but that I would speak to him and then let Jane ARCHER kow what she waa to do. 8th September. A telegram has come in from Bourne, drawing our attention to the publication in the Pakistd Times of September 4th of a facsimile of a O letter,date July 8th, written by "George" Jenkin to myself on the subject of our niaison with Palistan. This had been written up in a leader, implying that there was some spy plot of the British to sabotage the Pakistan Govern- ment. This was followed by a telegram from Singapore, saying that a similar copy of the letter had been published there. There iB in Sact only one paragraph of the letter which might be capable of Binister construction, but my letter - to which Jenkin's publishad letter is a reply - completely dispels this idea. It WO ulld be neither possible nor desirable to publish my letter, which can only raw further attention to things and which also deals with other matters, publicity for who Would be undesirable. I telegraphed to Bourne telling him that I shall be sending him a copy of my letter, and suggesting that it was fore consideration whether it should not be shown both to Sanjevi and to Ahmed. I have also suggested that someone,other than Bourne,migh think it advisable to get in touch with Jenkin, who is at present at the Cecil Hotel, Simlap he woud obviously be the best person to aavise as to how the matter should best be handled. Lastly, I have arranged through Hill and McCullogh that if any paper asks whether they can publish the letter here their attention 78 shoulld be drawn to D. Notice No. 1, and that we should be informed. Bamford has spoken to the C.R.0. who feel that the really important point is to put ourselves right with the Palcistan Government. On this I think we are all agreed. It is difficult to see how the letter leaked, unless it was photographed before Jenkin put it into the envelope, or subsequently opened fore it got into the India Office bag. It was addressed to me at Box 500 and sealed in hree places. It was apparently sent by ine India Office to Parliament Street Branch Office, who passed it to S.W.D.0.. who sent it up here with the Box 500 mail. There is little likelihood of it having gone wring after arrival in this country. The envelope is being examined by our laboratory. 9th September. The D.G. and Patterson returned from East Africa, where they attended a special confer- ence of the East African Police, under the auspices of the Governors' Conference. As a result, I think the Police Forces will do more to build up their Special Branches, The D.S.0. is to receive copiebllof algOtHeir reports. He is to havatanothey offidertAal two more female staff. IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 AuqusT 2010 I also shoved him and Newsam a file on HINDMARSH, who used to look after the welfare of internees an the Isle of Man and at the Beltane Schools. HINDMARSH has become a director of a company formed by Leopold HIRSCH, the Abwehr agent, whom the Home Office have been trying to get rid of for months and years. HIRSCH is esorting to every form of legal action to prevent his deportation. At my meeting to-day we discussed the question of making white cards for those concerned with 46 atomic energy research establishments. Pobter announced that he made about 3,500 cards, but that he had over 7,000 named uncarded. The purpose of these white cards is..to draw our attention to any individual in atomic research concerning whom there may be adverse information subsequent to his vetting for original employ- ment. This would be to some extent covered if the police would undertake to ascertain the whereabouts of any member of the Communist Party who came to our notice. This is, however, a commitment which at the moment the Metropolitain Police are unable to accep.. I said that we should make an attempt to reduce the numbers and confine our carding to actual scientific workers and their secret- arial staff. This could do ubtless be done in consultatior with 0.2. and the Ministry of Supply. It does, however, raise the issue as to whether workers in atomic research are any more important than workers in bacteriological warfare or other forms of armament. I suggested to Hinchley-Coole that he might consider the possibility of arranging another party with the Immigration Officers, several of whom had expressed their appreciation of their former visit. Harry Allen explained that certain of them were being enrolled in the Port & Travel Control Group, which is now a unit of the Terrbtorial Army, and this would create a useful bond. It might provide an occasion for further talks with the Immigration Officers. The D.G. saw the PM. at the latteris request, After beating about the bush,by asking questions about the Fascists, he came to the real point. He had apparently been spending a holiday in Wales in the house of one GOUGH. GOUGH had written out a long memorandum of complaints about M.I.5. This is the GOUGH of the famous GOUGH 6ase, which caused us such a lot of trouble during the war in the Caribbean Area. It all started by precipitate American action, aubsequentiy GOUGH had been seen on several occasions by Hinchley-Cooke, when it 47s] became clear that he was suffering from perseeution mania. This has been confirmed by GOUGH'S doctor, who actuallyeam up ah his own request to see HinchreyCooke. Little Clem is being informed! THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 hucus Dolo loth September. - At the J.I.c.. to-day, the J.I.C. (FE) was discussed. D.M.I. thought that it was desirable to do two things. Firstly, to establish that J. I. C. (FE) was responsible to the Commanders-in- Chief and the Defence Committee. Secondly, the J.I.C. (FE) should be reconstituted on the pattern of London. It clearly had grown too much and was attended by people who were not indoctrinated. Hayter explained that it was now proposed that the Special Commissioner's office and that of the Governor General should be merged. Killearn would disappear and Malcom MacDonald would have responsibility not only for countries in the SIFE area, but also for foreign beuntries affecting that area, such as N.E.I., Indo-China, Siam, et He would be assisted by a high-ranking Foreign Office official, and his office would provide the Chairman for the J.I.C. The other members would be the three Services, J.I.0., ourselves, and S.I.S., if they wished to attend. D.H.I. mentioned a complaint that he had had from his Commander-in-Chief that when AUNG SAN was murdered,he could get no appreciation of the situation in Burma from the J.I.C. I said that I could not understand this as we here had received a number of telegrams from our representative in Rangoon, which had been repeated to Singapore. Off the record, Hayter told us that the Chiefs of Staff had instructed Bevin to go all out for Cyrenaica, which if we got it would be our Middle Eastern base. It seems to that Bevin will have a difficult job, since the moment he asks for Cyrenaica, the Russians will ask for Tripoli. If they do not, they will certainly object to our going to Cyrenaica. Dick gave us an account of his last B. Mtg. 19 when Potter to was severely attacked. come the meeting to get concessions He from had B. Division, owing to his staff crisis. handled the position somewhat tactlessly, He suggesting that his troubles were to a con- siderable extent due to the stupid nature Miss Weldsmith by her christian name. to appeal She He was rash enough mentioned at one were moment of a trivial kind. The to of examples the enquiries he made by the sections. 't replied you somewhat stiffly: "Well Mr. Potter, 21 you. really We want have to alll now received what I feel I will king I us to recruit our friends. a notice my should friends not that dream of suggesting to Personally any of Registry in its present they should state, come since into it the was no scope the signal to anyone for a of general any intelligence". offers This was I told the D.G. that in my view onslaught. the trouble run T explained before the to him how the Regiatay many had been fundamental and had existed for years. outbreak of war war had and been how its failure at the ever, system for rather better than for to the attributed lack of staff. to the employed changed and in a the staff process. of worse, some While 350 the Women system had had How- been been appeared to have served us well during broadly the it war', hhd while we were carrying such heavy vetting fr or nitments, the I had always had doubts about pot lay in L.Us. Intelligence point of view: the crucial it indefinite informa If you had an index with a L.U. to on indefinite tion informat: and you tion, were it effecting was H of this necessary could only have be something done by an to bridge the knowledge gap - intimate Registry system to was impossible for members of the the it subject. According to the present belt. were all working, acquire so such to speak, knowledge, since they We preferred a system where on a conveyor the girl went to tthe index to solve an Intelligence which problem, she with the maximum amount of information could acquire. It was only this way go that good Intelligence results could be obtained. I thought, therefore, that some compromise in the present system was necessary. I told the D.G. that a small committee of B. Division had bone into this question pretty thoroughly, and that the file vas now ready for his consideration, with the criticisms of Horrocks and Potter. It seemed, however, that it would be impossible to deal with the question until the D.G. returned from America. l1th September. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Aug 2010 - At the Appointments Board we saw Keene, We decided we could not give Keene immediate employment; that we would give six months run, and that we would take on 12th September. I saw , who is looking for a job. I suppose there is nothi, that we can offer him. I am, however, trying to see if S.I.S. would care to employ him of which he has Considerable knowledge. Dick and I saw the D.G. Bridges has agreed about compensation to PADGHAM, but feels that P. shoulld give us an outline of that he intends to do and how the money will be spent. P. wants to go to America after getting British naturalisation kxopiaxthexpoponxtnxistyoxotuorkoougeerx SI I saw Dick and Bamford on the subject of Jenkinb letter to me published in the Palcistan Times. It was decided that I should send a copy of my letter to Bourne, in spite of his telegram saying that this was no longer necessary. The letter should be shown by Bourne to Sanjevi and to our own High Commissioner, and a copy of it should be sent to the High Commissioner to Pakistan to show to Ahmed and, if he thought fit, to Liagat Ali, who had sent for the editor of the Pakistan Times. The editor was told that Liagat Al1 Hnew all about the proposals foreshadowed in the letter and that he must pipe down. E ford says the editor is very strongly Left dog, if not Communist: he is obviously trying to make mischief. Meanwhile we are no nearer to discovering how the leakage actually took place. We really require Jenkinee end of the story. 15th September. I had lunch with David Boyle, after which I went over his establishment, which struck me as being very efficiently run and probably as water-tight as he can make it. I asked whether the Foreign Office and other Departments profited by the highly expert knowledge of his staff. It seemed that, with one exception no tests were ever carried out. I suggested that we might test our mails, b nning with SIME and SIFE. Boylee said the he Would be quite ready to carry out this work on our behalf. His department would like to have our letter before it isdespat.ched, and the envelope subsequently returned to Dthem unopened. ORIGINAL ALDOCUMENTRETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 16th September. PUBLICRECORDS I discussed the arms traffic at my meeting 2010 te- 1958 Aua day. On the home front it seems that the machinery for this is satisfactory, except that we have no informant and no H.O.W.8. examination of export licences was not. Our there- 57 fore likely to be particularly productive. Neither were we in a position to pass on this important by-product of Intelligence to the Services. On the foreign front I thought it was necessary to get our D.S.Os to take stock of the position locally and let us -know what dumps they had, what pilfering was going on, and how far those responsible were carrying out their duties in regard to checking export licences and guarding duinps. We coult then consider taking the matter up with the J.I.C. They have decided to abandon the white.card system, except for the Intelligence Services. L.S.I.C. and a very small nucleus in Atomic research. 17th September. The D.G. left to-day for Canada and the U.S.A. At the LI,C. tp-day we discussed Hawtrey's memorandum, which approaches the Russian pro- blem by drawing a comparison between our attitude to "Mein Kampf" and our present attitude towards 'the speeches past and Present of Lenin and Stalint In "Mein Kampf", Hitler teld usxexactly what he was going to do, and did it. Nobody paid much attention until the war started. Lenin and Stalin made the position equally clear, but there is a tendency to dis- regard their varnings. There is certainly - something in this approach, but the memo- randun is badlly written and is, I think, mow adequately covered by a note already issued by the J.I.C. to the Chiefs of Staff which Bevin, for some reason, does not wish to be shown to the Cabinet Ministers. It was decided that a note by the J.I.S. on the basis of Hawtrey's thesis should go forward to the Chiefs of Staff and that a renewed request should be made to issue the J.I.C.' 's note. to the Defence Comnittee. Kenneth Strong told me that last Thursday he had lunch with an important journalist of the Kemsley group, who had told him that he had 53 read an important scoop that his paper had intended to publish the following Sunday which related to the cutting down of armaments, and in his opinion must have leaked from a high- ranking Naval officer. This is interesting since it narrows the leakage down to a period of about twenty-four hours. The document was only issued on Wednesday. There is a fright- ful TOW going on and the P.M. has ordered enquiries to be conducted in all departments concerned. We have been drawn in. I told the meeting that, according to a tele- gram we had received from Singapore, the J.I.C. (E) had refused to express views on the hmese situation after the assassination of Aung San, as they were not in possession of -Ly of the Governor'g telegrams from Rangoon. I explained that all our telegrams were repeater to Singapore and were in the possession of the J.I.0. Furthermore, the S.0.I. had drafted his telegram to the D.N.I. on the basis of our information The matter is to be discussed t the next meeting, the general opinion being that the Governor of Burma's telegrams shoulld have been repeated to Singapore. D.M.I. was gloomy about the situation in Greece where the Communists seem to have made con- siderable headway. D.N.I. stated that a Yugo-Slav renegade had give evidence to the. effect that the mines in the Adriatic,whicl some months ago led to damage to our destroyers, were in fact laid by the Yuo--Slavs immediately prior to the incident. Ts man may be used as a witness for the International Court. THISI A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED NDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 OF THE RECORD? ACT 1958 Auo Rolo I saw Hilll about the leakage case. Boddington is sitting in on enquiries in the Admiralty. Meanwhile. Eric Speed has asked me whether we can give them an Officer to assist in the War Office. I explained to him that I thought the focal point was in the Admiralty and that as soon as we had finished there we should be very pleased to give him the services of the same officer. This I thought would be advantageous. Speed said that unfortunately he had been inst- ructed to get on with the job. I then .suggested that he might place his officer in touch with Hill, s0 that they could discuss the general lines on which the enquiry she be conducted. If necessary H1ll would sit in on the more important interrogations, NutI was anxious to avoid this if possible as he could ill be spared. 18th September. Frino came to see me. T told him that Kenneth Strong was unable to give him any employment in J.I.B., but that if he were going to Malaya or Java he would be glad tb establish local contact, since rubber was a subject in which his department wa's interested. Viv rang me up to ask me whether I had seen Jenkin's letter in the Pakistan Times, to which the answer is "I'll say"i! 19th September. Max Knight tells me that he has a rather promising case. His agent, M.24, looks like getting an espiohage mission -- probably abroad. Harry Allen, who attended the Deputies meeting of the J.I.C., tells me that Bevin has asked for a note from the Chiefs of Staff on the strategical implications of an immediate SS ithdrawall from Palestine. The note has to be prepared by six o'clock this evening it is mainly military in its implications, but TAR is attending a meeting at 5 p.m. in case any question arises of the internal implications. I said that in such a case the proper authority woulld be the Colonial Office in onjunction with ourselves. I gather that Creech Jones is not altogether in favour of such a course and prefers some via media. If the Government decide in favour of a withdrawal, Which I gather would be temporarily to Cyrenaica, we should have to consider the position of our D S.0., which would depend on the kind of icial representation that would remain in estine. We might, I think, be able to stay in liaison with the Agency. In any case, however, we should have to open a post of SIME in Cyrenaica. Hill tellls me that he has seen the D.G's friend, Dixon, who is on the staff of Kemsley Press. Dison offered to go straight to Kemsley on the question Df the leakage. He thought that Kemsley would give him the answer. Hill, I think rightly, dissuaded him, since it would clearly be difficult for us without letting Dixon down to pass the information on to the Navy. Hill did say, however, that if Dixon got any line from other sources in his office and cared to pass the name on confidentially to us, we might be able to extract a confession in the course of our interrogations. 20th September. TAR and Jenkins came to see me, when we discussed the question of traffic in ars in the Middle East. Jenkins had evidently had a good deal of experience in this. He had brought the matter to the notice of the G.0.C. on several. oecasions; the latter iadubeen sceptical, and Jenkins replied that if the G.0.0. would give him a grant of E50 he would 56 show him what he could buy in the vicinity of Cairo. He was taken up on this and the money was given. Jenkins succeeded in purchasing several machine guns, severall boxes of brand new hand grenate's, and more than a dozen rifes. The G.0.0. was duly impressed, but nothing very much appears to have been done. There is no doubt that pilfering on an extensive scale has been going on for years, and tha't arms are really a kind of currency. Almost every Arab has got some secreted under the floor boards Or in a hole in the ground. Whatever we do, therefore, will be to some extent in the nature of bollting the stable door after the horse has gone. At the same time we all agreed that 't would be a good thing to take stock of the position and to make recommendations for the final liquidation of these dumps, or for the establishment of proper guards. 22nd September. Jo Archer came to say good-bye. He will be a great loss to us in every way. THISIS A COPY ORIGINALDOC INALDOCUMENT RETAINED NIDEPARTMENT UINDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. Aug 2010 23rd September. General Wright, who is the new Deputy Director DT .I.A. (formerly C.I.G. D in the U.S.A. 9 came to see me with I 481ked to him about the general principles of our organisation and said that I was very satisfied with the co-operation between C.I.A. and ourselves and that I was strongly in favour of such co-operation on the gound brnt 57 our various stations abroad. T explained that in advocating this we differed somewhat from M.I.6. in that our offices abroad were more or less open and on British territory. General Wright seemed to be in agreement We have already had explained to us his new organisation, which 1s not really worth describing, Binoe in praetiee I haven doubt that it will be ubject to all kinds of alteration There 1s a great deal of "dissemination, evaluation, and co-ordination" but of course the thing that really matters is whether they have anything which is worth while disseminating, evaluating; or co-ordina- They ng! are It weak. is on Their the production organisation, side however, that as the approval of Congress and the money behind it. In the course of time, therefore, they may produce Botething of value: At the moment probably the most useful Service they perform 18 extensive monitoring of foreign broadcasts. if this more iB done inteldligently a large amount of useful information CEIT be obtained. The Americans have an advantage here in equipment and resources. I went to see Sir Alan Cunningham,the High Cormisaioner for Paestine, and showed him a certain amount of BULLDOG materiel, which he found interestir ting. He told me that he was going to see the Doctor to-horrow and that if there were any interesting reaction he would be glad if T would let him know before he left Monday. T asked him about Wright. He said that While he vas 0f course sorry that it had been necessary to withdraw Bill Magan, Wright Seemed to be doing well. He tod me that the Government decision,o Orl which MoNealts statement at U.N.0. would be based, was an extremely cautious one. As far as I can understand we are to sit on the fence,lsay that neither the majority report nor the minority report were wholly acceptable and that unless something could be thrashed out which would meet with the approval of the najority of Jews and Arabs, we did not intend to continue hoading the babysat 58 any rate by oursellves. I told the High Commissioner abou't the Bella group, whichinterested him quite a lot. He said tha t provided a justification for his aotion against the Revisionista, a number of whom were still held in prison in Palestine. We then talked a lititle about the dayawhe Cunningham was G.0.0. in Northern Ireland. He told me that on one occasion he waB aaked to inspect Eire defences, which he did in full uniform, with McKenna. the Chief Df the General Staff. He often inspected defences in civilian clothes. He also told me that some time in '41, NcKenna had approached Dev and asked 10 what his action should be if the Germans landed in Ir land and our forces in the North, as he fuillly expected, marched down into the South. Dev's reply was mIf you get into a fight and a friend of yours comes to your assistance, you do not catch him by the throatt The High Comissioner was extremely friendly and begged me to come and atay with him if I had oecasion to BD Dut to Palestine again. 2lth September. wildy of L.C.S., came in. I talked toohim about a proposal to abolish the ICIO, which is the successor Df the XX Committee. I said that I thought this might be a pity because once you abolish a Piece of machinery it is always difficult to set it up again. In time of 1t had a particularly useful function, in getting traffic approved. It was also of great vallue as a Forum for discussion: even in peacb time thought that Biscusaion on that level might have been valuable. There was no necessity for the Committee to meet regularly, but it might be a good thing to have it in existence 8o that it can be called if necessary. At the JL.C. to-day we discussed the failure of the J.I.0. (FE) to supply information about the situation in Burma after the murder of Aung San. $7 lle receive telegrams had pointed copies out of the that Governor J.I.C. (FE) of Burma' did not General should be Wright taken It and vas up with agreed the that Burma the Office. matter He about of Committee did his the not organisation passing wi sh General of and Wright Intelligence was gave then visited questioned an reports. outline the to Service with the departments existing arrangements, interfere in by any which way Tave opposite but that numbers. if his representative He passed did, reports however, here to could point their He him said more a copy that,as speedily of these we than doubtless reports they do knew,in they at might present. an reach On to Amnerican thisecount do what organisation 50 people reports would often 500 people do over were here. employed departments. if D.M.I. and D.N.I. got stuok both in said that their opposite numbers were in a agreement, copy of their they had no objection to passing As either regards here or in reports Washington. direct to C.I.A. J.I.C. reports tative to J.I.C. was think left here, Washington. wwerer there open. a passed might The reports, General be throhgh normal some the channel Wright his advantage question represen- seemed i if through the high-ranking officer to be in to charge appoint and a it they intended Oght be af great value to him to see the own iriew is that it would be better to My con- report before it went to Washington. Washington, tinue to send SO the that reports the through the J.I.C. but tive to there give WD an uld have the copy Services entree to the representa- to C.I.A. C.I.A. initial Air representative in London. is at present Evill submitting attended a report the meeting, as he Marshal lapping in Intelligence, exclusive on of over- S.I.S. and ourselves. T Secretary lunched to with the Mungo J.S.T.I.C. J. Buxton, T. who is now 60 25th September. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMEINT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Aug 2(o 6/ 26th September. General Hollis telephoned to say that he was going to America on the Queen Mary on October Lth. He did not want any publicity. He would be glad of anything that we could do at this end. As regards the American end, he had made all the necessary arrangements. I said that we would arrange to give him advice. I asked Malcom Cumming to go over and see his Staff ofricer, Major Stapleton. Cumming discovered that the General had a passport in the name of "Mr. Hollis" but the photograph was of the General in uniform ith all his medals, tabs, eto. What was worse, the Ministry of Defence had appihied for his passage in the name of Lieutenant- General Hollis, eto. etc. and presumably he is S0 recorded on the ship's list which will be available to the Press - a copy of this list will doubtless be handed to the American press in New York. Malcom told them that if he really wished to conceal his identity. the only thing to do was to cancel the passage and to go via Canada. He left them to think things over. I saw Sir Alexander Maxwell to-day. He has authorised the return of NAGY to this country should he get into difficulties. He would be landed conditionally as a matter of form, but provided his behaviour was satisfactory, he would be allowed to remain here indefinitely. xwell thought that wha't was necessary at this stage was for me to record his acquesence and if by any chance he were away during an emergency, to notify whoever might be concer- ned that he had agreed to NAGY being llanded on these terms. 27th September. Operation. GOULASH has been a complete success, not only have we got the book, but the instructions for its use and a special code used for prominent personalities. The 67 informant was much impressed by the napidity wi th which the work was done. Dick White and Hollis came to see me. They want to reorganise the research section, B.1.0., and enlarge it to coven a good deal OT uaC work being done by the B.2. sections. They feel that good as he is at his job on the Intemmgencer side, would not be able to taokle the organisation. Moreovery there woulld be a difficulty in placing certain people him: unfortunately he has almost inhuman characteristics in dealling with his staff. It is suggested, theref ne that M.E. be placed in charge. I am afl ld this will be rather a blow to but it is I think unavoidable. a Gleadell rang me up about/leakage,ond the gist of the Cabinet's statement to U.N.O. on Palestine. Which had taken place in The Cabinet decision was revealed several days in advance by the Bourse Egyptien. 29th September. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Auo 20(0 63 O THE ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DERARTTAENT UNDER SEOTION 8(41 OF THE PUBLIG RECORDS ACT 1968. Aua 2oL0 64f THISIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT DNDER SECTION 3(4 OF THE PUBLIC BECORDS ACT 1958 Au 2010 30th September. Stonfond. came to see me. He told me that his firm, of which he wa8 either Chatrran Director, was concerned with the manufacturr of X-Ray machines, for which tthereavas a considerable export market. The only difficulty was in obtaining the soneens which were made of a mixture of lead oxide and glass. Pilkingtons normally manufacture this and could make in three weeks sufficient to carry the industry for a year. For this purpose they require 1500 tons of coal to start uD their kilns: this they were unable to obtain: Lead oxide therefore, i8 sent by aeroplane to the U. U.S.A A. whence after it has been processed it comes back here and is paid for in dolllars at a high rate. The point, however, of his visit was to tell me that his firm were selling these machines to the Soviet Government and for this purpose were in contact with the representative of the Trade Delegation of the Soviet. To carry out their work, the firm were in close touch with the Research Establishment at Woolwich, which was also engaged on the application of X-Ray to atomic research. If he dropped a hint to the Russians about this connection with the Woolwi ch research place, they might be- come interested and a line for deception on atomic research might thereby be estab- lished. I told him that there was no point in batting the ground for an espionag case against the Soviet officials, since it was common form for anl Soviet officials to collect any information they could, and we were conawquently only interested in those who were on their own initiative actually engaged in some form of eppionage. We did, however, like to know as much as possible about Soviet officials, particullar those who were potential defectors. There might also be something in his idea about a line for deception, and I would let him know about 'this in due course. He then tole me about a friend of his who was in touch with a representative of the Swiss Legation. His friend was confidenti chemical adviser to the firm of one of the biggest chemical firm on the Oontinent. He had lent money to the Swiss attache, form which he had ant I.O.U. It had not been repaid, but they had come ti an arrangement, by which the Swiss attache passed him any file from the Legal to which might be of value ot him in,his in, his business. Stopford said that if thereis was anything particular that we CantedDfr from the Swiss Legation, he could robaply get it through this channel. OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Aue 2010 66 Jenkins came to see me about an agent of his with whose services Magan wished to dispense, owing to information that he had received from Carstairs that the man had forerly been in Russian pay. All this was knovn to Jenkins, who is running a man as a double-cross in conjunction with the Egyptian Police, who pay 606 of his salary and actually handle hhe individual. A good deal of information has been obtained from this man, which has been of value, even though he may be a scoundrel. To drop him now would seriously embarrass Jenkins vis-a-vis the Egyptian Police. A telegram has been sent to Magan, urging hhat nothing should be done until Jenkin's return. Geoffrey Wethered came to see me. I asked him how he was getting on and what he thought of Foreign Office security. He said that he was enjoying his job and that the Foreign Office security did not look quite 8O bad as it might appear to this department. There were many difficulties and many serious deficiencies, but he thought it was improving and that if they could finally get through their establishment it would improve still more I explained to him exactly what our interests were. Firstly, we liked to see F.O. security on a sound footing as otherwise it could make nonsense of our WO rk here. Secondly, it was important to us to know Immediately if they had reason to think that a leakage had take place in any part of the world This for ne reason that we were investigating Cabinet leakages and the answer might lieein some- thing that had gone wrong in the Foreign Office. Thirdly, that we did not wish to interfere in the Foreign Office domestic security, beyond the point that if there vere no reasonable explanation of the 1088 of a document, the case became one for this depart- ment. As in the case of Service Depts., we expected the F.O. to make quite certain that before they calll us in everybodys! cupboards have been turned out. but that this gound shoul 67 be cleared at the earliest possible oppor- tunity, since in nvestigating a case of espionage it was often important to get going while the ground vas fresh. He perfectly understood these points, which he thought were entirely reasonable. 3 INDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED THIS IS A COPY ACT 1958. (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS Aua 2010 Horrocks returned from leave. T told him about the case of SHIELDS and asked him to proceed on the lines agreed. 6 lst October. Hinchley has been concerning himself with straightening out the affair's of General Hollis. We have, I think, made the best arrangements that we can in the circumstances, although it seems to me that he will be lucky if he is not met with a battery of cameras on the quay in New York. Wilde came to see me. He had been in touch - directly or indirectly- with Ellis, the No.2. on the Coal Board to Hyndley. He had come to the conclusion that Horner was playing a vel tricky double game, and that it was his intention, in spite of his remarks in the "Daily IVorkertt about Grimethorpb, to bring the whole industry down in ruins. T told Willde that this did not altogether coincide with our views. Ve thought that Horner's action in the Grimethorpe strike was based on the following considerations: 1) It vas in the interests of the Communist Party to get the Government over the crisis, otherwise there might be a Conservative Govern- ment in power. This would not suit the Communists, who were on the whole fairly well place. It would be better for them to have a Labour Government and push it more and more.. towards the left until they obtained power by constitutional means. 2) The Grimethorpe issue was not a good one. The case was weak and the Communist Party not gain gredit with bhe public as a whole if they were to aggravate the hardships of the householder. 3) The Communist Party did not Wisn to do any - thing which, would encourage a heresy hunt by the T.U.C. / I told Wilde to see Hollis, and if Hollis thought fit, to arrange for him to see Ellis and to discover exactly the basis of his fears. Ellis apparently has not discussed this matter with Hyndley, but I gather From other sources that Hynaley is which of the same opinion. 69 At the J.tc. to-day Sir Douglae Evil'e paper waa diecusaed. firat in commttee and afterwards with Evill himself. The Cttee. were unanimous in recommending that M.I.9. and M.T.6. should continue to be members. They advanced two reasons; firstly, that apart from the diseusston of matters Which were direothy their concern, they could by reason of their long experience in ntellkgence matters, give a certain oonm tinuity to the Committee's worl; secondly it was clearly of value to N.I.5. and M.1.6. ta ta know what was in the wind. It was pointed ou't that the minutes of the J.I.0. meetings were of necessity cut down, but that there was a great deal of discussion, both on the Agenda and off the Agenda, which everyone felt to be of value. The Committee felt that it would be difficult to divide itself into L.I.C. (Bperations) and J.I.C. (organisation) on the lines suggeste by Evill, but that they might arrange to give more time to the discussion of final drafts by the J.I.S., and that they might perhaps have an extra sub-Committee to deal with organisational matters. D.MI. was keen about this. He Baid that under present arrangements, Hirsch, who was really concerned with intelligence ma tters, should not have to handle organisationall matters, which were within the province of Fage. General Strong thought that another sub-cttee. ight quite well be formed, but that it should e organised on a subject basis and not on the basis of rank like the Depities meeting of the J.I.C. He thought, that Heads of Depts. might on occasion wish to be prerent them- selves at meetings of the organisntional sub- ettee. It was generally agreed that Evill's new charter, giving the J.I.0. slightly wider powers was acceptable. The Cttee. felt that there was advantage in the present Chairman remaining a member of the F.O., on the gounde that it was important that the Chairman should have a definite. responsibility 1 with o Minilsterial backing. This was preferable to the F.0. merely putting forward its depart- organisation mental view and as a so whole. having a Evilld: smaller did stake not dissent in the from this view, rovided the Foreign Secretary was in agreement. If, on the other hand, he felt tha't the varous matters of defence discussed by the J.I0. were now a matter for the Ministry of Defence, a Ministry of Defence Chairman would be the best aternative. The Cttee. did not dissent from the view that the Chairman should be given a certain loeus standi inthe matter of intelligence organisatior as a whole. In fact this was welcome by the three Da. of I. Germany was cited as an example there the Chairman could usefully intervene. Althoug he did not say so at the time, General Strong vas of the opinion that while it was a good thing that the Chairman should draw attention to gaps or overlapping in intelligence, his powers should not go beyond recommending that those responsible should take the necessary action to improve their machine. He felt, for example, that it would be wrong to sena out a F.0. Chairman to Germany to make recommendation about the improvement of their organisation; he would not have the necessary knowledge to carry out the task. I think the idea at the back of Evill's mind in suggesting that wider powers be invested in the Chairman was that the tasl which he himself was undertaking Duld be better handled by the Chairman of the J.I.C., who had a more intimate knowledge of intelligence matters and could keep them under permanent review instead of waiting until a case arose. I think myself that General Strong is right, and that, aathough it might not apply in the case of the present Chairman, it would be dangerous to give too much power to the Chairman in the matter of telling otherddepartments in the intelligence field how they should run their affairs. Hayten himself felt extremely diffident about giving them any advice on matters of this kind. Mann came to see me. He regrats the departure of the other A,I.0.a. I told him that his job would increase in importance, since he would now be the only' sounding board. T shoma be gllad, therefore, if he would let me know of anything that came to his notice which indicated that C.Cs were not getting the service they felt they were entitled to. He said that the only complaint he had had was that certain of the communications from Glasgow were not being acknowledged. T told him that onmy return from leave I had heard that the practice of aoknowledging letters had been dropped, but that had been reinstituted on the D.G's inst- tions. T should, however, be glad to know of any case where a1e.0. has not received an acknowleagement, Dick, Gwyer, Gecil and I had a meeting to discuss Gwyeris nemorandum on Ireland. We thought that though this Should be bven to C.R.o. tephenson), it should not-be DaBsed on to Maffey. We thought that it might usefully g0 to the Chiefs of Staff, and that we should make arrangement by which we were informed if any matter affecting the future of Ireland bainemap for discussion in the Defence Cormitter or the Cabinet. If they did, it was important that our document should be available. since it would show the very grave risks involved and the opportunities which existed for damage to this courtry, of Which the Germans, by E strok ofmood luck, had not taken advantage. We agree te eceneidor the memorandum in detail and to discuss dt further. 2nd October. Dick Butler came to see me about Stephens. He has made contact with the secretary of the Army Council who is horrified at Sephens' 7u detention Bince April. He said that he would give orders for him to be sent over here at once if the defence required his presence. Butler Said he would not press for this until a summary of the evidence had been taken. He agreed that he would be allowed to come over immediately afterwaras. Meanwhile cussen was going out at the weekend Butler has alsosascertained that in cases of this kind a grant iB often made on application to the J.A.G. This supports the view that we are thoroughly Within our rights in giving assistance. I told Butler that I saw no particular object in discussing the matter with the D.M.I. unless he happened to raise it in conversation. There was nothing really that the DMI could do. Jack Monton came in. T had a discussion with him and Dick. We came to the conclusion that we should attempt to give him F.0. cover since his position with the Air Force virtually made work impossible. The difficult was to find accommodation for him within the Embassy Compound. He thought it possible there might be some reduction of staff. We propose to discuss the matter first with SIS and then approach Haytor. Prior to that we did not propose to say anything to the ACSI. 30d october I attended the JIO Deputy'e meeting. Nothing of any great interest was discussed. I Baw a Mr. Powell on Burt's recommendation. Powell, who was at one time in the CID and later for some years in SB, retired from the police force Bometime ago ab he came into 73 a good deal of money. He was travelling in N. Africa with a friend when it was suggeste to him that the Syrian police wanted the services of a British police officer to reorganise their force. He saw the Minister of the Interior, and subsequently made contact with the Legation in London to whom he gave his credentials. The Job is virtually his for the asking and it only remains for him to fix up a contract. We encouraged him to take the Job on and said hat if he did so we should like to stablish contact between him and our officer 1 In Beyreuth. He is going to keep us informe of developments. 7th october. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION (4) OF THE PUBLIC CRECORDS ACT 1958 Aug 2010 I have had a message from Jenkin via Symon and the SLO in which he say that he will be returning from Bombay on 16th October by the Strathmore if he can make it. f He sees no useful purpose in staying on in India at the moment. He has had no contact with Ahmed 74 Alec Kelllar came in today. We parsuaded him to stay away until 1st November until the reorganisation of B. Division was complete. This could not be finally ratified until the DG returned on 25th october. Boddington and a representative of the Admiralty formerly headmaster of Gresham School, Hold,t who is now an official at the Admiralty, came to discuss their investigations of the leakage case on the cutting down of the services. The story is long and complicated, but they see fairly satisfied that the leakage did not Cu from the Admiralty. According. to the aBsisuant editor of the Sunday Times with whom they have been in touch, information was received from a Variety of sources. This led the Sunday Times to seek confirmation from some highly placed official or Minister. The person they saw waved a document saying "it is all in this". Having this confirmation of their previous built up the Sunday Times went ahead with publication. There is apparently no reason to think the person who wrote the article, who was, in fact, the assistant editor, Haywood, himself, had ever seen the document. This article confined itsellf to the navy as his paper thought reductions in naval forces would be more likely t.o be heeded by the public. The Admiralty are going to wind up their enquiry in the course of the next few days. In th meanwhille a heresy hunt has started in the Ministry of Defence. 8th October At the JIC today we discussed at Some length the report which the Air Ministry want to put in to the Chiefs of Staff drawing attention to the authoritative pronouncements by Lenin and Stalin on their long-term projectives. It is argued that Hitler wrote Mein Kampf which he tried to carry out to the letter, but nobody paid any attention and that it might therefore be as well to give due 75 weight to the words of Lenin and Stalin. This paper presents considerable difficulties since, by implication, it presents a more alarmist picture than the careful assessment of Russian intentions which laa recently been submitted to the Chiefs of Staff. In their heart of heart I do not think any of the members of the JIC like the Air Ministry paper ACSI 18 pressing it because he iB being pressed by the CAS. It was ultimately decided to redraft the paper showing to some extent how far speeches by Lenin and Stalin have already been put into practice. It was also decided to ask the JIS to examine previous reports and conBider whether the JIC should not revise it8 view about the possibilities of war with RuBsia within the next 5-10 years. Previous reports baaed on economic, technical, Scientific and military information tend to ride off the possibility of war for the next 5-10 years. More recently there have been indications that RuSBia may have made more progress in atomic research than we are inclined to think. Personally, I believe that we are too much inclined to think in terms of a direct act of aggression. Things are much more likely to happen by subversive means when it wili be made to appear that Russian domination of any particular country has been brought about through the w1ill of the people, The issue will be clouded and the machinery of U.N.0. will be brought into action. There will be long discussions and any action will be vetoed. It i8 only when this has happened three or four times that the limit will be reached and the Russian bluff will be called. The danger 18 that the RuBsians willll mis- calculate on the extent to which they ane going to be allovred to get away with it. The DMI said that he had been seeing General Savoury, late Adjutant General of our forces in India, who had just returned to this o country. He thought if anybody was speculating about a Simhistar they shoulc take it that a movement for a Silchistan of a very positive Icind was already in being. The 81hs are already concentrating their forces and have been marching out of certain areas in formation with advance guaras, rear guards and flank guards. They have rifles, sten guns and bren guns and, I believe, a few mortars. He think they W1l1 move eastwarde in the direction of Delhi, reform and then launch an attack to recover what they consider to be their area (he did not State exactly what this area was, but T imagine it would be centred on Amritsar). Nenru i8 considered to be too weak to deal with the Sikhs and Savoury woulld not be surprised to see him surplanted by Sadar Patel. The Pakistan forces have come to the conclusion that they are not strong enough to defend both their northwestern and eastern frontiers. They have decided to concentrate on the eastern frontier and keep the tribes at bay by giving them subsidies. Ismay, who is over here at the moment, is being asked to visit the JIC next week. I gather that he is extremely gloomy about the state of affairs in India. Horrocks came to Bee me on various staff matter He Said that there had been some suggestion that U'ren should go to the Far East instead of to Ceylon as it vaB thought that he might be 8 suitablle successor to Bourne when the latter's term come to an end, and that U'ren might be better groomed for Delhi in Singapore. I said that I felt a little doubtful about this as we already had 2 Indian policement in Singapore and were sending a thira, and that meanwhile Bourne seemed to be doing weill and would be prepared to stay on on a Bix monthly basis if we wanted him U'ren is Joining us next month. I then raised the question of the Registry. There had been a Suggestion at the 1aBt DG'B meeting that in order to relieve pressure 77 on the Registry certain categories of correspondence might come direct to sections before being joined up. While I agreed that the present principle was sound since it ensured that action was taken only on complete information it might be for consideration whether the risk should be taken. Horrocks said he was not against this if there was a case for it, and he would examine what categories of correspondence could be treated in this way. He said that the staff position and improved slightly during the last 2 weeks probably owing to the recent regulations Ich imposed restrictions on anybody wishing to change their Job. They now have to apply to the Ministry of Labour and can be drafted anywhere. THIS IS A COPY IN ORIGINAL DOOUMENIT RETAINED 3(4) IDEPARTMENT OF THE PUBLIC UNDER RECORDS SECTION ACT 1958 Aug 2010 75 curry came to see me. He is proposing to write a book, in simple terms, on the Comintern and ite policy in relation to Soviet Russia He is also considering taking on soem work with the Control Commission. 9th October Phillips of NID came over to say that in view of the cuts in the Navy which would be published on weinesday next the First Lord had sent for DNI and asked him to get whatever information he could as to the effect on na ratings. Apparently all short-term Service men are to go and this will mean that long service men will have to spend a far longer time abroad. This clearly will not be to their liking. Further, a number of ships are to be scrapped naval construction practically to cease and Chatham dockyard may be closed down. Lastly, there will be no improvement in the accommodation at naval barracks which, in many instances, is extremely poor. T told Phillips that it was not really a responsibility of ours to snoop on the Navy, but that ever since Invergordon we had to some extent been drawn into these matters aB there did not seem to be any other appropriate organisation to deal with them. This, as far as I could see, arose from the fact that the relations between officers and men in the Navy were entirely differenb to those in the other services. In the army an officer knew his men and generally a good deal about their family life. This is not BO in the Navy, and officers often do not know -what the lower deck is thinking until they start to throw buckets about. Phillips Bhid he thought that was a fair estimate of the positio I said that we would do all we could to supply the information he required, and that I Would send Boddington down to Portsmouth towards the end of next week, and that he might also 77 be able to visit Plymouth. I discussed this matter afturwards with Allen and Boddington and said that while I felt we must help the Admiralty in their present difficulty, we ought to try and devise some scheme by which they could look after their own house. I had in mind that they should select suitable informants, Boddington thought ex-marines, who could work under the iirection of Chief Constables. They would presumably have to be paid, at any rate in part by the Admiralty. I had lunch with who is going on another Visit to Holland. He is anxious to know what we thought about the recent pro- nouncement by Moscow that a Communist Information Bureau had been set up in Belgrade with representatior by RusBia and the satellite powers, Italy and France. I told him that in our view this was a move against the Marshall Plan, and an attempt by the Russians to drive a weage into the west through the two countries which they thought from their point of view were the most promising I rather thought they might have missed the bus in France. On the other hand, the situation in Italy seemed more promising from the Cormunist point of view. We thought it curious that the RuBBians had come out into the open in this way., as it could only have the effect of stiffening world opinion against them themGINALDOCUMENTERET RETAINED INDEPARTMENTH 10th October 3(4 OFTHE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. Aua 2Olo Roger and T went over to see Sir Doald Ferguson, P.U.S. Ministry of Fuel & Power. We handed him a short note on the Communist infllnence in the Miners Union. He said that Shinwell had, of course, been in very close relations with the former. He had So done this deliberately as he thought he was getting more out of it than Hornen.. With this view Sir Donald was inclined to agree He note did which not disagree he thought with represented the terms the of position our fairly accurately. We did not, however, deal with the point which was worrying him, namely a that feeling, perhaps and Horner it Was wanted no more to put than a a limit feeling, on the amount of coal that should be produced as this would leave it within his power to hold up the nation at any moment. Roger said that our evidence did not support this view since Pollitt had mentioned a figure of 230 million. It wasTetetomary, he thought, for the Communists to make a pronouncement of this sort and then take steps secretly to slow down pr oduction. Sir Donald said he thought that many of the Lodges were under Dommunist control. With this Roger agreed. Speaking of Horner, Sir Donald said that in his cups he waB rather inclined to take the old revolutionary line and to hint that he would like to bring the whole place down about our ears. It did not follow, however, that this was his real intention or that he would think it politic to do so. Horner is meeting with quite a lot of opposition in the Union from Bowman who thought he ought to have been made Secretary General. Bowman thoroughly disapproves of the Communist element. Win Lawther, the Chairman, is just the stooge 09 Horner and the Communist members of the Executive. I asked Sir Donala whether he would be kind enough to let us have, from time to time, any information which might come his way relating to lisputes Within the mining industry and of the individuals who were at the back of them. Equally it would be of interest to uB to know what people like Horner and Pollitt vere thinking. He said he thought that for our purpose we should get more information met, and suggested from the that Coal we Board, should see Sir Arthur Street. This we are arranging to do. 8/ Dick, Viekery and I discussed the Indian situation. Vickery had confirmation of the D.M.I.'s remarks about Sikhistan They had evacuated the provinces of Lyallpur and Montgomery on the scorched earth policy and were staying on the eastern frontier controlling certain bridgeheads and threaten- ing to hold up water supplies. Having starved out the Muslims they would go back and occupy their former strongholas. I discussed with Vickery the last letter I have had from Bourne about the incident of the Pakistan Times. He agreed that there was no point in going further with Sanjevi, but that if the High Commmissioner for Pakistan could find out tactfully what the effect had, been on Ahmed and our future liaison it would be useful. Apart from this we .should no nothing except await the return of Jenkin. We had a meeting of the Hollis Gommittee with Bridges in the chair to diBcuss a plan put forward by L.C.S. It was decided to concentrate on the scientific and technical side since questions of dispersal would be difficult to put over plausibly in the present atmosphere of stringency. With regard to a suggestion by the Foreign office that something should be done to counter Dommunist propaganda I said I thought we might try to let them know that we thoroughly understood their methods of achieving their ends by subversion and infiltration, but we regard them just as much ab act of aggression as an attack with weapons of war and that there was a limit to what the Anglo Saxons would stand. The queation of lecturing to the I.D.C. came up and it was agreed that 'C' myself and the L.C.S. Should see the new Commandant, Air Marshal Slesser. 13th October 1947 V Coll. Wilde came im to see me about the meeting on deception I told him that I thought that on the whole, I thought it had been quite satisfactory. He then made a suggestion about putting out some document under a Cominform heading. I said that I thought this would be difficult at the moment since we knew So little about the Cominform, its organisation and methods of communication. 14th october (4 ORTHE PUBLICRECORD ACT 1958 (ua 2010 Viv rang me up to kow whether I had heard or Thakin Nu's arrival in London. I said that I had not heard anything about it, but would find out. I subsequently heard that he was coming to sign the Treaty. Viv'e idea was that ve.might pursue with him the request that he had made to our D.8.0. that he should be provided with. Some experienced officer to set up an Intelligenc Service in Burma. I said that I would think this over and let him know. I saw Maxwell on cases. He handed me back the B.3 document about the Bella Group which he had read with interest. I sav Sir Eric Speed about the case of Jack PARINE. I said that we had what we consideed to be conclusive evidence that PARINE was a registered member of the Communist Party, but that if he was contemplating action we should prefer to obtain confirmation by other means in order to cover our sources. This seemed desirable in any case, since it would be the first case of this kind that would come before the new Minister. Speed thought that basically Shinwell was anti-Communist and might therefore be quite ameanable to action being taken. He did not, however, know $i3 very much about his new. Minister, though his first impressions were good. He said that as soonaswe had obtained confimmation he would get in touch with Bridges and ask for guidance I told him that there had been a Working Party which had considered the question of Communisti in Government employment. They had put forward certain recommendation regarding the elimination of these people which had been accepted by the Defence Committee. The matter waB to be referred to the Cabinet, but So far we had heard no more. There was, herefore, no positive Cabinet policy on the ubject. Speed said that it would be most undesirable to keep PARINE where he is, and if he moved him it would be difficult to do so without stating the reasons. I agreed to pursue enquiries and let him know the result as soon as possible. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN 3(4) DEPARTMENT OF UNDER SECTION ACT 1958 THE PUBLIC RECORDS 20Lo 344 15th October I discussed the sunday Times leakage case with Hill. In spite of the enquiry in the Aamiralty Hin still thinks that the leak occurred there. He bases himself largely on the statement of the D.G.'s friend Dickson a high official of the Kemsley Press. I discussed with Dick and Paddy Bamford the question of an approach to Thakin Nu. I said that in my view the moment was inopportune. Firstly THAKIN NU would be extremely busy, and secondly it seemed to me undesirable that we should appear in any way eagre to give him an officer to run his Intelligence Service. It would be better, I thought, to let the discussions go on locally with the D.S.0. the more so since THAKIN NU himself had said that he did not wish to consult the Governor in a matter of this sort. I subsequently telephoned Vivian who agreed with our views. At the J.I.C. today when referring to the American and Soviet views recently expressed at U.N.0. on the future of Palestine, the Americans had been asked by us for further details about their proposal that the country should be controlled by an international poliee force, and I gather that we had expressed considerable doubts about the practicability of the plan. The lline adopted by the Russians was consider by the F.O. to be logical. From their point of view, if they had not vaguely supported the ajority report of U.N.S.C.O.P., deadlocle would inevitably have been reached out of which they felt we might have profited. Their one idea is to get British forces out of the Middle East. The aapotion of the ajority report is now certain. Meanwhile, telegrams have been received from the British Ministers in Irag and Transjordon stating that the Prime Ministers of both these countries have expressed their intentions of occupying the whole of Palestine imediately the British troops withdraw. How far Irag and Transjordon will be able to 85 implement these decisions is a matter of Bpeculation. A1l matters relating to the evacuation of Palestine by the British forces and administration are now being considered by a special committee. O.I.G.S. has stated that this will take two years, but the general view is that it would not take more than 8 months to a year. Eight months 18 considered to be the minimum. General Iamay talked about recent events in India. He said that be had searched his consoience carefully and was convinced that unless the Government had been prepared to send several divisions of troops to India and 5,000 administrators with the object of revising our policy and continuing to govern the country for an indefinite period, the decision to hand over in the shortest possible time was the right one. We had been in the position of having respon- sibility and no power. Prior to August 7th there were grounds for optimism that we might sueceed in effectir the transfer without bllooashed. Firstly, Nehru had not gone communall, and indeed, had maintain his position throughout, in spite of strong opposition from other members of his Cabinet. Secondly, the General Defence Council seemed to be working well. Joint responsibility had been accepted for the control of areas hought most likely to be affected by the decision of the Boundary Commission, and it was hoped that this would prevent an outbreak of hostilities. These hopes had been 1ll- founded, Cormunal strife had broken out among the troops and with the police force, xiki which rendered them thbally ineffective. The istuation had been beyond control of British officers who had behaved with the greatest fortitude under impossible conditions. BY September 6th the disturbances had spread to Delhi and an extremely critical stage had been reached. He and Mountbatten g assembled a kind of War Cabinet where decisions were made and carried out as far as the general breakdown in administration woulld permit. Lord Ismay sala that he never thought he would see the day when Nehru Would act with So much courage. In the circumstances he kept his head extremely well, and through orders being given to shoot to kill an uneasy peace had been establlished. Ismay gave instances of Nehru'e ersonal courage when he went down to the camp of 50,000 MuBlim refugees without any escort. Ismay in a general himself state had seen of panic these and people capable who were of almost anything. The marvel was that Nehru was not bor to pieces. orders have now b en given by Mounbbatten that he is to have a guard of Gurkhas and that whatever Nehru's instructions, they are to accompany him wherever he goes. The mass evacuations have to be seen to be believed. Isray had flown low over the affected areas. Columns often as much as 25 miles long could be seen on the main roaas, and were being swelled by smalller columns from the countryside joining the main stream like tributaries. These columns were, of course, a perfect target for attack by oppoing factions. The attuation in Delhi too had, for a period, been extremely bad. There were no communication either by wire or by rail, and the whole commeree of the city was at a stand-still, with the threat of starvation hanging over them. Stabbings were going on all over the place. Ismay had seen a llot of these himself when walking about in disguise as a brokendown quartermaster. He had been impressed by the way in which the few British troops had behaved. At the station he saw two corporals smartly dressed and walking down the platform in step. The whole place waslittered with dead and dying. When he asked them what was going on their only remakr was that the Bombay tran was two hours late. At Lahore, which he had visited on his return, the Black Watch were passing through by train. There was a seethirg and ugly mob on the 8) platform, when two Military Policemen walked down and a gangway was imediately made. Two pipers got out of the train and marched up and down the platform playing a tune. This appeared to paeify the mob entirely, and the train moved out with cheers and salaams. There is a complete lack of intelligence about what is going on in various parts of India, and on several occasions Nehru has come to Ismay with the most fantastic 8 stories about disturbances which have Subsequently proved to be entirely false. In each case Nehru stressed the point that these reports had been received from eye witnesses. D.I.B. is not even a shadow of its former seif. On the question of Sikhiatan, Ismay deseribed the position more or less as we know it. The Sikhs had marched out to the frontier in am orderly fashim with all their goods and chattles, guarded by military forces. The probability was that when they reformed they would attempt to re-occupy their old strongholas, and that Nehru would not be able to control them. They lacked, however, a strong leader. Generally speaking, Tsmay thought that there were some grounas for thinking that the present uneasy peace, which had now lasted close on three weeks, might be maintained, and that things would ultimately settle down. This did not say, however, that the administrative problems to be coped with were not enormous, and that even if decisions coulld be obthinea there waB hardly anybody qualified to carry them out. In particular, Ismay was trying to get Nehru to consider what his defence forces should be and what assistance, either advisory or executive, he required from the British. He had found it impossible to make any heaavay. Everybody was BO taken up with day-to-day emergencies. He doubted 80 whether any British officers, either in the army or the police, would continue to serve, particularly after the vilification which had been heaped upon them after the distur- bances in the Punjab. We now have about three brigades in India, but the strength of the battalions is not more than about 300. Two of these are in Delhi, and the remainder in Bombay, Calcutta and Karachi. So far there have been practicallly no incidents direoted against Bhitish subiecta, but if Nehru cannot hod his poBition and Delhi goes communal the uneasy peace is likely to revert to anarchy and the need for getting British subjeets out of the country may become an urgent necessity. Numbers are estimated at something like 50,000, but it is as difficult to plan evacuation in advance as it would have been to plan in April 19939 for the evacuation at Dunkirk. Many of those British subjects remaining in India outside the official classes have Commercial interests, or are private citizens who have, for some reason or other, decided to settle down in the country. If steps are taken now to compel them to leave the responsibility for their future and for the 1088 they would incur would rest upon the Government. Lastly, Lond Ismay mentioned his own personal position. He had seen a great deal both of Hindu and Musllim leaders and has reason to think that the time is rapidly approaching when he will be regarded with suspicion by both Bides. He feels, therefore, that his usefulness is coming to an end, and that his finall return to this country will not be long delayed. 16th October I gave Hill a file about an article which the Daily Express were proposing to publish on M.1.5. and M.I.6. Admiral Thomson had expressed the view that it did not contram 81 vene any D. Notice and that there was nothing to be done. I have asked Hill to get a copy of the article and consider whether we should not return to the charge. Cumming came to ask me about our new cipher book. In order to prepare this book it was desirablle to let L.S.I.C. look at our telegrams for the last 2 months, in order to see what groups recurred the most frequently. When this had been done they old want to have our present book which would, if they were So minded, enable them to de-cipher all our telegrams. I said tha I saw no objection, pr rovided they were not given any telegrams which contained anything contravential as between ourselves and S.I.S T.A.R. tallked to me about a letter that he had received from S.I.M.E. asking whether the Palestine police knew about (a) and (b) microphones. I said that as rar as I knew they were only aware of the existence of microphones. This they obviously knew on account of C.S.D.I.C. It was, however, just possible that they new something about from Quill or from the facit that COPY defensive precautions had to be taken, RETAINEI INDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTO 17th October 3(4)0 OF THE PUBLIC RECOFD ACT 1958 Hua 2010 IA attended the J.I.C. deputies meeting Nothing of importance was discussed. Miss Russell King told me that head of S.D.E.C. was coming over to see 'c'. Should he be encouraged to come and see Us?. I said if he wanted to see us we should be very pleased to see him, but unless the suggestion came from him II did not see much point in our seeing him at this moment, Since we had no particular proposals to makce to him. I gather that head of his counter-espiona'ge section had 4o been anxious to send another representative to this country. was not in favou of 6his as there would be very little for him to do and the Ambassador Massigli had vetoed the proposal on the grounds that he only wanted one Intellligence Office on his staff. We did not Wish to get involved in this dispute. We are perfectly satisfied with through the flow of information owing to the political situa- tion in France as the moment is not very great. If we had any new proposal to make for closer cooperation and a wider exchange of information there would be some point in seeing I thought it best to leave matters as they are and to get out to lunch after has gone. I would then get From a frank opinion of the present state of French intelligence and the extent to whict it might be penetrated by Communists. We should by then know better through the - results of the municipal elections how things were going. I would also c onsult 'C' and find out what had told him. THISI A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Aua 2010 Roger and I went to see Sir Arthur Street of the Coal Board. He read a note on the N.U.M., a copy of which had already been given to Sir Donald Ferguson of the Ministry of Fuel and Power. He said that our note was, in his view, an extremely good appreciation of the situation in the mining industry. He thought that we ought to maintain very cllose touch and that he should give us any information on general trends or personalities which came to his notice. Lilcewise, he would be glad if we would pass to him any information of interest which came our way, particularly anything which might indicate a change of policy which mi ght well come from the Comunist Party Headquarters. He talked a lot about HORNER whom he thought was one of the ablest Trade Union leaders in the country. In some ways he was a satisfactory person to deal with, Since if he. undertook to do something he was true to his word. Street was fairly confident that Horner was genuinely out to increase production. He d not believe that there was any limit and ne agreed with Us that Pollitt'e pamphlet on the coal industry where he set a target of 27 million tons was genuine and that it was unlikely that the Party would, at the same time, be secretly trying to restrict production. on the other hand, Horner was out to increase wages regardless of whether the industry could carry the burden. Street had represented the mining industry to him as a cake. He had said "now this is your slice. If you want a larger slice you cannot have it without the burden falling on the community as a whole, and this will include all your fellow-workers. The only way in which you can have a larger slice is by creating a bigger cake, in other words by increasing production.! Street had drawn attention on one or two casions to nasty remarks made by Ben RANCIS in the Daily Worker about the Coal Board. HORNER had taken this up and for the time being at any rate the remarks had ceased. Street said that in Walles there was what really amounted to cacanny. There had been talk about increasing the sting by 2' from 25' to 27' at Grimethorpe, but in Wales they were only working on about 13' and an dimmence amount would have to be done to get any increase as the conditions were not So favourable. Another matter 9z which had been vorrying the Coal Board was sabotage. This appeared to be confined to certain pits, the nozzels of hose pipes were cut off, lamps were deliberately broker etc. Street had had exhibits brought up to his office and had show them to Horner. Horner was furious about it and brought the whole of his executive to London to see the exhibits. They were instructed to track down the offenders. There had, however, been no resullt from their efforts; neither had the police been successful in their enquiries. 20th October I took the chair at the D.G. meeting. I discussed with Dick and Vickery a note which had been received from Bourne in which he points out the difficulties of getting any information on internal affairs in India without arousing suspicion. officials in D.I.B. were obviously self- conscious about the whole thing. He thought it unwise to press them, particular since the attitude of 'I told you so' has caused a certain amount of resentment against British officials. THIS IS A COPY ORICINALI ORIGINALDOCUMENTI DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4 OF THE RUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. tua 2010. Balley is apparently on his way home for consultation. A message has been received through Bailey from George Jenkin who has been in Delhi. He has heard from Ahmed who does not appear to be in the least worried about the Jenkin-Liddell publicatio; in the Pakistan Times, and hopes Jenkin 73 will ultimately retun to Karachi. Jenkin takes a very alarmist view about the whole situation in India. He thinks there will be civil war, and that if Pakistan carnot get any help from us or from the Americans she vrill probably turn to RUBSia. 21st October THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL ALDOOUMENTIRETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Aua 2010 O T.A.R. brought Burgess and his successor, Sir Marston Logan, to see me. Burgess is going to the East African Department of the Colonial office. Hinchley and I saw Perks. He said that we ought to see Paice about the Traffic Index. AS regards the Port and Travel Control Group, he vas all in favour of HTB officers Joining it. He had some 40 applications, but he did not think all of them suitable. It was hiB intention that we should have ( was the only way in which our relations at the cream of the I.0.s. He thought this the ports in time of war could work on a smooth basis. He was full of stories about the quality of I.0.S. in the early days of the war. Many of them were totally unsuitable as well we knew. It is satisfactory to find that Perks is thoroughly behind the echeme for a Port & Travel Control Group. I had a meeting with Dick, Holllis and Furnival Jones about the discussion at tomorrow JeIac. on the Intelligence Division of the Control Commission in GErmny. It was agreed that I should emphasise that the present proposal for offensive action against the Russians would lead to strong counter-action on their part. This meant that not only the Contro Commission personnel might be penetrated, but that the RUBsians might regard these operations as a way into this country. We therefore had a considerable interest, and should like to have the closest possible relations with those concerned in the Contro. Commission We might consider sending them an officer from our research section on Russian espionage, and it might further be for consideration whether we should not revive in some form or other the War Room which would include ourselves, S.I.S. and the Americans. Cecil, Dick, John Gwyer and I discussed John's paper on Ireland to which we have made several amendments. 22nd October The whole morning was taken up in discussing the re-organisation and new objectives of the Control Commission with General Lethbridge. It did not seem that we got very far. The fact is without knowing 95 exactly what the situation is on the ground there is very little point in discussing how matters can be improved. One can only listen to what Gen. Lethbridge had to say. I asked about his research section on Russian espionage. I was told that it was working well; that he had a million cards and so on. We know, of course, from Exper- ience, that it has very little appreciation of how the Russian Intelligence Service is working, but it was difficult, if not possible, to say so at a meeting of that and. What is really required is a first- Glass research and anallysis section with properly carded records which can give proper direction to the out-stations, other- wise nobody knows that he is looking for.. If a suspect is apprehended bt the frontier he has to be interrogated, but this can only be done profitably by somebody who has real knowledge of the Russian machine. I put forward our proposals which were on the whole, sympathetically received tet however threw some doubt on the advisability of creating a War Room with the Americans owing to the differeneB which exist TON between G.2., RECORDS ACI 1958. Aua Lo10 I got Col. Rhodes, who attended the meeting with Gen. Lethbrigge, to come round after lanch. He is head of the Operations ivision. Dick and I tallked to him. He seemed very amenable to the proposal that we should lend the Control Commission an officer from our research section. He would also agree to the revival of the War Room if it could be made to work. A proposal is going forward for powers to intern under 18(b). At present there are no powers for holding the Russians. While it is obviously a good idea, it exaifiyikk does carry with it all the snags which we experiences, e.g. the Birkett Committee, haebus corpus, etc. I pointed this out both to Rhodes and to Gen. Lethbridge. qb THISI IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Auo 2010 D.N.I. rang me up about a Canadian of White Russian origin who has served in the Canadian Navy for 20 years, and has been nominated to join the Canadian Naval Staff here under the Canadian High Commissioner. He did not Wish to have a White Russian, and was anxious to say that M.I.5. thought this a bad idea. I said that I did not think he could use our name, but that he could say that it was a matter of common knowledge that White RuBBians were always a target and that although this particular officer might be beyond reproach, it would be difficult to get the idea out of peoplles heads that his origin rendered him unsuitable This would produce a certain awkwardness and might affect liaison. He would thereto prefer to have someone of British origin. 23rd October. Colonel Ford, who was formerly employed here is an Italian speaker. He 1s leaving the Control Commission and is looking for a job. He ig a Regular Army Officer. I told him that there was really nothing here that we could offer hi. 97 I attended the Senior Immigration Officers Conference at Brinceton House and found the proceedings qudte interesting. The Conference is an annual one and lasts for to days. E am sure that ve should be present Et 811 the sessions, since it gives us an opportunity of understanding the difficulties with which Immigration Officers have to contend, and bring to our netice e number of interesting facta. E was only able to attend one morning seBBion, during which the following point transpired: 1. It 19 perfectly DoSSible for an allien to fly from Eine on a visit to the Isle of Man ithout a visa. Once in the Isle of Man he can come uncontroilled to the U.K. 2. An allien who erosses the Eire border into Ulater without a British visa commita no offence against the Allens Order, since so much of it is ultra vires, where it might be picked to Pieces in Parliament. The Only remedy that the Northern Ireland Government have i8 to deport the allen, but for this they would, of course, need to have adequate grounds. 3. The Home office were eonnidering cancellirg conditiona landings for all aliene who have been domiciled here since before the var. This aueaition was put back for further examination and, as a result of Iy being there, the matter will be referred to us before any action is taken. 4h. There vere various complaints about the Traffic Index, which assisted me in opening the matter with Paice. He admitted that the index was three or four weeks behind on accoun't of the large amount of travel during the holiday season. I explained to ham that in its present state t was,f from Dur point of view, practically valueless, since8 alien could come and go before we knew anything about it. 6 Commander Attwood, a Canadian who has been visiting N.I.D. and other aepartments during the laat Bix weeks came to see me before hid return to Canada. I explained to him the general Lay-out of the offiice,and introduced him to Hollis and Furnival Jones. He told mne that in Canada the D.N.I. was responsible for operations and intelligence, and that under him he had two D.D.N.IB, one for operation and the other for intelligence. The general lintelligence policy of the D.D.N.I. (I)is closelly ldnked with the D.M.I. who has some overall charter in this fieba for military, air, and naval intelligence Shaw, Chief Immigration Officer, Port of London, came to discuss wath 1S ways and means Df getting MTKOLATCZYK ashore Wi thout any publicity. we had been notified by the Foreign Office that he had been placed oi board the Bataviat in a packing case, by the Americans, and that he vas due to land on about Friday or Saturday. Nobody knew his identity except the camtain. AB far as T can gather, the authorities want to conceal the method of his escape and to announce Later on that he has arrived here vla the Continent as a refugee. T believe that Some sort of undertalcing Was given to him when he went back to Poland by Winston, to the effect that if he vere in real difficulties he could always seek asylum in this country. It is quite clearly Moscow'a policy to 1iquidate all Peasant Parties behind the Iron Curtain. They have already dealt with PETKOV in Bulgaria, and are now dealling with MANIU in Roumania. MIKOLAJEZYK's turn would certainly have come, and he mus't have decided to give u the unequal strugele before it was too late. In Western Europe it seems to be MoBcow'E policy to Bplat the Soclaliat Parties: this they have already done in Itally with some success since the Left wang Socialist Party. under Nenni, vote tegularly with the Communists.9 There hes been talk in Marsaw, according to an aetiole in the Times, of the formation of a Left ing Interna'tional. This coincided with a visit by ZIILIACUS, who had an inter- view with Stalin. It will be interesting to see whether this new International comes into being. Carew Robinson telephoned to me to say that LACHMANN had now been given permission by the Ministry of Supply bo take up employment Handley Pages works. Robinson wondered hether we had been consulted, since this vias contrary to the order mate by the Home Secretary when LACHMANN was released. I said that, as far as I knew, ve had not been consulted. He promised to send me a copy of the Ministry of Supply letter. 24th October. I attended the Deputies meeting of the J.I.0. T launched with Hayter This IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED INDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Auo 2010 We talked a good deal about things in general. and particularly about Rugsia, told him that whille the proposal o1 the J.I. to eview their conments (?) on Russia' pro- gress in atomie research was obviously sound. I did feel that perhaps we were a little too inclined to think of a possible war with Russia in terms of the atomic bomb. It seemed to me that if war was coming in the next five years, it was much more likely to occur through subversion and infiltration, such as had oocurred in Persia, where things seemed to be boihing up again. If we were faced with the fait accompli, I rather wondered what either we or the Americans would, in fact, do at this moment: the matter would obviously be taken up with U.N.O. vith the usual negative results. Meanwhie the Russians would be on the ground and nobody would be prepared to take any effective action to turn them out. When this had happened in tho or three ifferent places, we should have to say that the limit had been reached. The danger was that the Russians, encouraged by previou successes and ignorant of the psychology of foreign powers, would bluff over the limit and SO drift into war. Hayter agreed, but thought that the threat of the atomie bomb Would loom large in all their calculations, and that they might even draw back if they were told that failune to do SO would result in America OP ourselves using the bomb. He thought that a totalitarian state was perhaps more flexible than a democracy, since it had no public opinion with which to contend and it could lways twist the facts by props- ganda to suit an action. Goebbels, for exnrople, had S0 hypnotised the German eople that what he said one week could be put into reverse the following week. This would be even easier with a backward race like Russia. There is, I think, something in this argument, although the Russians could not afford to lo86 too much space, particularly in view of the foreign factual broadcasts which are now reaching the Russian people. Hayter told me that the B.B,0. O. receive a considerable amount of fan maill from Russia. and tha't the "British Ally", published in Moscow, is passed from had to hand and eagerly read. It is, of courge, careful in what it publishes, but it has recently got away with one of MacNeilt hot speeche's to U.N.O! FAHANOV has ad- mitted, by implication, in a speech on the Cominform. that Russia was not yet in possession of atomic bombs: he complains that the Americans have an unfair advantage. This is not, of courge, conclusive, but on the evidence available it is probably brues ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED INDEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION 3(4)OF THEPUBLICRE RECORDS ACT 1958 Auo 20L0 That silly old blimp Sir Walaron Smithers ( or as LOV calls him. Sir Walldron Blithers!o is asking a question ahout monitoring tele- phone lines. The Post Office are giving a purely technical answer, which refers only to testing of linea, etc. As there might be supplementary questions, I thought Maxwell should be informed. He agreed with the terms of the reply. S/lar. Birchfield, who is going to SIFE, came to see me. He was formerly employed in Ops. B. at SHAEF. He is very well thought of here and should prove a useful addition to Hugh Winterborn's staff. The D.C. has returned from America. He gave mOan account of his travels. In addition to visting Montreal and Ottawa, he has been to Toronto and Vancouver. and he made con tact with a good mnahy of his former police friends, al of whom had proved. extremely co-operative. t Toronto he had been given a large dinner. at which Drew, the Prime Minister of Ontanio, was present and 45 millionaires. He talked to them about the work of the Security Service - in strict confidence He had found that they had the wvildest notions about conditions in this country. He told them that the present Government were nox more Communist than he IPRE himself. They had been reassured to r heer this, as they had evidently got the impression that the old country was going bolo. Commissioner Wood is apparently going in a months time and will be succeeded by Gagnon, the French Canadian, who is from all accountsa first-class man. He certainly gives that impression. It is hoped that arrangements will be made to send over Mc Clellan, who is now in charge of the S.B. of the R.C.M.P. and handled the GOZENKO case under the direction of Rivett-darnac. I have met McClellan; he makes a very good impressia Gagnon had apparently talked about Cyril Milils, whom he evidently disliked. He hoped that we should choose someone else if ve were sending another envoy to Canada. I explained to the D.G. what was behind this remark. The fact was that Cyril Millls had been sent out to deal with a very delicate nu double-cross case, which the Canadians had bungled. In trying to get things back on to who the was rails, considered Cyril had to. comenup be one against of the Ace Harveson, men in the Montreal Pollice. Harveson is a good chap and all right on his own job, but. he knew nothing about double-cross work, and if Cyril Mills had not been there and taken a strong line, the most frightfull bungles would have been committed and the whole of our net- work in this country might have been jeopard. ised. As it was the incident had been smoothed over, but not without some diffi- culty. The D.G. saw the F.B.I. He had a long talk with Hoover, who rattled at him like two machine guns! He had managed to put in a suggestion that the F.B.I. should send over a representative for discussion on Russian and Jewish affairs, particularly the latter, in which they were clearly becoming more deeply involved. here would be He most hinted welcome. that Ladd's presence He also had a very successful interview with the Ambassador lo after a somewhat sticky luncheon Sanby OOPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENTRETAINED NDEPARTMENT UINDERSEOTION 25th October OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. Aua 2010 MIKOLAJCZYK was successfully landed last night without any incident. ERIDPacame to see me. He is wornying a ut a testimonial from here, which he wants sent to KLeinworte if they apply They have offered him a job in the Far Esst an area which so far they have not exploited. I told him that his representations about pay were in the hands of Horrocks, and that he would be discussing the matter vith the D.G. I suggested that when they had reached a conclusion, they should send for Fripp and tell him what they were prepared to do. 27th October. At the D.G. meeting to-day, Furnival Jones raised the question of the twenty Russian engineers going to Rolls. Paynter has made an enguiry. We are seeing that every possible precaution is taken by the Works nager to isolate these people from ayone who could give them confidentiall information. The .G.direeted that the Derby Police should be informed. The D.G. had a meeting with myself, Horrocks, and Dick, whenwe discussed the new plan for B. Divicon. After a good deal of argument it was decided that TAR should go to to B.2. to control Russian espionage, and that Kellar should, at any rate for the time being, take over his old job 'with B.3. It was also decided to put Malcom Cumming into B. Division as head of B.4., as this would p'ive him a chance or experience in a different field. Horrocks said that he could perfectly well get on with Joe Spencer, who would take over Malcom's A. duties. It was decided to send U'ren to the Far East and to move him later, if necessary, to Delhi, or to Ceylon. The Treasury have given a ruling that Indian Police officers with pension rights,who join this depant- ment and wish to be established members, can only take their proportinnate pension from the Indian Police, and not their gratuity If they did not elect to become established members of our staff, they could be temporary members and draw both their compensatior (?) and their proportionate pension from the Indian Police. I raised the question of decorations. I explained to the D.G. that his predecessor had kept the this result matter tha entirely t the first in his I had own known hands, about with the granting of decorations to officers serving in my Division had been the noti- fication in the Press! on one or two embarrassing, occasions I had since found I this thought extremely that others in my Division had better claims. I would suggest, therefore, if he agreed, that when the time came Directors of Divisions should be asked to put Forward recomendations. He entirely agreed that this was the proper way of doing things. THISIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED INDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Aug 2010 /os ThIs IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED NDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. Aug 2010 28th October. Ve now appear to have got as far as we an in the case of Paul FIDRMUC @ OSTRO, who caused us SO much trouble and anxiety during the War. We had during the war made a careful analysis of OSTRO's ISOS traffic, in which there were fairly frequent references to information from this country. We have come to the conclusion that in the main it was so. trivial and so grossly inaccurate that OSIRO must just have been making up 62 stories based on little snippets of information that he got in Portugal. Occasionally he hit the nadl on the head, but we felt that this was likely to be purely fortuitous, wince Buch facts were always hedged about with alternative poSsibilities, and other facts which were wholly inaccurate. e e were, therefore, considerably shaken hen FIDRMUC was repatriated from Portugal and subsequently interrogated by the Americans. He then explained in very considerable detail that he had recruited a Czech named Rudolf Eranz RATSCHITZKY in 1937 or 1938, from Whom he had been receiving reports since before the war. RATSCHITZKY was employed in the U.K. during the war in a variety of capacities. It was alleged that a good deal of his information related to air matters, and that he obtained details about our production (0 and About our operations through the Head of the Czech Air Force, JANOUSHEK, and that the Czech Minister, Prince LOBKOWITZ, vas also involved. Communi- cation was by secret ink on the wrappers of periodicals, propaganda material, eto. This agent was known by the name of TOR, and nobody in Germany of in this country k ew his reall name except OSTRO. On the basis of this information, RATSCHITZKY vas traced to the U.S., where he vas interrogated by the F.B.I. and Miss Gh01 Chenhalls Whiille he showed slight confusiion at the Dutset when asked if he knew Paun FIDRMUC, he subsequently denied vehemently all charges that he had acted as an agent of the Germans during the var. He began by saying that he did not know Paull FIDRMUC, but shortly afterwards confessed that he did and said that he had misunderstood his interrogator on account of his mispronounciatio of the name; this may oP may not be true. The whole of RATSCHITZIY'S career was most carefully gone into, his methods of receiving money, etc., and a check was made wherever possible. In no single instance was RATSCHITZKY found to be lying. With this information Klop returned to the American zone for a further interregation of OSTRO. The latter stuck to his original story, but was broken down in one or two aterial points. We feel, therefore, that as he was bowled ou't on these important items, his other statements must by necessity be treated With reserve. He had claimed to have received the correct news of D. Day before the 2nd June, 1944, although he did not get the exact date when thexitade on which the information was posted in the U.K. When told that it could not have come to him in a May copy of a booklet, as he had alleged, since air mail from the U.K to Lisbon was suspended from Manch to June, 194, and all other mail subjected to approximately three or four weells delay 1o7 he said quickly: "Printed matter was not delayed" When told that waa 80, he said. "Perhaps it could have come through Dipomatic channelat. When it was then pointed out to him that all dipllomatio privilege was wi thdra on the 27th April, 1941 and corresporence ubjeoted to ondinany examination and the overall delay, he Remained silent. We feel satisfied, therefore, that in this instance he was Iying. and are confirmed in this view by the fact that there was no ISOS message to Berlin giving details of the invasion plan. The other case was concerned with the magazine called the Ironmonger".OSTro cllaims to have recruited In 11938 a Ceech named Frantisek NEJEDIY who was engaged on technical words 111 Ruesita. and to have persuaded him to send regular reports on conditions in the iron and ateel industry there direct to "the Ironnongert magazine in London. On the bacle of these reports were secret writing messages in German. OSTRO allages that he came to an arrangement with Mr. Hartmann, a member of the staff of "The Ironmongeril, that these reports should be readressed to him in Hamburg after the magazine had used what they needed for their own publldcation. Hartmann is aleD ppoaed to have informed OSTRO that British Intelligence Were interested in these reports, and OSTRO was proud of the faet that NEJEDLY'S secret writing messages had failed to be intercepted by the Russian censorship or by BritIsh Intelligence. Hartmann was interviewed; he is now the advertising manager Df the paper. When asked what he knew about OSTRO, he said: "Have they caugh't that old Nazi?i. He said that he and his 8o0 had visited Germany in 1936 - 37, and that OSTRO had arranged their accommodation He had been impressed by the importanoe attached to OSTRO by the local Na z16, and had returned to England and joined (o8 the Territorial Army. He said that OSTRO visited the U.K. in 137 of 138 and had been entertained by him and his wife to lunch. Hartmann said that they had no contributor to the paper from Russia, nor did he know the name NEJEDLY. On the other hand, the information on the Russian metal businese was often included in OSTRO'S OWTI reporta. He summed up by saying that no report came from RusBda or from NEJEDLY. If they had come, they were the property Of the periodical and would not have been forwarded. lastly if any 8D ecial arrangements had been made MP. Hantmann would have remembered them. OSTRO, when faced with these faots, could only protest the truth Df his statements and say that possibly Hartmann was now contraddetirg them as he WSES fearful of the consequences of beiing connected with a Nazi. In the opinior of Dtr Interrogator, Hartmenn vas an entirely honest witness. There were several other Significant points in the reminterrogation Df OSTRO - one in particuller is worth mentioning. In July., 1939, as War was imminent, OSTRO states he asked the Abwehr to make a payment of 21,200 through the German Embassy. DII a bearer chea drawn Dn Hambro'e Bank for RASCHTTZKY. He does not know what directions the German Embassy Eave for carrying out this instruction, and it 18 not clear how the Embassy could have done it wi thout being given the name of the recipientt OSTRO was eonveniently vague about the ins structions he gave to RATSCHITZKY to collect the money, and no Clue is given as to how Hambros were to recognise the person to whom they were to hand over the 21,200. The only point in OSTRO's favour is a statement DV him that he did not now that RATSOHITZKY had gone to America during 19144. ThiB makes his previous remark, that the handwriting of the messages he received from Englland in secret ink changed about that time, of considerable Bignifictnce. The final view of Miss Chenhalls and 109 Klop is tha't RATSCHITZKY was appraached and very probably recruited by OSTRO, but they doubt whether he ever operated as an agent whilst in the U.K. RATSCHITZKY states that he never met OSTRO after 1937, yet OSTRO alleges that he recruited him in his home town of Lundenburg (7) just after the Munich crisis in October, 1938, and that they together went to Warsaw to make business connections which might prove useful to RATSCHITSKY later when operating i.n the U.K. It seems likelly, therefore, at RATSCHITZKY was recruited by OSRO between October, 1938, and March, 1939. The recruitment of RATSCHITZKY explains his nervousness when he was first inter- viewed; his refusal to acknowledge that he knew tensiion FIDRMUO'S and tears name at immediately, the beginning and of his his interrogation. The possibility that he did not operate as an agent gave him the nece necessary confidence to continue to deny throughout the remainder of his questioning that he had ever acted as an espionage agent. OSTRO's capacity for invention appears to date-back to his student days: he was given every opportunity for confessing that his agents in this country were notional. He said it would not be easy for him to make such a confession, since it would subseauently be proved that OIs s agents did exist. Klop thinks it possible that as he had several novels to his credit and was writing a new one it might be about spies with sensational "facitsi which OSIRO had confessed to the Allies: to deny these facts now would be to destroy the whole basis of a potential best-seller. Personally I think there may be another reason. Although not having see OSTRO I am not a very good person to judge. Clearly he had built up a veny great reputation for himself with his own people as a master spy he might, there- fore, for reasons of vanity - and indeed for ((o other 2easons, if he intends to remain at peace with his own people and to reside in Germany, feel that the confession that he had deliberately misled the germans, for financial or other reasons, would be likely to make his llife difficult in the future. One additional point seesm to me to stand out. In none of the papers can I find that OSTRO had any personal colllaborators - secretarial or otherwise - this, coupled with the fact that he had an undertaking with the Abwehr, that he would never be callled upon to discuss his sources would clearly have placed him in a strong position if it was his intention to mislead his superiors. He clearly found it easy to lie to his interrogators, since the story he told them himself was one that he had been telling to the Abwehr for four years. We shall probably hever know the neall answer to this story but T fee that we were not very fan from the truth. UINED THE RUBLIC BECORDS AOT 1958. Aua 2010 29th October: TAR and Courtenay came to discuss with me a telegram received from Burma about-our future position there when Burma gets her independence. The D.S.0. feels that this matter should be straightened out as soon as possiible. We have told hir that We propose to take the matter up with S.I.S. and the Foreign Office, and that thereafter he, and possibly also H/S.I.F.E. should raise the matter with THAKIN NU. Hunt came to see me. He seems to beequite UmTirtably settled in the country-and he is prepared to wait until He thinks tha't we are IUI on a very favourable wicket in Burma, and that it would be a mistake, at any rate for the time being, to move John Harrison, who is doing extremely well. Burt rang me up to say that ZIG-ZAG had asked him to meet two Yugo-Stav women jounnalists, who had told ZIG-ZAG that they were receiving E40 a month from the Yugo- Slav Embassy to carny out certain espionage duties. I encouraged Burt to meet these men and let me know what they had to say. -EAG, I gather, is well in funds. He has opened two hairdressers shops in Knightsbridge, in Which he has installed some of his girl-friends. He is proceeding shortly to Tanger on a small yacht, although for what purpose it is not yet quite clear. He seems to be quite prereered to toul Bunt all about his experiencesus IST Ishoud imagine that he is probably gunrunninge HeAiEDin He in close aasociation with WIIMER, the ex-Mayfair boy. FTHEPUBLIORECORDS RECORDS ACT 1958 Hua 2010 Halford rang me up to say that there had been some proposal from the Czeohs about the abolition of the Gzech Visa on a reciprocal basis. Halford wanted to know that our former interest in the matter of visas had been. I told him that Passport Con'troll was really our first line of defence, ince it provided an opportunity of interrogating an alien before he arrived in thiis country. This was the more desirable since the quality of the Immigration staffs had deteriorated. and there was little opportunity for interrogation at the ports. We were, therefore, opposed to the abolition for many reasons and, as tar as I knew, M.I.6. felt the same. We had always thought that the abolition of the French ndnother European visas would be the thin end of the wedge. Halford said that the Foreign Office viewed the presenttsuggestionnwith tiv disfavour, and he thought that they would be able to scotoh it. An alternative proposal had been put UD about the abolition of diplomatic visas. The F.O. did not like this either': they found it convenient to have a gaudy diplomatic visa on their own passports,an they thought that the Czeohs would take advantage of the abolition by sending all sortS of people to this country who were not really diplomats at a11 3oth October. U'ren came to say goobye. He is going to join S.I.F.E. but may ulltimately be posted as S.L.0. India or D.S.0. Ceylon. I impressed upon him the urgency of trying to improve production in the Far East. Dick Butler came in to talk to me about the Stephens case, which he thought on the whole was going fairly well. Therervas only one allegation against Stephens personally, which he did not think was a particularly grave one. 31st October. I told the IaL.C. ve were preparing a report on the attitude of the Russians with regard to Palestine. LIe had though it wise to review all the information we had here and in the Middle East in the light of the somewhat tentative support which the Russians were giving to the Ma jority Report of UUN.S.G.O.P. We had come tentativelly to the conclusion that O there was a good deal of evidence of active support to the terrorists, and a certain amount of evidence, based largely on the support of illegal immigration, of conne otions with the Agency. The Committee Said they would like to have this report and woula then consider whether to embody 13 in the memorandu in the course of preparation by the J.I.S. or to submit it as a separate paper. I also mentioned that we had had a report to the erreat that a special committee had been sitting in the U.S., under Eisenhover, to consider the military interest of the U.S. in Palestine. It was implied that this committee had reached a conclusion that for the point of view of their in interest U.S. would be better advised to back the Jews, since the Arabe seemed to be too divided and unreliable. Hayter said that he would like to have this report, but that he rather doubted the authenticity of the report. Only a few days previously the American Ambassador, at the instigation of Marshall, had called on the Foreign Secretary to implore ls to stay in Palestine. Bevin had turned this down, pointing out that the Americans bore considerable responsibility for the present impasse, but were not prepared to carry the burden. I saw JACK who is leaving in the course of the next fes days for Austria on his new venture.. He seemed a little bit vous. I told him not to worry and that should not be surrisea if his mission were unsuccessful, but we thought that the venture was worth while. je shoud certain. not blame him if nothanz mate ialiseacTion THE PUBLIC REOORDS ACT 1958. Aua 2010 3nd November. For minutes of D.D.G. meeting see folder I discussed at Some length with Dick and Roger the position with regard to Cormumians in scientific and research establishments. Roger has now Eot ou't a list showing how O.P. members are situated. The worst cases Ire at R.A.D. Farnborough and T.R.E. Malvern, but there are odd ones dotted about a large number of other important research stations. My feeling is that unless we bring this situation forcibly to notice, e ve shall be open to serious criticism. We have, of course, told the Services individually about their cases when they arose. II think, however, that it would be a great shook to the J.I.O. if they SaW the Whole ploture. In SO far as the Ministry of Supply is concerned it has apparently been the practice in the past to notify the head of the establlishment concerned bu't not the Security Officer at the Ministry of Supply. The conseauence is that the Ministry is unaware of the large number of establishments which have nov come B under its control, I asked Roger to bring this matter to the notice of the D.G. a't his meeting on Tuesday. At the moment the Ruseiang seem to be concentrating on two broad lines of policy: (i) The liquidation of peasant panties behind the Iron Curtain, They have already got rid of PETKOV; they are prosecuting MAMOIU and his associates in Roumania, and MIKOLAJOZYK' party in Poland has been split, MIKOAJOZYK himself having left the country and sought refuge here. This move seems to be, at any rate in Jugo-Slavia, couple wi th a drive against the Cathollic Church, which the Russians recognise as the most powerful international force in oppoBiition to Communism. On the other side of the Curtain they seem to be concentrating on splitting the Socialist Parties. This was very much the view of T-R, as expressed in his article in the Observer after his visits to Italy and France. InItaly the majority of the Socialist Party under NENNI are voting with the Communists. The furtherance of thi movement has been a suggestion from Warsaw that a Left Wing Socialist International 1s sluruti] IE Formed, which would be known as SOGINTORM his proposal came almost immediately after a visit by ZILLIACUS to Wansaw and Mescow, where he had an inter- view with Stalin. After the D.G'S meeting Dick, Horyocks and I disoussed with the D.G. the position of Marton. It was agreed that Marton should delay his return to Iraq until we had had an opportunity of discussing his position With Magan, who is returning here on the chat th Morton November. should Provisionally see Medhurst we on) his thought way back, explain to him his difricuities with the Air Force in Irag and try and enlist Medhurstis support. Vle thought that if we could get the Air cover for our representa- tive worling properly, it wonld be better to do this than to apply for Foreign Office cover, which might meet with a certain amount of resistance. It was agreed, meanwhile, that we should send a telegram to instruoting him to look out for premises, which we WD uld run at office expense. The present accommodation provided by the Air Force i8 totally inadequate and really makes serious work impossible. When Magan comes back, it is suggested that he might arrange to visit Ireg with Medhurst and settle the whole hing on the spot. Marriott and Callaghan came to say goodbye. I said TI vas sorry they were leaving and thanked them for alll they had done. The general reaction of Chief Constables is one of regret, but by and large they seem to have accepted the position. THS GOPY ORIGINAL DOCEN RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEC SEOTU Of THE PUBLIC FECORDS ACF:195 F1958Aua 1958 Aud 2010 1(6 This Is A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED NDEPARTMENT UNDER RSECTION 3:4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Aug 2010 5th November. Jane Archer ran nte to say that she had been in to see the D.G the previous evening. and had nather let henself 8o. She had apparently made it clear that she was not satisfied with the position and wished to bee Bridges henself. She was annoyed to find that the D.0. had only forwarded on, without corrent, to Bridges a copy of his letter to her. 1 told her that I was unawane that any reference had been made here by Bridmes. As I felt that the D.G. might think T had been stirring her to, I told him the equence of events since he left for America After receipt of the D.Gis lette3 Jane had written me a note asking for advice as to whait she should do next. Ias she to imply that the D.G. did not wish her to take the matter further. I had spoken to the D.G. about this and he had made it clear that he hed no bjection whatever, and that if he were in her place he would do the same. Whin, he was away, Jane had rung me up to know whether any reference had been made here by Bridges. I told her that her letter had been received. Later, The rang me again to say that she had had a polite note from Bridges saying that the matter had been referred here and that he was unable to do anything: she was, therefore, intending to see 'o: and possibly also the D.G. That wae really all that I knew until T heard that she ad called on the D.G. the previous evening T repeated to the .G. my views pn the Whole case While thought that echnically Mrs. Archer had not got a leg to (17 THIS IS A COPY ORIGINALDOCUMENT RETAINED INDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 8(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Aus 2010 (iii) T think that Harker was to a large extent. to blame; but for his incompetence the situation would never have arise, and he had, moreover, over a period of many years, encouraged frank criticism from Jane Ancher. He had had it in full measure without any mining of voris, and had on numerous occasiions acted on her advice. On the last occasion, however, she had unfortunately gone too far. This perhaps excusable in the circumstances tha prevained at the time. 19 THE ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. Auo 2010 O 1I9 THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDERSECTION 3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1968 Aug 2o00 6th November. Mis. Ouin tells me that the enquiry into Einthoven's aetivitiles during the wa) is ikely to be completed by the end of the Month and 1s unlikely to be favourable to Dinthoven. This may bring about changes. Meanwhile., she hac been receiving quite a number of enauiries I moner a little whether we ought not to tell van Moyland? Derek Tengye tells mne that the D,G. oi mvself ape likely to be Bubpoenaed by the Ministry of Labotn Count oP Inquiry 011 the Gavoy strike, in older that we giive 20ence 01T the internment during the war of Frame PIAZEA, the ringleader. I told Pangye thet the proper people to subpoena ane the Home Office. 7th November. I informed the D.G. and Hill about what Tangye had told me, and suggested the D.G. should let Maxwell know. At the J.1,0. Deputies meeting to-day we discussed the paper on the grading of secret contracts the Ministry of Supply was represented. The arranguent seemed satisfactony but a new point was raised by the Ministry of Supply: it referred to cases where a firm on its own initiative started som experimental project which might have a military bearing. In almost every case they brought such matters to the noticed of the Ministry concerned, and suggested that the Ministries should in future guade such projects. I said that it was important that we should be informed immeddately, so that we could send an officer down to the factory to see whether the secnrity arrange- ments were adequate. Another point has arisen, which I was asked not to discuss at the J.I.C. as it is being dealt with in conjunction with the Air Ministry. It refers to attempts by firms to meet certai.n Air Ministry specification for various types of aircraft. No decision is reached and no contract signed until the moel-up has been made. If the mockup 1s successful, it is obviously necessary to safeguard its security before the contract is made. There seems to be a very definite gap here. George Jenkin dined with me. He is wholly mystified about the interception bf his letter to me published in the Pakistan Times. He drew attention to the fact that the letter must have been put into the envelope before it was photographed, as the reproductions 2) show creases. He does not recognise the seals: he has no signet ring of his own and would normally have used the seal of the Punjab C.ID. He cannot swear that he sealed the envelope himself, but says that this is what he would normally have done. He is coming to have a look at the whole file. I got the impression that Jenkin was not very keen about the liaison job with Pakistan, or at any rate not for the moment, but did not go on to press him to give a positive answer. He ennfirmed that the Sikhs nad been allmost entirely responsible for the troubles in the Punjab. He had obtained valuable information about their activities which he had reported to the Governor General. The question had even arised of arresting alll the Sikh leaders, but he personally had advised against this course which might in the long run have led to even greater troublle. He was very apprenensive about the future of Pakistan: he thought there woulld be civil var and that if Pakistan could not get any assistance from UB she might well appeal to Russia. T said that I doubted whether Russia would do more than supply arms and, possibly, advisers in disguise. She might well be interested in setting up so-called nfriendly" Governments - I doubted, however, whether she would openly march troops into Palistan. Goorge Jenkin did not seem to be entirely convinced Dn this point. 8th November. I SaW Maxwell about the Communist ta the B.B.C. He is going to ask the Home Secretary to extend the warrant for a further period. T alBo discussed with him the case of PUTLITZ. He was very sympathetic and IB out to stretch the regulations to the utmoat limit. He has asked Hollderness to look look into the matter. Holderness seemed 12 to think that we might get over the difficulty of the undertaking to remain resident within the British Empire by a nev regulation which i8 coming into force. This regulation authorises the granting of naturalisation o.allens who are going to reside abroad as representative of British firms. I saw Bowker, who is to be our Minister in Burma, at the Burma office to-day. I explained to him the position of the D.3.0., his relations with S.I.F.E. and with the Burmese authorities. I told him that the D.S.0. would be in the same position as Jenkins in Cairo, and ulti mately on a pattern with the 8.L.0. in Delh: and the S.L.0. in Pakistan, when he is appointed. I 8so told him about the moratorium now in existence between ourselves and S.I.S. Bowkcer said that he would like to have the D.8.0., whom he thought would be of vallue to him, and that he was agreeable to giving him accouodatia in his office in the Legation building. He assumed that we should be regularising this position with the Foreign Office. T have, therefore, passedtthe draft letter to Hayter to the D.G. for his approval before deapatch. 1Oth November. For Minutes of D.D.G. Meeting see folden nDiDtGjeSec'stray. I dined with Alley at his request, with a feeling that something was corning! I came rather late in the evening. Alley wants me to see SHARKEY Sharkey says that he has two important stories to tell, one relating to a German fund in dollars 123 which is being used to set up a factory in Germany for the manufaoture of secret weapons, and the other rellates to a Russian espionage network with lines into this country and European bases in Warsaw, Paris, and Prague. Alley was, I thought, a littlle inquisitive about who was working here and in the Middle East. T was not altogether certain, in view of Sharkey's known behaviour that the latter might not have been at the back of Alley's enquiries into the welfare of TAR, Kellar, Dick,and Douglas Roberts. Alley told me that Sharkey had temporarily recovered from his illness: he had been in a home where the dootor had given him a good deal of dope - in fact he had almost made him an addict. Sharkey had, however, resisted this and had subsequently reported the doctor and the nursing home to the Home Office. Alley said that both he and Hayor were shareholders in a scheme which Sharkey controlled. I was entirely non- commital and said that 1 would look into the matter of seeing Sharkey and let him know. Alley said that he attached a good deal of importance to seeing me once; thereafter I could delegate somebody to carry on. Sharkey would want to travel, but he did not wish for any expenses and, indeed, would be quite prepared to cover the expenses of anybody we liked to send with him. l1th November. I told the D.G's meeting to-day about the Defence Committee document which has come in. It outlines our proposed dispositions in the Middle East, on the ssumption that we shall be leaving Palestine at a fairly early date. It is regarded ab essential that we should have our principall base in Cyrenaica and that building there shoud commence forthwith. The trouble is, of course, that Cyrenaica in comes under the Italian Treaty discussion and that no final solution can be reached until vell on in 1948. I think, however, that it has been decided to put in a strong bid, probably on the basis that we cannot let down the Senoussi, to whom we made promises during the war. This may be a convenient but not very convincing argument! We should then have a Division in Cyrenaica, less two battalions, a Brigade in Cyprus, and two battalions in the Sudan. Ou main stores depot would be the one in the course of preparation in Natrobi. If we go from Pallestine about the middle of next year, we could temporarily house our troops in Tripoli and Cyrenaica, but we could not get out of Egypt untill some time in 1950. The D.G. haB agreed to my proposal that we shoulld have resident night duty officers, if and when we move to Leconfielld House. I saw Derhyshire and Hill. Derbyshire has heard nothing from SHARKEY for some time. He had asked Derby to call on him, but at the given time Derby had turned up and was told that Sharkey was 111 and could not see him. We know from S.F. that Sharkey was actually seeing a friend at the Regent Palace! This seemed discourteous to say the Least. Receiving no apology or explanation, Derby has just allowed mattera to drop. Derby thinks it not unlikely that Sharkey wants to travel abroad, and that his present proposal may well be designed to enable him to get over the restrictions and to receive official backing to carny on certain nefarious deals on the Continent. We all agreed that it would be unwise for me to see Sharkey, and that I should tell Alley that we did not regard the proposal with favour: we did not think Sharkey particullarly disereet, and that he he vas altogether too tricky. In otherlps words this is perhaps a convenient occasion to liquidate the whole business. I saw Burt. He will also tell me. He told me about ZIG ZAG. ZIG ZAG had been asked by a Yugo-Slav todo a job on a safe owned by the King of Yugom Slavia. He had reconnoitred the position and had told the Wugo-Slav that he did not think the proposal was a good bet; he had, erefore, declined the offer. Since then the Yugo-Slav has been apprehended for the theft of the money and is at present awaiting trial. In this vay ZIG ZAG learned that two other Yugo-Slav journalists were getting E40 a month from the Embassy to spy on their own na tionals. Apparently we already have a certain amount of information about these two. Bur't is going to let us have a full report. I previously understood that these two journalists were women. ZIG ZAG is WD rking with WILMER, one of the ex-Mayfair Boys. WILMER brought in a diamond watchhith other day and was caught by the Customs. un This wa's unfortunate as Burt finds WILMER quite useful: he therefore squared the Customs to drop the prosecution provided that three times the value of the watch was paid. ZIG ZAG gave the cheque. In will exchange expect for more this inforation little service, from Burt ZIG ZAG and WILMER! Burt brought in Johnson, who has just been giving instruction in Holland to Einthoven's organisation, at the request of MT.6. This IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4 OF THE [HE PUBLIC RECORDS CRECORDS ACT 1958 Oct 2010 THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. Aug Qoto 12th November. Roger, Miss Chenhalls, and Hill discussed with me to-day the proposals for an International Red Cross agreement on the treatment of civilian detainees in time of war. I think Hill adequately safegunrded our position. We want to be protected firstly against obstruction in the Home Office, secondly against the passing of any Clauses which might make interrogators feel that the were acting ultra vires. We have agreed to a clause stating that such detainees should be humanely treated, without specifying exactly wha.t humane treatment is. Our interpretation would be that we are justified in exerting pressure, but we should be strongly opposed, as we were throughout the war, to any acts of physical Violence. George Jenkin came to see me. We discussed at some length the Pakistan Times leakage, and called in An examination of the seals seemed to indicate that the impression was made with the. signet ring of A.N. Rizvi, George Jenkin's Moslem Superintendent George Jenkin himself danhot recollect having borrowed Rizvi's seal on this occasion, but said that he Tad done so on other occasions. Normally, how- ever, he would have used the stamp of the Punjab O.I.D. it was his habit to seal letters in either three or five places and he would undoubtedly have done this himself. He was considerably shaken at the thought that Rizvi had been responsible for opening the letter. Rizvi was the son of a man who was working in Ahmed's D.I.B. ; he had been in the Punjab C.I.D. for many years and right up to the end had been actin vinth vigour not only against the Sikhs, but against his own people. He had appeared to be extremely distressed at George Jenkin's departure and had, in fact, wept in his office and lissed his feet. Apart from this, there did not seem to be any particular motive in what Rizvi had done. George Jenkin admitted, however, that in the present state of affairs almost anything was possible. THIST IS ACoPy ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT U UNDER SECTION 3 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Aua 2010 174 13th November. Machell came to see me about a man called LASERSTEIN, who he gathered had formerly been employed by ourselves and was turned down for further employment. He had heard that LASERSTEIN was now going to take up some job in the Afghan Govern- ment in Kabul. Machell said that he had no axe to grind whatever, but he wondered whether the fact of LASERSTEIN going to take Vip a post in the Afghan Government might make it worth while for someone to reconsider his case. He personally did not know anything about IASERSTEINN nIhis past services. OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. Aua 2010 Phillips, A.D.N.I 9 came over for a dis- cussion with F-J, Boddington and myself about setting up some machinery by which the Navy could be kept informed of the re- actions of the fleet to Admiralty orders. Phillips and the D.N.I. had evidently hoped that we would recruit suitable Marines in every port, who would report direct to us. I explained that it was not really within our Charter to look after the moralleand discipline of the-Navy in fact the Prime Minister had attached great importance to our keeping clear of any possible accusatim of being a Gestapo. We had, of course, ever since the days of Invergordon assisted the Admiralty in these matters, byEy reason of their sys'tem of discipline, which, unlike that in the Army and Air Force, made it difficult for naval officers to know exactly what their men were thinking. I did not think, however, that we were justified in going on with this ad hoc service, still less in extending it. As we understood our responsibilities, they were to inform N.I.D. regarding attempts by subversive organisations to undermine discipline than this, in ve might the Navy. equally If W81YeB8 Aurter to report on the feelings of the miners (27 about the Coal Board. At the momen we were only responsible for reporting to the Home Office or the Ministry of Fuel and Power on the extent of Communist influence in the Minerst Union, and on any policy with regard to the miners formulated by King Street. Phillips said that he appreciated this point; he had, however, thought that it would have made it easier we for knew us to more carny about out the Dur ordinary strict charter grievances if f ratings upon which the Communist Party ght work. I emphasised that we could not cover SO wide a field, but that we were fairly well placed for informing the Admiralty the moment the Communiste tried to exploit a situation which generally arose from purely natural causes. If we really carried Phillips's proposals to their logical conclusion, we should have to vet their Lordships' orders before they were sent out. Boddington suggested that the Marines might possibly work through the Marine Police, who are already concerned with other matters in the dockyard, such as pilfering, etc. Phillips said that he woulld pass on our views to the D.N.I. and Nould let us know in due course his reactions. THISIS A COPY ORIGINAL. DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER RSECTION 3(4) OF THE EPUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. Aua QoL0 A case has blown UD with regard to 1o Didcot. An individual rang up the Soviet Military Attache, both at his officeanid at his home, saying that he must see him urgentily on an important matter. The appointment was apparently made for last Monday, but the information only reached the section to-day. We have got Arnold up from Didcot and are trying. to identify the voice. l4th November. THIS IS A OOPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINFD INDEPARTMEMT UNOER SECTHIN 3(4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. Aug 2010 13/ THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED INDEPARTMENT UNDER UNDER SECTI SECTION 3 3(4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Auy 2olo 17th November. Hugh Winterborn has arrived for the Conference. For minutes of D.D.G. meeting held to-day see D.D.G. sec's folder. So The D.G. wa-G. the Prime Minister to-day. He expressed great anxiety about the Communists: he thought they were delibera- tely promoting strikes to sabotage the Royal Wedding. The D.G. asked him if he had heard of PIAZZA. He said that he had not. The D.CuTHen explained PIAZZA'S history and the part that he was playing in the Savoy strike. He said, however, 132 that as far as he knew this had begun as a purely industrial dispute. The P.M. asked why PIAZZA was not deported as an undesirable allen. I reminded the D.G. that far from deporting people of this kind, it was the Home Office policy hot to regard membership of the Communist Party as a bar against naturalisation. 18th November. We had our first meeting to-day with H/SIME and H/SIFE, the D.G. being in the Chair. There was a long Agenda and a good many matters were considered and some dettled. The minutes are on record. Magan feels that if the final decision is that G.H.Q. should be at Nairobi, SIME should come to London and direct Middle Eastern affairs from here, which as a matter of distance is in fact nearer. If we succeeded in maintaining our hold on Cyrenaica, SIME should there with G.H.Q. It was, further agreed that we should draw the attention of C.R.O. to the duplication of work between our D.S.0.8 in Kuala Lumpur and Singapore and Dalley's M.S.S. In future the M.S.S. should be broken up between the two Commissioners of. Police in the Malayan Union and Singapore, and act as the Special Branch under the local Police officials. Certain of the: more confidential activities should be taken over by S.1.F.1 The present system would work if Dalley waa a reallly reliable person, but unfortunately he is not. He has no high-powered agent in the Malayan Communist party and there are strong indications that if, as we intend to do, we put in an informant, Dalley will sabotage him. The D.G. rulled that the. terms of the Mattaxyx RXIEXANXEXTXRMELYXDTUKBKNTXKOYSONP Bridges Agreement should be implemented by 13 the Heads of S.I.M.E. and S.IF.E. TO the full. THIS IS A.COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLICRECORDS ACT 1958 Aua 2010 *. 134 General Bourne, who is to be Head of our Military Mission in Burma, came to see me. He is an extremely pleasant person. I explained to him in rough outlline our organisation here and abroad, I also told him about out position in Burma and about our relations wi th Thakir Nu. He told me that in addition to being Head of the Mission, he would aot as Attache on the Minister's staff for all three Services. T impressed upon him that our activities were overt and that we were only feeling our way, but that if we could be of any assistance to him, the D.S.0. would be only too ready to help. He said that he would make contact with the D.S.0. immediately on his arrival. I thought that this could probably best be done in our Legation, to which we shoulld both probably have access, since any apparent cllose co- opetion with the Military Mission might bring suspicion on us both. He entirely agreed. 19th November. Colonel Wild came to tell me that he was raising a certain matter at the next meeting of the Hollis Committee. S.0.E. were practicing deception in a somewhat light- hearted manner in connection with illegal immigration. He thought that L.C.S. shoul] have a much closer hand in all this, other- wise the lines will become hopelessly crossed. Apart from this, S.O.E., working purely on an ad hoc basis, may, by the inadequacy of their methods, compromise deception as a whole. A recent case wa's their action in creating the no tional "Defence of Arab Freedom" organi- sation. It was never very convincing from the start, and the fact that it has now faded away into thin air must make it clear to all concerned that the British created it for their own purposes. Personally, I agree with Wild's point of view, that these matters must be centralised and controlled in L.C,a. Marriott and TAR came to talk to me about a Belgian, who has the appeararceor being a Soviet agent sent here to obtain information about Russian and Polish emigres. She pretends that she is obtaining information from Russia through certain Russians whom she befriended in Belgium during the war. This gives her cover for making contact here with such people as BAIKALOFF. We are keeping her under observation. Known to me Derby had made an appointment to meet SHARKEY. I told him to confirm, if necessary, the views that I had given to Alley and to listen to what SHARKEY had to OPy say. IN NOEDNAEDOOUMENT RETAINED DEPARTMENT UNDER DEPARTMENT UNDER RETAINED SETION 20th November OF THE PUBLIC 1958 Derbyshire told me that SHARKEY did all his 20Q Aua usual stuff. It was quite clear that he had no evidence at all to support his story beyond the vague statement that a former dubious arms dealer, with whom he had been associated,in Belgium, had a letter from the Soviet. Embassy which he had not seen. He thought this was very sinister He and Derby parted on quite good terms. 21st November. After a long consultation with Magan.anaok Dicio it was decided that Morton should make a tentative approach to Bu'si about obtaining Emnbassy cover. If this goes weil he will telegraph back here and ve willl then approach Hayter. If Busk is unsympathetic we have an alternative plan for obtaining accommo- dation, which we shall purchase ourselves, remaining under Air Force cover. Morton is, I think. pleased with his visit and feels confident that if given the chance he could do valuable work in Irag. The D.G. has approved this plan. 136 At the J.I,O. to -day we discussed the question of Palestine records. I said that if we could obtain the necessary aecommodation we should like to house them in the Middle East. We sere, however, quite clear that they should be brought out of Pallestine: if necessary we would bring them back to London. I asked that the J.I.C. should give their support to the neeessary accommodation being made availble in the Middle East. It was left to us to approach the Colonial Office in the matter of obtaining the services of LAWSON, the Hebrew speaker who knows the records inside out and will be useful at any rate for a period of six months. Quill asked what arrangements were going to be made for obtaining intelligence after the withdraval. I mentioned the Tact that we were in liaison with the Agency, and that if it were thought desirable, we might continue it in a purely overt capacity. Hayter made a mental note of this, but did not commit himself, and I have no doubt saw the red lignt' COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT SECTION DS ACT 1958. St. Jamaica. John came I told in to him see that me. I to would He is give going Aua him LO an introductio to Bill Stephenson, who might possibly be able to help him. Bennett brought me up a letter he had had from N.I.D. about a Swiss callled FREI who has a house somewhere on the west coast of Scotland near waters where the Navy is conducting trials. This man seems to have quite a lot of money suggested and to be entertaining to Dick naval Officers. I case, although I doubt very Mann much should whether look into there the that is anything in it. /37 24th November. For minutes of D.D.G. meeting see folder held by D.D.G. Sec. 25th November. I mentioned Air Marshal Eyilli's report at the D.G'S meeting and suggested that we should consider it and put forward our views in case the report was sent back to the J.I.C. for comments. The only proposal in the report which really concern us is the change recommended in the constitution of the J.I.C. It is suggested that greater powers should be given to the Chairman in the matter of supervision of the intelligence machine as a whole and the co-ordination of its ompnnent parts. He is not, however, to interfere with the internal workings of individual departments. It was suggested that he should have a smalll staff and deal exclusively wi th J.I.C. matters. The point is also raised as to whether he should be a representative of the F.0. or the Ministry of Defence. This last point is a difficult one; if he is to have jurisdiction over M.I.5./M.I.6. matters, it might be to our disadvantage if the Chairman were a representative of the F.0., since his first responsibility would be to M.I.6. a department which the Foreign Office controls. On the other hand if the F.O. is to Shed res- ponsibibility and interest in intelligence matters a S a whole, it would be a pity to let them drift into a position where they would take up a purely departmental attitude. 139 THE ORIGINAL DOOUMENT 3 RETAINED IN DERARTMENT 1 UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958., Auo 2010 1391 THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958. (ua 2010 I gather that some progress has been made with Russian B.Js. 300 Americans, headed by two experts of L.S.I.C. were working on the job in the U.S.A., and a considerable number vere similarly employed in this country. Some success was achieved over a massage from Australia, dated about 1945, indicating that a Government document, supplied by us to the Australians, had leake almost in toto. The Department for External Affairs in Australlia is probably responsiblle. This is disquieting, since SO much of our information is going in that direction and experimentall work on rockets, etc. is being conducted in Australia. This would seem to make it even more important that we should have a represen- tative in the Commonwealth Invesitgation Bureau, who woulld be linked to S.I.F.E. We discussed this the other day. The first proposal was that we should ask the Australlians to send a representative to Singapore, although personally I think it would be preferable for us to send an officer to Canberra. We should then get a far better idea about Australian B ecurity and maybe we coulld do something to improve it. We should at least know who was neliablee and who was not. 26th November. wo THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMIENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Auo 2010 We had a meeting with Noel Wild, S.I.E.E. and S.I.F.E. on deception. The whole position was explained to them. The onlly positive conclusion seemed to be that it would be desirable, at any rate in the Middle East, for IL.C.S. to have a representative - probably attached to the Defence Committee - who would co-ordinnte the work of the Planners, S.I.M.E. and C. .R.P.O. 0. Roger Moore called in. He doubted whether Sean MCBRIDE would get into power next January, though he thought that Dev might lost ground. I attended the D.G's cocktaill party, where I had a word with Pendred about STORK, the Russian defector from the equivalent of R.A.E. Farnborough. He said that a lot of extremely valuable information had alre. Ly been obtained he seemed to have the answer to everything. I asked Pendred whether previous estimates about the potentialities of the Russian Air Force were confirmed. He said that from what he had been able to gather s0 far the Russians vere not nearly so far as we thought they vere. 27th November. I saw Colonel Appleby on the recommendation of Hugh Winterborn. Appleby has done most of his service in Burma, which he knows ll inside out he also knows all the dialects. Dick and I both thought he had useful qualifications, but it is very ddfficult in an interview of that kind to know whether he Would have any flair for intelligence work. He has completed his term of service as a regular officer and is on a years leave. He is, therefore, available if we want him. I told him that it was impossible for us to say anything at the moment, since much depended on the attitude of the Burmese. If we did need his services, I would let him know. He is quite ready to go to Burma, although he has children. He would leave them here in charge of his sister. He is married,bu divorced. lst December. Quill raised a point at to-day meeting of the Deputies of the J.I.C. af 1a what sources of intelligence would Be avaiable when we left Palestine ETAINED NDEPARTMENT UNDER ATOOEHEUBUICRECORDS. ICRECORDS Aef 1958. 20/0 I sadd that we had some sort of a liaison with the Agency and that it might be that this Could be continued if it were thought desirable. Nobody registered any view on this suggestion For minutes of D.D.G. Mtg. see follder held by D.D.G. Sec. Dick Butler came to talk about the Stephens case. I told him that the D.G. was pro posing to see the D.M.I, privately and give him his views on the way theecase was being conducted. He might also suggest that the D.M.I. liked Butler would tall to him off the record. (42- Howe gave a party at the Yard. I tallked to Burt and to' about de BOURBON. I also had a conversation wi th Rymer-Jones, who was very depressed about the Palestine Police. 2nd December. D.G. Meeting. (see minutes held by D.G.Sec.) I talked to H1ll about the arms traffic. EDRUSE, Hyderabad's War Minister is over here and working with RIOKETD and Rex HOYES. They have both been to see Burt. There is also a good deal of information on demands by Paksitan to obtain arms. I had a meeting with Dick, E.J. and Kellar about the Evill report. to decide on the line that we should adopt. General Hollis his to attend the J.I.C. on Wednesday to discuss the implementation of the report. I thought that we should say: the l. That/additional powers which Evill vi'shed to see vested i.n the Chairman should be vested in the J.I.0. as a whole. 2. That, subject to 1. being agreed, we would prefer to see a Foreign Office Chairman Our reasons for this decision were that it was better that the F.O. should feel an over- all responsbility for intelligence matters than that they should be put in a position where they would merely aot departmentally. 3. That instead of forming sub-committeee for security and organisation, the problems of the J.I.O. should be dealt with as a whole, and that sub-committees should deal with them aecording to their importance or the amount of sifting that they required before coming up to the Directors. (43 3rd December. Colonel Hinchiey Cooke spoke to me about visa policy. The Home Office want to give a greater measure of discretion to P.0.0.S. We have agreed that after a delay of a fort- night, subject to no objection being raised, to a telegraphic notification, visasmay be granted to certain categories of people behind the Tron Curtain. Lith December. We have had a telegram from Burma, saying that our position there has born eccepted by the Burmese Government. 5th Decerber. At the J.I.0. tp-day Hayter said that the Foreign Office had had an interesting despatch from Duff Cooper, who did not take such a gloomy view as some about the situation in France. He thought that the Communists were losing ground and that their strike action was designed to provoke de Gaullle to seize power. They real ised that they could not win if It came to a show-down. -4 They thought, however, that if de Gaullle got into power he ould rapidly be discredited owing to the severe measures which he would more or less be forced to take: any supporters that he had frar the centre would then shift over to the Left. While Duff Cooper thought that Schuman was acting energetically and courageounly, he felt it a pity that he was a member of the dis- credited M.R.P. rather than of the Sociallist Panty. He thought, however, that he might welll sueceed in getting France out of the present drisis; he had a majority of the votes in France at the moment. Hayter said that there was every sign of the Foreign Ministers't Conference breaking down Ebout the middle of next week. I mentioned the somewhat tneatiseactory state of affaris in the J.Ivos (FE) anaY suggested that the matter rGSHould be placed on the Agenda next week, Dwhen Hugh Winterborn could attend. 3(4) FTHE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Colonel Lennox came to te mne theto But 2010 (Baloon)2 was in touch with EDRUSE. He also lent me a paper which he received from a Colone] Maxwell in Italy: this related to the supply by our old friend GRAFFENREID VIILARS of ars to Hyderabad or Pakistan. We had been under the impression that the French had shot GRAFFENREID VILLARS as a spy at the outbreak of war, artough as far as we knew he was innocent. Maxwell wanted to know whether such a deal had the approval of the British Government. said that Pakistan being a Dominion, we could neither approve non disapprove. If, however, thought fit to do the deal, we should be interested to know what happened. At a meeting of the Apppintments Board to-day we considered Ede's request to take up two directorships. This was agreed on the basis that they woulld not be connected with his official duties and would not occupy any official time.. It was pointed out that it was a normal Treasury regulation that directorships could be taken up on this basis by Government officials. A plan is to be drawn up for our withdrawal from Palestine. Hornby is to go to Eastal Africa. Hughes is to suoceed Battersbytat Kuala Lumpur insthe spring of next year. U'ren is to suecedd Bourne. is to go to the Far East, and Roger is to be re-engaged for a further period of two years in Hong Kong. I raised the question of Australia, and it was more or less agreed that after exploring the ground, an approach should be made suggesting that we establish a iiaison officer in Australia. Macdonald, who is returning from the Caribbeam will go to B.3.a. As regards the expansion of SIME and SIFE in time of war, it vas agreed that the control should be retained by the D.G. y but the expansion of staff should be bheW.D. strength. As soon as possible we intend to compile a live register of reserve officers, who could be employed at H.Q. I.P.I. is tD continue as a separate entity for the time being. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. Aua 20L0 (6 THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL JALDOOUMEN RETAINED INDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. Aua 2o0 The D.G. had a visit from Gerald Templer, to whom he explained his views on the Stephens case. He did not discuss the merit's Of the case, but merely the gross irregularitie in procedure. Geralld Templer was distnrbed about this and said that he would prefer to ke ke e ep cllear of it himself; he woulld, however, talk to the A.A.G. and ask hi.m whether he would like to see Dick Butler. Stephens is arriving in this country in a few days. The D.G. has also seen Alexander, who produced for him a docuent drawn up by Cripps on the question of C.P. membership of Government employees. Cripbemasiruled that C.P. members are no't to be employed on secret or top secret work. This ruling has to receive final approval from the Cabiret once it has been obtained the way will be clear for us to discuss with the rellevant departments how these people can be side-tracked without giving rise to too much comment. Personally I do not see how they can escape telling a man the reasons for his removal. (u7 6th December. Sir Charles Nickham came in to see me. He is leaving to-morrow for Greece, where he will probably remain until June. He takes rather an pessimisttic vi ew; he thinks that the Communists are gaining ground and that if the place is to be put on its feet, considerable assistance in funds would be required. Up to DW all this has been rather half-hearted: the first thing is to get an increase in the strength of the Army, whose operations against the Communisti are getting the Government nowhere. From time to time rather extra- gavant claims are made, but in fact the Communists always succeed in dispersing in the hills and re-forming elsewhere. Much larger forces ane needed to round them up. Wickham was very insistent on keeping the Gendarmerie out of these operations, as he does not wish them to be in any way political. He feels that this is the real mistake made in Palestine; the Police there were drawned far too much into military operations He had pointed this out during his visit, particularly the activities of Berguson which 1 ed to the Farran incident. aavt who was going to Holland. is anxious to have some definite plan with us in the event of war. He thinks that if some sort of unification takes place between the Dept. of Justice and Einthoven, it might be possible to make arrangements for a nucleous to come over here. I agreed, but said that T felt it vas even more impor- tant for the Du'tch to establish a useful stay-behind organisation. Cracroft.f from the War Office, rang me up to say that a request for arms for Hyderabad was being made by Close Bros. and that it was being alleged that this had M.I.5. appro- val. I tolld Cracroft that this was entirely untrue and that I sho1d like to have details in order to look into the matter. 8th December. I had a taik with Dick, Hollis, and F.J. about the case of FUCHS, who is employed on atomic research. The question of this man's establishment has come up. It was agreed that,although our information was entirely negative, ve shoulld tell Atomic Research what we know and express the opinion that in our view the information does not really amount to anything. The allternative was to say nothing, which seemed to me undesirable - the more 8O since Arnold the Security Officer at Harwell, would be putting in his comments which might be grome- what unbalanced. I had a talk vith Miles who is from Gibraltar. PUBLE FECORDS Aef 1o 2010 I questioned him rather closely on now his agents were being run, and it seemed to me that he had instituted adequate safeguards. I told him that if a suitable opportunity arose,I felt that we might now rellent in the case of MOLLINA, who had passed on informa- tion to the Germans during the war about the bogus Monty. For minutes of D.D.G. meeting see folder in D.D.G. Sec. 's tray. B.I take the view that the C.P. is anxious at the moment to avoid any strike action which may impede production; their main reason being to appear as good boys" in the 14 eyesr of the T.U.0. and avoidnanything in the nature of a heresy hunt. They supported the Savoy strike, although it is doubtful whether they initiated it. This was not, however, a strike which would impede production - it only hit the managers of luxury hotells and the upper classes. Caulfield came to talk to me about "SHARKEYH who had come to him With some proposa about anticipating the needs of the Poles in the Re-settlement Corps. He rather wanted to know what these funds were, as he did not wish to handle tainted money. As far as he could see the proposal was above-board. I told him that "SHARKEYH WaB not altogether in favour with this office; he was too tricky and his moitives Seemed to be too mixed.for S to have any serious dealings with him. He talked a lot, but he really roduced nothing. Caulfield said he thought that although "SHARKEYI had a kind of power complex he was patrlotic and not solely out to make money. 9th December, Wild talked to me about his roubles with S.I.S. He thinks that all S.0. plans should be vetted by the Hollis Committee, since they might well have a deception aspect. He aso thinks and haG told them that if S.0. are operating in the Middle East, they should keep I.M.E.infoumed. 'o' is evidently very relluctant to move in this direction. oth December. I discussed with H/SIFE, Kellar and Courtenay two telegrams from Burma relating to the so D.S.0.'s Charter and his status vis-a-vis the Burmese authorities. It was decided that, although he was now to become a Second Secretary, he should explain to the Burmese authorities that his functions will remain the same. As to whether they continue to call him a S.1.0. oP not was a matter of indifference. I saw Admiral Thomson and H1ll. The primary purpose was to discuss whether it wad desirable to say anything to the Press about defeotons. We explained all the circumstances canefully to the Admiral. He thought it would be best If he said a work personally to the News Editors of the Daily ExpreBs and the Daily Mail he did not think it necessary to ED further. He explained that their policy would to some extent be guided by any publicity that might be given to the matter in the Britsh oP American zones. T explained to him that even if something wene said in Germany, from our point of view it was undesirable that it should be repeated over here. There were two things that we had to consider: 1. the man'E personal safety, and 2 embarrassment between the Russians and the Foreign Office. I took the opportunity of saving quite a lot to the Admiral about security matters. We finally got to the question of the Daily Worker, who still receive D. Notices. The Admiral thought it might be possible to include the Daily Worker, but he was not certain that this could not be done wi thout it coming to their knowledge. We shala be considering this point further. General Festing telephoned to me this after- noon. He sata that as an enthusiast about Japanese swords he had for some time had I( dealings with the firm of BAPTY & Co. who have a small shop somewhere off the Haymarket (this firm is well known to us but I do not think there is anything wrong There are two partners, one Mark DINLY or DINELY (also known to us) and a Commander WARD. DINLY is responsible for the story about Pakistan. General Festing intends to tell him that he has passed on his inf ormation to the authorities concerned, and that they will be taking whatever action they consider necessary. I asked Hill to approach DINLY. I vent to cocktail party. T was introduced to both the Assistant Military Attache and to the Consul Geneal. We only discussed generalitiess I had a short wond with who is clearly very earnest in his desire to try and improve our relations and the flow of information. we are going to have a meeting in the near future. RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLC CRECORDS llth December. 1958. Aua 20/0 I save Dr. Cynthis CREWS to-day. She is a sister of Professor N.B. Jopson, His sister evidently has the same aotitutde as himself for languages. our file for DP. CREWS relates almost entirely to the trouble over her with the British Council in Turkey. I asked her what she was doing during the wal She told me that she had worked for the British Council in Turkey, as a teacher bf English in a secondary school. She felt, hovevep, that she - and indeed the British Council as a whole - was wasting her time. It was clearly for this reason I think I'n the that she offered her services to M.I. Middle East, and what happened afterwards was largely their fault. They began by suspecting her of being identical with a German spy called KROUS, and when they had cleared this up sent her back to the British Council, who repatriated her to England. At the end of 1942 she came up for empioy- ment with the Foreign Office, and was turned down as unsuitable, presumably owing to her behaviour in the Middle East. We, in writing to P.I.D. said that although we had nothing recorded against her from a security point of view, we thought that was not a very suitable person for employment on highly secret or confidential work. Personally I do not think that this comment is really justifiable on the facts known to us. Dr. CREWS is now looking for work and is clearly an able linguist in Turiish, Roumanian, Spanish, French, German, Italian, and Judeo-Spanish. She would realy like a permanent job in this country, but would not be averse to going abroad, provided she were not asked to be behind the Iron Curtain or to a disthnbed area. Mr. Humphrey of the Northern Rhodesian Police came to see me. He has been doing a short course here and was most appreciative of all that had been done for him. He said that his eyes had been very much opened to what was going on in the world. Norther Rhodesia was an isolated spot, and it was only by coming here tha he realized the importance of certain things that might be going on in his own country. I explained to him on broad lines the principles on Which we woric. It seemed to me that it was allways of value to keep a close eye on political movements of a subversive kind, even if they appeared to be purely indigenous. There might come a time later When some foreign power would find it advantageous to work on them. Hence the importance of getting in on the ground floor. 152 12th December. Derbyshire came to teil me that at SHARKEY'B request he had seen him and obtained some concrete information, albeit of minor importance. We are trying to S SHARKEY off, but it does not seem easy. 16th December. Winterborn came to sas good-bye. He felt that his vist had been useful,in that he had learned- a good deal move about the work here. Infortunately, however, it has not been possible to get a fina settlement on the housing problem. We have decided to tackle the Collontal office about Dalley's organisation. The D.G.wil be looking into the matter when he goes to the Far East in the Spring. 17th December. I gave a lecture to the T.D.C. more ol less on the same lines as the one T gave last year. a It was to a seleet audience of about sixteen, and followed one given by Noel Wild on deception. 18th December. Stolces put down a question about the enquiries concerning the Interrogatior Centre at Bad Nenndorf. He referred to this camp as a "M.I.5. Camp. Bevin, in making his reply, failed te correct the mistale. Neediem to say, the question was never referred to us. I spoke to Dean, of the Foreign Office,about this matter and suggested that it might be possible to get another question put down, or to iBste (sa some sort of official Statement. While he was very apologetic, he did not like either of my suggestions, as he felt that they would only reactivate the Press and cause them to ask who, in fact, was in control of the camp. While this might be awkward for the Foreign Office, it/Blearly very undesirable that matter should be left as they are. As E explained to Dean, we get our full share of mud, and we are usually unable to throw any back. If the matter was not put right now, the Press would quote us again as soon as the proceedings broke in Germany. This kind of thing wan extremely harmful to our work, Bince it built us up in the minds of the public as a kcind of Gestapo. T told Bean that I would tell the D.G. what was said, but did not lcnow what action he would take. Colonel Campbell of the J.A.ois Department called here to see Dick and myself. He said that he wanted to know (a) what the standing regulations were at Ham, (b) what instruetions there were about punishments, and (c) what happened when Camp 020 was transferred to Germany. 1 said that we had nothing whatever to hide as regards Ham, apart from the security aspect of the work done there, bu't that I should be glad to know how the procedure at Ham was relevant to the proceedings now pending in Germany Campbell replied that statements had been made in the summary of evidence that the cammps in Germanyhad been set up on the lines of Ham, and that as no instructions had been given by the Cortroll Commission, he wan anxiois to know what the standing orders and procedure at Ham were. Ittold him that neither Dick White nor myself had any responsibility fir the adminis tration of Ham and that without reference to the files T could not give him first-hand knowledge of any standing orders there were about pinish- ments. The camp had been set up on the orders of Lord Swinton, who was, T believe, Iss at that time Executive Head of M.I.5. It Beemed to us doubtful whether any orders in writing had been issued at the outset, although there had been many discussions. It seemed likely, however, that orders had been 1ssued by the Commandant and that these could be traced. As regards punishments, it was within our knowledge that, mainly for administrative purposes, people were kept in solitary confinement: Lt was obviously essential that two OT more spies who had been working together should not have an opportunity of concocting a story. Ve thought, too, that for any offences against prison discipline there would have been some form of unish- ment, although we were confident that no violence was ever used, and that there was of no curtailment of rations. We orly knew one instance where violence had been used, and this had been done by a visiting officer. on Stephens's owr initiative the officer wan thrown out of the prison at once and was never allowed to come back. We impressed upon Campbelll that Camp 020 was authorised as a Dlace of detention by the Home Secretary, and was visited on several Decasions by the Under Secretary of State and also by the Parliamentany Secretary. and the Home office doctor: no complaints of substance had ever been received - in fact all had expressed their appreciation of the way the camp was being run. There had also been visits from time to time from the P.I.D., to whom Stephens was responsible for the dsicipline and werare of the guards We both said that we should be extremely shoeked and Surprised to hear that Stephens could have been a party to any form of thrid-degree, since,apart from the moraii issue, he and all of us were quire convince that intelligence received uinder duress wa.B bad intelligence. We had had very vinvid experience of this in two case where we cleared prisoners and passed them on to the 15e French Forces. he French had exxitracted what they calllled a "confeasion", through which we had been able to "drive a coach and fourth. We told Campbell that there were perhaps four people who might be able to obtain for him the evidence he required about punishments; these were Sir Alexander Maxwell, Sir Osbert Peake, sir Herbert Creeay, and the late Dipeotor- Generall. Colonel Campbell asked mne to make enquiries and to let him lonow whether any of these people could supply him with the information which he required; he would then make arrangements for either himself or Lond Russell to see them. The D.G. is going to see the P.M. about the Red Cross Convention, which is trying to restrict our powers in dealling with suspects in time of wa. The Home Office and the locall pundits are with us in insisting that the type of people with whom we deal should be excluded from the Convention, and that there should be no vague phraseology on this point. If the matter 18 left in the air, the Home Office of the day may well refuse to allllow us to set up anything in the nature of Camp 020, in which case we shal be completely hamstrung. It is, further, necessary to proteet our internogating officers, who may be relucsant to do the work if they feel there is any likelihodd of their being held up ab war criminals after hostilities. 19th December. Dick and I took Stephens out to lunch. He 17 extremely bitter about his treatment: he says that not only has he been virtually under anrest for seven months, but that all his belongings have been stolen by the guards, ete. He is quite emphatic about his ignorance of any improper activities going on in the camp, 152 with the exception of certain minor incidents with which he dealt. He is, however, fairly convinced that some of the charges against subordinate officers and guaris are justi- fiable. His own orders against third-degree or any form of maltreatment, were quite emphatic and are admitted by those accused. He complained bitterly about the lack of support which he got from the Control Commiss ion: in spite of repeated complaints, par- ticularly about the quality of the officers and the guards - at one time he had as many as fifty guard with Criminal records;ene man had forty-nine convictions. He realised tha' the job wag more than he could handle and asked for E second-in--command, which waB refused. He had not been able to exercise the same supervision as he did at Ham, owing to the enormous amount of administrative paper work which he was forced to handle. This was partly due to the cumbersome administrative machinery of the Control Commission, and partly to what appeared to be systematic obstruction or incompetence. He asked about his future. I said that the D.G. could not possibly commit himself untill the proceedings were over. 22nd December. Butler came in. I tolld him about our talk with Stephens. He coulld not give any definite opinion, but, as far as he and Cussen could see, they oughb to be able satisfactorily to disose of the suggestions that Stephens was a panty to the third-degree methods used at Bad Nenndorf. It would, however, be difficult to clear him of any blame for what went on there, owing to the position that he held. He willry however be ablle to plead extenuating cindumatances. ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED Hunt came to tell me that DEPARTMENT UNDER OF THE PUBLICRECORDS AOT 1958. Aus 2010 (S he had received what he thought was a very favourable offer from the Colonial Development Board, through some friend of his. He had been to see Garrow- Jones (7) - now Lord stick-in-the mad. - who seems to have accepted him at sight! I think they were impressed by his record with Steel Brothers in Burma. He is to hold himself in readiness to go to British Guiana, where he is to make a preliminary report on possible lines of development. I saw Maxwell and gave him an account of the Bad Nenndorf incident and Campbell'e approach to us. Maxwell said that he was extremely sorrty to hear that Sterhens was in troublle. He firmly believed that 020 had been run on perfectly above-board lines, and that Stephens had done an extremely good job under very difficult circumstances. He said he woulld be perfectly prepared to see Collonel Campbell, although he did not recpililect any ins tructions or rules about punshments at 020. OTGALDOCUMENT RETAINE DOOUMENT RETAINED INDEPARTMENTUNDER SECTIO SEOTION 23rd December EPUBLIC RECORDS 1958 Aua Mr. Eric F. Hall called to see me to-day.. 2o1o He produced at etter which he had received the solicitors of Captain SMITH, the Medical Officer at Bad Nenndorf. He did not knov anything about the case and wondered wl tat it was in order for him to make a statement. I told him briefly what it vas all about, and that I thought he should go and see the solicitors as requested. He said that on the particular point in question, namey, whether the authorities provided the doctor with an atbbulande, he could state that Colonel Stephens had asked that an ambulance should be provided, but that his request had not been acceded to. There were, I gather, very real difficulties inrrocuring an ambulance at that time. To 1$7 get over these aifticulties, S covered van, which had formerly been used at Ham for conveying prisoners, had been adapted for hospital use and was alwaye at the draposal of the doctor. Mr. Hall was in the same position as Stimson at CamD 020 - in other words he was the Chief Administration Officer under Stephens until he was demobilised. He was quite clear that strict nstruetions had been issued by Stephens that no acts of violence were to take place, and that in cases where solitary confinement was thought necessary, the matter had bo be referred to Stephens before any action was taken. The regulations were extremely strict and on exactly the same lines ab Ham. He himself had no knowlledge of any punishments being inflicted, or of any third-degree methods being employed, but he appears to have left the establishment at the end of 1945 or beginning of 1946. I asked Hail whether he would be prepared to see Disk Butlers He Said that he would be very ready to do 50. I Gaw Captain Moran to-day, who was at Camp 020 and subseguently with Colonel Stephens in Germany. He left Germany to tace up other duties in Gzecho-lovakia in April,1945, and did not return to Bad Nenndorf until about March, 1946. He had been in charge of the rison and took over again on his return, when he was shocked by what he found. Enquiries had then started and obviously a bad state of affairs existed. The guards were i11-disciplined and ordered prisoners about in a manner of which he did not approve. The rations wene in pant being eaten by the guaras and the prisoners were badly elothed. He set himself to put this right, but did not inform Stephens as he did no't wish to get hia predecessors into troublle. He knew of no punishients. and had no knowledge of serubbing cellla, other than the normal cleaning out of cells which took place two 0r three times a week. He had received instructions since (bo his return to this country to see Colonel Campbell. He vas specifically aslced about punishments both at Camp 020 and in Germany, and also about solitary confinement. Hs recollections Df Camp 020 were at the time a bit hazy, and he was asked to go away and consider various points Which had been put to lim before returning for EL further interview on January 5th. While turning over the records Colonel Campbell had said, en passant: "some of your statements do not altogether agree with Colonel Stepheens - you know, of course, that he is trying to "ship! all his officers". eaptain Moran was rather shocked by this remark, as it seemed to him that it was made deliberately to induce him to say things against Stephens, and there was of course an implied threat that if he did not he might find himself in the same boat. I told Captein Moran that T was in a slightly difficult position, in that I appeared, through no desire of my own, to be assisting the prosecution and the defence. Idid not quite know what my position was, or what his was; T would, however, take advice. If I found that 1t was in order, I felt that Captain Moran should inform Colonel Stephens's Counsel of what had been said, If, therefore, he received a request to go and see Mr. Dick Buitle: he could take it that the matter waa in order. I was solelly interested in the elncidation of all the facts, and if the prosecution were trying te build up their case in this king of way, there might we be a misearriage of Justice. 30th December. At the D.G's meeting to-day I mentioned a letter that we had had from 'ot, about the proposal that we should put an officer in the Intelligence Divisian of the Control Commission in Germany. The Intelligence Division had asked is to do this a long time ago, but at that time we had no officer to spare. I had mentioned the matter informally to Generall LethBridge when I saw him at the J.I.C. some veeks ago, as a resullt of which Colonel Rhodes, one of his officers, had called on Dick Whi te and myself. The matter was further discussed by Rhodes with General Lethbridge, and a short time ago we received a letter from the Intelligence Division, saying that they very much welcomed the idea of having one of our officers in Germany. The D.G. had approved, subject to the whole uestion being looked into by Dick when he ent to Germany with the J.I.C. delegation. It seemed to me a desirable appointment, since it would merely be an extension of our existing liaison. We should get to khow more about Russian acitivities in Germany, and they would have the advantage of our collated reconas here. Apart from this, we had a definite interest in view of possible attempts by the Russians to pene- trate this country. It was difficult to see why 'c' had referred this matter to the Foreign Office, since there was no question of opening up relations with the local authorities, but merely improving relations with another British Department. Charles Butler and T went to see Bamford of the Treasury about the Stephens case. amford agreed that it was right for us to ive reasonable financial assistance, the more SO since 020 was clearly going to be brought into the picture. 3st December. Kirby-Green and Macdonald came to see me. They have just arrived back from the Caribbean. They both seemed to think that in the absence of any possibility of doing the job on a big scale, it was better to pacl it up. T tola them to read Thistle's report, with which I thought they would be 162 in substentiall agreement: we would then have meeting and decide what could best be done in the matter of maintaining touch with the area. THISIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED INDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 Aug 2O10 "Fa TO r 5