A The National Archives (c) crown copyright Catalogue Reference:kv/4/466 Image Reference:1 POL F 53-24-90 SAV13 TIDDELL DIARTES FILE CLOSED CU s Form 924 SEE ALSO LIST INSIDE COVER Sta R Stor Sewiad Nak. Dure Sonnt No Snrinl NO Date Date Denigrtiion Desrgrotion S N AP4 29 0 Nur493 Go i( ot 2-01-0 5 For 960 Tp TE TLTT Fou 10 1U 11 he 8tu higas LO vempar UTI U 1945. tpptrn u 11 THISIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED E IN IDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS tnesaath ANE2 2010 I looked in yesteruay and had a talk with Heroert. The only outstanaing event during my aosence was the discovery from a Gernan P/W that T.J.HOOPER OI B.Il hau just belor the war been working Lor the U.I.S. He hau sola them inlormacior about the Russian agent Hans Christial PIECK al he had also sold them further information for which he received oll one occasion 250 ariu on another E80 through Felamarn OI the ADwehr in Colog The most sinister appect relates to an agen called Dr. Kruger who was empuoyeu py SIS. The /W,whose name is GISAI- or GEShIS, say that this agentts name was given to the Germans by HOOPER and that he was subse- quertly liquidated. seems to recoiiect that a renuezvous was appointe with this agent early in the war and he never turned up. It is thought that Felix Cowgill may have a certain amount under his hat and it is proposed that Herbert shoula have a talk with him when he goes to German OT Thursday It is possible, and indeed the SIS files show, that HOOPER was in touch with the Germuns and that he did subm numerous reports to SIS about his corcuct, admitting that he was receiving mouey lor information supplied. This however was at a time when he was out 01 Favour with ncu W tore the reports uo anc put them in the WPB mon had the impression that HOOPER was tryi to buy his way back into the service. John Marniott came to tak to me touay apou his worn in F.2. He is stilt rather worrie about the handling o1 atlairs anu linds it diificult to get on irtimate ters with Roger. I told him that Roger had spoken to me before I went away and that I had expres ed the view that in deaing with the dark and file some discrimination seemed necess- ary. I appreciated the point however that trouble blew up it was on the industrial side that we should come into contact with Govt. circles rather than on the espionage side. If we could not give a fair estimate of the percentage of party members in any particular unit and chapter ana verse to the effect that certain Officials negotiating with the Ministry of Labour were in fact members of the Party, it might well be considered th we were not doing our JoD. There was atls the vetting side. I thought that this might be covered by what I understand already exists, namely a White List of people employ- ed on highly confidential WOrK (this list includes all our own personnel and that of SIS amongst others) against which any Party member coming to light should be checked. It seemed to me urnecessary that we should follow minutely the careers o1 those who were swinging picks ana shovels. I ased Charles about Findlater. He has not shown up bery much lately. It was therefore decided that I should ring up Drew, which I did. I told him that there were various people in -Division that I would like Find- later to see and that I was available if he. wanted to have any further discussions. He is I think going to SHAEF next week, te study C.I. position and will be available the weere after. He anticipates that nis repu may be ready early in August. with Dick came in to discuss his future with me. There is a strong move by en.Wheatley who is to be Montiis Chief oi Stali, to keep Dick and I gather that the suggestion has even been made that he should leave this office an stay OI. permanently in Germany This he does not wish to do. He thinks however that if he could set the Control Commission on its 2 feet and leave Ronnie in the sadde it might be to the advantage of ali. We ugreed that I woud mare the supreme sacrilice OI leaving him in Germany until the end 01 Sept. on condition that il a reorganisation scheme can into being earlier he woud be release on a fortnishtis notice. I broke the news about HOOPER EO Stoplord. While reallising that HOOPER way bad about money he was reluctant to beieve that he would etray his courory. he seemed to recollect that on soe occaSON HOOPER had menti ned that he hau established contact with the 6IS. Burt came to tell me about William JOYCE. He ison the whole inciinea admire him for having the courage of his conviictiols. JOYCE said that he was never really trusted by the Germans. There is a possibility that he may call a man called Hughes from S.B. also Max Knighty to give evidence that he gave information to the authorities about Communists in the pre-war years. In his eviidence he will probably say that he conscientously believed that we were maing a mistake and that what he did Was in the best interests of this country. This will not of course in any way help his case. Fish is clearing up 4 or 5 caseS in Italy and will then be Leaving for BOAO where he is to run an organisation for the revention of smuggling. I had a talk with Kirby Green. He is anxious to stay on with us il possible and says that David Scheer wishes to ao the same. 1 told him quite frankly what the position was alu that I very much hoped that we should be able to make some offer towands the end of Sept. He said that meanwhile there was quite a lot to do in Gib. and that he was quite content to remain where he was. II he served with us in the future he would like to go abroad as his wife carnot stand the severe winters. I saw John Both. He has become bitterly anti-Russian. He was very pleaseu with the FO answer to the Russian accusautons that we are treating their P/WS badly, and were causing dellays in sending them back. The is that theRussians will only receive 5,000 a may anu in they arrive om the front.l after 3 pm they are not accepted till the follwoing day. They are billettee and fed by us but behave in a periectiy shociing mannet. They are dirty and iT-discipineu to an incredible degree anu mess up all the clean German farms where they stay. Their morals are beyond all belief. The impres- sion upon our troops is very marked. The whole idea of fwonderful Russialt is complete vanishing into thin air, They think the women are unspeakable and the men just lie animals,whic in fact they are. The Russians who came to take over do not seem to be able to do very mnuch. The only way they can get their people to obey orders in tidying uo their billets before they leave is to teil them they with have no food until the work has been done. John had pun into Arnold RECHBERG while on a visit to the Swiss. RECHBERG was fu.ll of anti-Russian propaganda. Non-raternisatior is obviously breaking down and is quite unvortable. 5 June 19th I had a talk with the Immigration OIlicers this morning before Hebert have them a Lecture. This al temroon they ce visiting the LRE. They seemed very pleaseu about the present arrangements for co-operution but are loud in their protests that what we are doing now shoulu have Deen one 3 years ago. This is of course a long story with many pros and cons. I hope that reations will be better in the Future. FINZELL of the Australian Security Service came to see me today. He is very arious to get over to the continent in onder to examine all NSDAP documents relating to Austraiia. I hope Dick with be able to arrange this. Kremeb is proving rather difficult at 020. He now has a long story about information receiived through a Hungarian ramea FULOP in Maarid. Information is said to have reached him via the Jugoslav diplomatic bag. There are however certain parts O1 this story which do not ring very true. MALONE, who is aealing with the Mid East ana Far East in MT., eamne to sed ma He has taken over From Moutgomer/. Roger came to tell me that he haa a telephone check on a communist called BARNETT in the Aamiraity. The check haa revealeu that this man was a personal Friend of Roland Bird. John Marrilott thoht that Rolana ought LO be told. E an however inclined to agree with Hollis that tere is not much point in saying anything 1or the following reasons: bo (a) Roland Bird may or may not know that the man is a communist but would not dis- close anything of a really comtuentiat kind; (b) he will in any caseue leaving in the course oi a month or so; (c) he would feel embarrassed ii he were at BARNETTS flat and BARNEDT started to teleph rIe to one of his communist friends; (a) Roland might feel, in view of his somewhat strong Left wing tendencies, that the office was engaged in a heresy hunt and, worse, that ne himsel was not trusted; (e) Rolandis present work is not really of a confidential nature; (f) if he has the intention o1 disclosing seeret information to BARNETT ne could already have done so. John Marriott apparently thinks that as BARNETT is a Govt. official Holand might inaavertentiy. say things which he would not say i1 he knew BARNETT Was a Party member, and that he should therefore be warned. Walker came to Sae me abouthis memo on pigeons. I said that when ne haa sounued SIS,S0E,MI14 and the All Ministry I would put forward his memo to the JIC. The JIC may think it desirable to keep some small nucleus for practice purposes and 1or expansion in war time. Gort wants Kellar to go out to Mid East again. He was not quite sure whether thi was necessary at the moment. Meanwhite I understand that the P.M. has told WEIZMANN that he is postponing the Palestine issue until the peace conferenees This is apparently a great blow to WIELMANN. Hil-Dillon came to see me. He is being demobilised. He was full o1 praise for all his MI5 staII and for the office as a whole, and thanked me warmily lor verything I had done. Crean,Gwyer,Ffoulites Crean,Gwy Ffoulices ald Mair are 7 carrying on at any rate lor the present unden their new chief Fripp, the prospeetive DSO for singapore, had a talk with me. He seemed quite sensible although his appearance is a ittle against him. I gave him an outline of Jap activities in So far as we knew them. It does not seem that he is going to get much assistance in the early stages ard there will be no local police force. He has liveu a good many years in Malaya and knows the country well. The Jap Ambassador in Moseow hed a long interview with Molotov towarus the ena of May. It seels doubtful whether in spite of the abrogation OI the treaty the Soviet Govt. will deciare war upon the Japs, at any rate this is the impresson giver by Molotov. The Shaef O.I. summary Lon the weaat ending June 9th suartes tIrat cumulative arreste to date Dy 6th,i2th and 21st Au.s are: G.I.S. including Gestapo 2991, S.5. anu para-milit- ary, 2442. Others will bring the total up DO 13551. The insignificance of all resistance So Tar encountered unuerlines the inaaequacy of German preparations for postwar disruptior and the present lack Ol essential organisatic to direct them. The large cache oi British money and apparatus for counterfeiting alliec credentials of all kinds originally located at Oranienberg is being held at Friesing. June 20 th I gave a talk to the first batch o1 1.0.5. who are being given a 2-uay courses They have a leoture from Hart on the work we have Deen doing during the war aru on the general surue ture o1l the ollice. They then vibit the LRE On the second day E give them a talk about relations between our D madn unctiona espionage, subversive mnovements ana security, eplain to them what we think the postwar form is going to be, and in whatway we think they can made a contribution. They then go down to see the registry ab Blenheim. Ir my talk T told them why we had set up the LRE, the reason being that we were dealing with a centhalised orgaisation and, more important still, it was necessary to have 9 time thoroughly to sift a mant Story. Such facilities. do not exist at the port in wartime anu still 1ess in peacetime wher visitors woulu resent being extensively examined. There is ro doubt that the 1.0. appreciate the new development by which tne. are being paced in closer contact with oursellves. They have however a good many compllaints against SCOs and somewhat resent not having been brou, ht into the picture 3 years ago. I Skated very lightly over this by saying that we realised that mistares had been made in the past out that we hoped that in future relations would De on a different basis since we should YOV be relyir entirely on I.0.S in the first instarce. This did not mean however that we expected them to do ou job. They could however mane a very big contribution b/ letting us Low o1 any cases where they could not lina a pllausible ezocuse lor a mante visit and were quite cert in that he was not coming ToT the purpose Stated. They asxea particularly tha they might be informed about cases which they reported. I said that we hoped to be aole to meet this request through our Regiona Officers who wou a be visiting ports from time to time. We were however up against certain human difficulties. one ol them was unat Che investigation of reports was in a large percentage oi Cases inconclusive and there was rarely a given moment when we could give them a proper answe another difleulty asthat we uid not wish to discourage I.0.S, and generally a report that looked very promising in its early stages woula turn out to be a maratis next. We were always reluetant to point this out as we felt it might be discoraging but with regular personal contact this difficulty should be overcome. Dick Looked in to telt me that he haa had a satistactort talk with Finalater Wrto was going Out To Germany early next month. Baxter haa a ta wich me about his s1ati. At the moment he has only about 20-30 alens at the LRe and he has a number of people kicking ther heels. He thought it was probably necessary always to keep a small nucleus. A few could be discharged now. others might be found employment with the Control Commission and a small number were anxious Lor permanent employment. When Baxter goes he thinks that Vesey wi.ll De able to carry on. Tommy Lascelles asked me to go and see him. He is anxious to know what I thought of Nicholas Elliott, who is being considered for an offer of employment as 5ra secretary to the King. I said that I had only known him for a shont time in the hurly-burly at the Scrubs. I thought he was a pleasant personality and he had Deerl highly recommen- dea by Neville Bland who could give more intimate details than I could. I would however try and find out something about nis recent work ana what his superiiors thought about him. He then aSaed di I knew what was behind the reiusadl oI the PMIS to allow 1 certain scientists to go to Mescow. I salu that had been away but that it might well be that pou ple of the type of BERNAL, wno was a member of the O.P., were TIOT considered suitable to send to Moscow as they hau peer right in the middle o1f scientilie develop- ment here and would probably spili the beans I promised LO find out more and Let him now. He then shoved me Ribbentrop'. letter LO Winston which hau been hanaeu LO Monty. A curious thing in the covering Latter was that he referred tO the P.I. as r.Vincent Churchill. This seens almose inereulule for an ex-Foreign Minister, all it has been suggested thatpossibily it was not Riouertrop at all who had wrtten the letter. The letter stated that Ribbentrop wished to convey personally to the PM what he uescriped as Hitlerta last will an testament. He said that in fact neither he nor Hitler had ever wanted a war with England and that he himseii had always regurdea England as his second home. He was sure tia t the ony future tor Europe lay in close collaporation between Engl nu and Germany. The letter Was full of inconsistencies Dut in the present distorted/state of the German mind may conceivably De sincere. I talked to John Marriott about the Case ol Barnett and Roland Bird. I think he is more or Less persuaued that it is Dettor in the circumstances to say nothing. He has, as I have, complete confidence in Rolandt: integrity. Busten tells me that he is quite reudy ii his practice allows to put in hait time From pt.onwaras and I wisheu him to 4o so. Luke anu Marriott discusseu Tacet case wit me. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 June Dolo Cecil came in to tell me that Johe. CODD who arrived at Cantons Park with his German wif Irma, and who he believes is identical with the renegade Shaun COLLINS, has slipped through to ireland. He was expected here a a P/W. This has di.sclosed a loophole but steps will be taken to close it. June 21st I spoke to Kellar about some of his private letters to Mid East,purticularly those to CICI. It seemed to me that if these letter by any chance got into the wrolig hands we might we LL be accused of intriguing with Ryants subordinates behind his back. While these things shuuld be said in conversation it seemed to me undesirable that they should be on paper. Kellar said that he would tak the opportunity during his forthcoming visi to Palestine to speak on the telephone to Alan Roger and Dawson Shepperd with a View getting the lettens destroyed. These irar and personal letters are useful as they giv one a goou idea ot the atmosphere but in their present form I think they are dangero Wibroe has returned from Demark. He is less worried aboutthe Russian siue 01 thing; than he was. He thinks however that the Russians intend to stay in Boonholm until we Leave Deumark, which is at present schea: uled for the end of August. 2- At the daily meeting Thomas mentioned the case Of a P/W who had ultimately turned out to be a German. His story which is generally believed is that he got mixed up with some British P/wS anu being cad ina khaki shirt he got into a P/W camp where he had remained lor 18 months. He seems LO have satisliea all his colle agues That he was Bricish althou he has spent most of his life abroad. we have now got to take steps to rou a him hiv and get him bach to Germany. I had a short talk with Hill about his Work and congratulated him on what he had done. I gather that the BOLSOM case is going quite well and that two more conressions have peen obtained. BOLSOM himself is extremely rattled. The War Reserve policeman who was getting E2 a weer for watcning BOLSOMT house has been sacked. Chief Inspector Barrett who is handling the whole business appears to be doing very well and as far as we know there has been no dearaye through police channels. Barrett however takes all papers home with him and ii anything is typed in the office it is done in his presence. Hill wants David to stay on with him lor another month. He is anxious LO return to his owil business Iairily soon but woului stay on on a hali time Basis until we know what our reorganisution is going to be. II at that staye we coulu mane him a reasonable offer he might be prepared to remain on permanent.ly I Lunched with Rocher-Luna O1 the Norvegian Intelligence ana another resentative oi his organisution who is going to Koumania. Rocher-Luna has returned from Norway Ior a new days. He say that every this is going quite smoothly ind that he does rot alticipat any trouble from the LeIt. There is evident- ly a reunion of the Communist and wabour NE THIS A COPY oto 13 ORIGINAL DOGUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENTOUNDER SECTION Parties won chF may PLHUIEECOREST6h Lercwal trend ouAciegsainss no more. The is very anxious to TemaI ir ettotre Geueh with us anu would be very/ pleaseu to se a reresentativ o1 this office in Os1o. I saw fornie lor a moment. I impresseu upon him that in my view it was a good thing that Dick was going to to the co-oruirating 01 tr Control Commission in its euriy stases as there was otherwise a risa that a Regular solaier would oe put in. DiCk might be able to prepare the way 1or Ronnie athough I quite saw that he might feel that ii he was going to do the job he might prerer to do it From the start. He said that ir it was finally Ollered to him he had not quite maae up his mind whether he would accept it or not. A Mr. R.A.clyde of the British War Crimes Executive,bo.! Entrance, Church House, Gt. SmithSt. b.W.l. came here today accomparieu by representatives o1 SIS and SOE. He explained that he had beer im charged by the PM and the Solicitor General to collect the necessar evidence to mount art indictmen of 8 or 10 or the principle leauens OI the Nazi Party, tor criminal Sviracy This is.apparent.ly the first stage anlu te triad is to take place in Sept. The Court wil be a special one cllla will have ita OWII rues of evidence. The prisoners with De uelenueu An attempt i. to pe made to snow that the whole Party art all is wOP-S have been conceived on aggressive Lines The Prosecut OI the Jews is to be SfowI as a movement to eliminate those who might be opposeu to ageressior. I asreu Cijue whetiler ne had CO -sidered the Ausalus Orgalisation, which as far as we could see had worueu twoaras a policy of aggression through minorities. Where minoritles eistea they were stimulateo anra where the/ did not exist they were created. He ain not KNOW about the A.0. anu was particulriy interested ir this aspect of the case. I toLu him that I would Let him have c copy of Curryi Iemo. I also recom- menaed to him that he should CO sult M.I.14 who anew a great real apout the S.S. anu Gestapo atniu the para-militany organisatior It is Test that once criminal corspiracy 1s proved the other problems ol inaiviwual brutalities will rall into line. Personally I t irk the wnoe procedure is yuitedread- ful. The DPP had Recommended that a Fact- Finding Committee should come to the concius- ion that certain people should be bumped ofr and that others should receive varying terms of imprisonment, that this Should be put to tae House of Comons al.u that authority should be given to any military body Iinding these individuals in their area to arrest them and inflict whatever punishment had been decided on. This was a much clearer proposition and would not bring the law into aisrepute. Winston had putthis forward at Yalta but Roosevelt lelt that the Americars would want a trial. Joe supportea Roosevelt on the perfectly frank grourus that Russians likea puullic trials For propagarda purposes. IT sees to me that we ara just being araggeu down to the Level o1 the travesties OL justice that have been taking place in the USSR for the vast 20 yrs. A notorious Bribish reuegade rlamea COLE has bee run to earoh in Paris as all American Captain in C.I. College Came tO talk DO me apout a prospecti Frelch agent named with whom he nas got into touch through a Germal abent being run b/ D.Division. The Case looks promising. June 22nd Finzell came in to see me again. He wanteu UO know about documents in Italy relating to Italian Fascist activities it Australia pefore the war. I said that E knew that certain archives had been seized and I unuertook to find out whether there was likely to be anything of interest, and il necessar. what errang arrangements ements could be made 1or E visit tO taly. Joe Lynch came to se mes We talked about CHILEVIOIUS. He Said that he had not unfortun- ately had occasion to mind out what the Bureau thought of CHILEVICIUS: He would however get a full reportirom them anu let me know. I told him the latest positionas far as ve vene concerned namety that Palestine had now said that they were no longer interested I told him that was corsiuerabiy arroyeu about this seeing all the troubie that had been taens I dia not doubt however that the F.B.I. were quite right in declining LG employ CHILE- VICIUS. Doubtless they had discovered that he was unrelaole. J.0. drew my attention to a statement in the Dail Express that the alleged ath Army Which te Germans expected to attack in the Pas re Calais haa never really existed ana tha L the way in which the Germans hau come to believe in it was a secret. Wild anu Flethei Hesketh were apparently worrlea as LO whether this might allect Garbols return to his owIl country. I said both to J.c. all Wild that I had telegrapned the message out to Tomny Harris igho kad expressed the view that oIT account of the disintegration O1 the G.I.s. 1 did not take a very serious view oi the wuplication. I have asked Tommy lor his views. 1b I attended the JIC when a proposal was put forward for the continuation af CSDIC here im order to deal with hcertain Characters at present in Ashcan. The position is that CSDIC are closing dowIl one of their caps. They think however they can deal with any important prisoners in the other. In some cases however it may be more suitable tor the people to be interviewed in Ashean. When SHAEF is abolished Ashcan has E think got to be in charge O1 the Americans or ourse ot Become part o1 tae quaaripartite Contro Commission. The meeting left that it had better remain in our hands or those the Americans. TheD.G. spoke to me about the Capel-punie repor on overt intelligence and suggested that I should show it to Findater-Stewart. He also talked to me about Courtenay' report on CICB, and the proosal that it should Form the nucleus o1 some produetion agency in the post-war period. He was quite agreeabile that I shoulo discuss this with ivian. Grogan talised to me about the future o1 Censorship. He thinks that as from Auguscoth onward his section CarI withuraw From the Prudential. Meanwhile he is not very Sat. fiea with the progress being made by the a govts. He would De visiting the Continelt shatly to report AS regards his own 1uture he would like to pack up some time in August but would be quite prepared tu WOTI OI a haii- time basis or guarter-time, attending any meetings relating to ceusonship which might arise. Brock came to tell mne that SCHULTZ, a cerman Mid East spy who was exchange lor a British agent (incidentaliy the only occasion where (7 such ar exchange has Deen esiected as ar as I know) has been over-run and fallen into the hands of the Americals. After his returr to Germany SCHULIZE aid apparently tae up the German end of the transmitter in the KISS case I said I thought it would be better noD to question him about the RISSCase in the ldrst instance. After we had got his iarst re ones we could consider the murtter, ecil came to talk to me adou Irish detainees incerning whom he 1s having a conference at the D.0. There is apparently agreement that the P/Ws shai De sent back either direct by air from Ireland or via this country, when they will De deeit with in the ordinary way. AS regard the spies there is considerable difference O1 opinion and a suggestion by the Americans that vie should irterrogate them in Eires This would probably be agreed to by the Eire authorities. Cecil does not however think that this 15 a good plan and I agree. I have suggested that we shoula ascertain rom SHAEF whether they would be prepared to give the Irish Mioert art merely instruet the to report to the FSP periodical- ly, if they satisfied the British authorities that they hau diselosed ald intoration in their possession. if they were raaay to ocept these conditions the: could be put to he detainees who would De handed over Dy che Irish provided they were iin agrement with the terms. 1c1 rang to say he has written a strong letter to the F.O. recommending that strong ster: should be ta en to remove alt Germans con- nectea with the G.I.8 1ro Swain anu have the interuea temporarily in GiD. ala finay sant back to Germany. A meeting nas been held about the future o1 ta 16 War Room. WhenSHAEF disbalas at the enc O1 this month it is thought that the war nuom Should no.t become part of the Control Coramissio but should continue to function as at present, OSS,SIS and Security service aeceptire pes- ponsibility jointly Lor the work. June 25rd Burt is going out to fetch Amery Daci in 10 tays time. Mills has telegraphed apout theruture of vetting personnel for allied armies. AS Corrop Guthriets section which formerly dealt with this matter is packing up there will be a bit o1 a loop-hole as viisas wili not in future be required. I do not KTOW that this very much matters in inciviauad cases. What I cannot see however is why many cases O1 allied persorrei joining allied armies should still come to this country. we nave moTe or tess succeeded in stopping them coming from Stockholm. It seems ausurd to atow them stit to come from America. I should have thought that they ought to stay where they are until they could be received by their OWI countries. The only exceptions are of course the Poles. I have as ed Lee to arrange E meeting with Diplock,Barry,D.4,Baxter anc Byrde. At the daily meeting we discussed thequesuton of Polish transmitters. I1 the Polisi Lovt. in London is to be disDanded they can no longer go on transmitting although there may still be a case For the Polish Forces o1 which there are some 120,000 here,in Italyand in Germany. The position here has over Deon satisfactory since the P.M.years aso gave Sikorski permission to transmit 11 his own cyphers. SOE through whom they had peen trans- 91 mitting to their underground movement, had an arrangement where anl messages were deposited with their en clair translations but there was of course never any guarantee that the messages sodeposited were the ones sent in cypher. mon always accepted responsibilty for the PoleS 2eme Bureau messages although I do not think any proper steps were taken to monitor the communications. Whenever this matter was raised by us we were always prushea aside by .P. and SI" who said that they haa everything in hand. We raised the matter again when Polish transmitters started up in the Mid East, but still got no satisfaction. Lastly there were at messages transmitted by the Polish Minister of the Interior. Presumably these will now cease. Alley came to see me about the Polese At pre- sent they receive a grant from the British Govt ich is more or less vise-d by us, of some 30,000 a year for Polish security duties. The renewal of this grant will come up again before long. THis IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENTL UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Mae Doo Buster tells me that Erich PFEIFFER is likely to produce quite interesting material. He has alsotolu us about the Frenah Naval Olice: wnO was corresponding wi.th a cover auress o1 MrS. BRANDY in DuDlin. This cover acaress came to light through the Jessid JORDAN Case ana was passeu CU the French wiho intercepeeu the N.0.8 correspondence. For a saoTt cime the Freuch tried CO play the N.O. paci but tis apparently was quici/ resiseu by the Germans. The N.0. was rineiy axacuteu. PFEIFFER said that he was one o1 the mOsE blatant spies he eval came acros He lirbt went to tae German Embassy anu was finally passed on DO PrEIFFER who thought he was a plant He then sent French navol cyphers to PFEIFFER through the oruinany post,our when these were found to pe genuine a mee -ing was arrageu at all hotal in Antweip. The OIlicer turned up at the meeling in fuit French Navul univorm. PFEITER could naruy believe his eyes and avoided the reudezvous as he thought it was probably a trap. bater he made contact with the ollicer in his room and received the whole trurk o1 documents of corsiderable value, inclucins a gool many details o1 naval secrets whien we hau pussea to the French. Incidentaluy the French never told us anything about the Case at tha time except that the man had been Callant ald erecu ten. 21 June 25th I had another interview wu.th inuuter otewur tare main purpose of which to mariu him pens relating EO the suesesteu comuinea Intelliger.ce services propo eu D/ the JIU to the Ghieie of Suadton the basis o1 Capau Dunnets report. ninclater Tal through it aniu was T think rather shockea to discover the Lmhense number of intelligerce orglisations >1 one kind or another. OY the other hand he fet that nything winicn kewded to prevarst the immense amount ai overrapping that went on between the three Service intelligeice uepts. was Ali to the soon: This metter Leu us to uiscus. the relations batweerl ovarb anu clandestins inteigence. I said that T felt it wrote to scuuy elandestin inteliim gerce without the aground o1 overt intelligence. for axample, 11 you were marin a stuuy of communist activities either qua comunism or qua espionage, it was af con sideraule importunce to how what was belig said in certain organs o1 the Russian Press. This applied particurariy to Dotaitarian regimes where the Presa was controllady Very oiter clandestine intelligence could only be properly assesses or interpreter with this aciground. Equally it was necessary to heck clandestine intelligence against overt ntetiigence otherwise you might di1u the you were paying an Informant IOI irormetion that t he was really maRirg up rom the newepaperu. In the jast it nau Deen necessary 1Or each dept. to attempt to do a certain amount 01 OVE overt intellig erce Work aceoruing to its particular need. There have been IIO aepts. 0I Govt. to which you coullu turn 1or the informatio you requireur Neither tue o. nor any other kept nave a translation pureau nor was it the practice 1or the F.0. UO receive copies Ol the 1oneist. Press except in y exceptional cases. They relier entirely on the Ambassadorts Suati to uranslate and 5anu home whatever they considered to De OI interest, but ol course they or LooKeu at these LrOI the in.0. point o1 view. le had on occasion obtained extremely useful information From the Institute 01 Interna- tional. Affairs which was really the only body to which we could turn Findlater asited about our representation on the J-T.0. I told him that I thought that organisationally this was wrong, that Harry Alllan was as he knew responsipie For the factories cnd for port security. It fol owed therefore that many of the things discussed at the JIC did not really concern him. He was however extremelly good about this anu whenever he felt That there was a matter in which I was interesteu he would sugest trat E should Bo insteuu OI him. Findater as ed about factory security. I said that in many ways this was one o1 the most civilian Jobs that the olrice uid alau that it ebald well have been carried out by our Regional Officers There Was nowever an important function to be performed but it could ME iin my view be considerably ratiohalised. We ought to concentrate or new principles and new processes partic- ullarly when they vere applicable to war industry. It was of vital imporbanee that we should get early intimation so that we cou institute Saleguarus and provide the hecessary cover. This meant constant badgering oi the Service Depts. who were only too reaay to put everything on the secret list and dissi pate ourenergies on things that dd not matter. It was in my view quite useless to try and protect armamlants which had aureaay been issued to the troops. 3 We then aiscussed Port Security. I explained to Finalater that our Port Security Owlicers were being demobilised and that very shortly port control woul.u revert to the O.immigra. tion start. To provide lor this we were now engaged in giving lectures to I.O.S. I explaine to rindlater that the .0.Service could not be wholly satisfactory as lone as it was dowr-graded as at present. For example, I pointed out that you could not get a man of very great intelligence il as at present they were recruited at S6 a week. Findlater seemed to think this was a serious matter. He told me that the horizon o1 his enquiry was extending almost dai.ly as he kept on coming across related problems. He intended however to cover the whole ground and not conline his report to geueraditiea He was going to get down to conopete Iacts. He said he wound be very pleased to talk to the other officers OI B.Diviaion alter his return i'pom Geraany. Hughes and Alley came to tala to me about Polish trausmitters. I now have a List of some W/T sets which have at one time OT another been in use here by the Poles. I propose to take the matter up win C. since presumably if Lublin is recognised the majority o1 these sets will have to c.lose down. Strang, one of our officers in the I.0.M. came to see me. He wants to return to Spain where he was formerly aaviser o1/a British firm in Barcelona. He is not going to resumehis former pout but will prooably take a holidayfor a few years. HISISACOPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 June Doo zu KLop came to see me last night. He is going to interview Schellenoerg in Germany June 26th Vivian ased me to attend a meeting between himself,Tim Milne and Inoides on the future of CICB. Ionides had rather ambitious plans for the future with regard to CICB and apparently wendered whether Dixon was heavy enough guns. He mentioned the Iact that Dixon had had trouble with COSSAC on Second Front planning. I said that quite apart from anything ese Dixon was literally the only man we had. If we had anybody of the calib- re of Dica White and could spare him we Should send him out. We haa thought of Kirby Green but he had a certain amount to do stitt in Gib. and allso had a sic wife who woula not be able to stand the climate and who needed Looking after here. I said that I had rather been given the impression by MacIver that all the lanring work had peen aone and that Dixon would only oe required from time to time to put a certain amount 01 bil in the wheels. Ionides Seemed to think that some- thing rather more that tnis would be necessary and that it needed an astute politician, and. that the passage might not be a very easy one I Said that Dixon had done weii as an RSLO, haa survived Swinton in WAIrica who was very sorry to lose him, and had since done well in E.Africa. The incident at COSSAC I did not think was altogether his fauit. There were certain basic matters on which it was quite impossible to get any decision either out of the BGSI or the W.0. and with- out which it wa. very difficult to ao any serious planning. Dick managed eventually to drive through this but of course he had very exceptional qualifications. I was very anxious that Dixon should not start O1I on a bad wic et and I thought it quite likely 25 that everyone woula rinu hin adequate ior the job. II on the othl half ne daile we shoula have to think again. I Said tha t I th thought it woulu De important ultimately to araw the Australians ito CICB. They already had a Security Service and might well have Secret Service O1 their own. O THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 dude 20 vo June 27th I save another talk to the I.0.s on the same lines as last week. they all seemed very pleased with the course anu the trouble we were taxing to put them in the picture. I went to see Cavendish-bentinck about 3 mat- ters. (1) the Poles, what was to be the future of the 22 transmitter. which they now operated in this country? C-B said that within 2 weaks the British Govt. would recognise the Lublin Govt. anu that t e relore alll transmitbers except for representative: of the Lublin Govt. would cease. He was a little vague about the armed forces. I told him I would be taling to O.later about the transmitters which from our point OI view had never been veny satisfactory. It had always been heid to be Gampier-Parry' busines ara he never vouchsarea ary information. I took the opportuity o1 pointing out how unsatisfactory our po ition had been vis-a- vis R.S.S. aey were suppoed to be out techical tool but we never really knew how their Forces were disposed. (2) I left with C-B Walkerts memo on pigeons. He is putting this up to the JIC. (5) I then disessed the case 0l Negrin and explained that: some time ago we had wanted to carry out obserr vation on his activities here but had been prevented by Morrison. The case had been strongly bac.ked by the F.0. and had I think reathed the ministerial level. I gave C-B a memo showing what the position was ana the extent to whiich Negrin was now being backed by Moscow. In this Co nnection I outlined to him my theory about Soviet intentions to build a bigfleet and to control the various Narrows in the Baltic and the medicerranean. 27 He thought this was quite plausible. He then asked me how rindlater was getting on. I took the opportunity oi giving him my views about the future set-up, and was surprised to find that in his view there should certain- ly be amalgamation on tae C.E tront and possibly also on the subversive movement front, though in precisely in what form he did not say. He also thought the idea O1 both SIS and ourselves being responsible to the Minister O.1 Deience was unuouotealy the right set-up. He entirely accepted the view that,being aavisory, ib was undesirable tO betunder erlaedepartmental minister. Generally speaking he felt it inappropriate for SIS to be under the FO Sunce much OI what they did really corcerred the delence of British territory. THiS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 duNe Doo Victor brought rts.Schwarzer and Schoeten oi 12th A.G. Interrogation Group to see me, He walited me to talId to them gereraliy aocut U.I. which I did. I then arrangeu for them to go down and see the records at Blenneim, as I felt it might oe hepiul to them to know what was behina them in this respect. The tendency oi 12 A.G. has always vad.. to thinn that they could conduct interro- gations in the field ald that there is nothing to be gained from senaing people back. b. ana S. entirely agreeu however that once tactical interlisence hau bec extracteu there was every advantage in taciling the proolem where the Urielers and interrogators could Consult with each other. June 28th I had a talic with hiry alu vixon. I toLO when what Ionides had Said. Tim seameu to that that Ioniues was rather inclin.eu to build castles it the air anu te De a little vague when pinned aOWrl to coneTete facts. I did ot give any inuicatuion unat S15 were a little aoubtiul about vixonts suitapility for the job. Later I Saw macIver anu Ioniuo: wher we discussed the CICB JOo and Dixon's suitability I think in general. thet Ioniues views are souna altnough I am a little douotiul whether at the moment we coulu do mone than mare preparatiol.s. I imressed upon him the vital necessity OI CICB or its component parts conceutrating on the production of information. 29 Hart returned today Iron Germany He said that he had had the most interesting 6 days of his life. The set-up at SHAEF at Frarkurt had to be seen to be believe.. He had nicinamed it "Kur-ort SHAEFf or "Ober Belsentf. The Americans were o1 course in 1uii once strol ing apout thei grounus hand in hana with their girl-frienas, eating ices and listening to the Jazz band which Dared incessantly all day. hart coulu not imagine what the Russiar Mission couu be tniniging )f all this- The thing that SurUEK him mout was the stream of German P/WS aemobilised, aru returning to their homes, Ali in fairly lean,onden Fashion. He Said that Speer who was in change ol the German MAP, hid been interrogateut anu a good maty o1 his documents examined. Our estimate uI German prouuction ha been grossiy exasgerubeu. Proauetion hed been Steauily aecining lor several years The olly points where our estimates nad agreeu was where our mounting graph crosseu their declininggraph. Speer had had reular reports from Amnerican sources giving rot orly their proauetiol figures but also a good many 01 ours. When asiea where the information came from he said that he was ol the uistnibution list! Presumably he got it From one O1 the American mbassies auroaa. A.F.H.0. monthly O.I. sumary For May states that 500 arrests had peen made in Itaty atone It is already clear that in Italyas in the West, no plans were mace for suovensior sion in the event O1 surrenuers ALL pans were Dasea on the assumption that directions. would continue to be given from one cantre o1 organ -ised resistance. LocaL plans uaerelore For Werewoli and similar activities became the function of counter-resistance wok. Little has yet been Learned OI such unuertarings. In conclusion it may be said that important 30 ofliciadls have yeerl iuentilied all are being arrested in suiicient numbers to mnaie it possible (a) to define aecurstely post- occupational aims of the G-I S. S.,(b) (b) to iden- tiny the buik of the GI.S. in Itay amu (e) to distocate any possible attempt at survival. The netwonks o1 postroccupa ional agents ane for the MOSD part broken or incapable ol indepenuent action. So lar there is no evidence either o G.I.s. survival of attempts on the part or captured officials to doudle-cross allied counter- inteiligence. bastly there are no cases o1 subversion directed by elements of the G.Is. since the surrender. A P/W officer captured in Paris on the 24th August 1944 has given a certain amount of intormation about 3F activities. In par- ticular he talks about Roger who appeared in the GIIBERT case and about Boddingt ton. He says this unuersround group uruer Paul had liaison with London through a Capt.Eli or Elly, and the Abwehr had daily reports on the object and missions ol this group. The Abwehr did not molest this group due to the fact that the information obtained was too valuable. Besides that the Englis were parachuting weapons ana equipment to thi group which the Abwehr either intercepte or kept track OI So that they could lay ther hands on them at any time. hrough roger the Abwehr was suceessul in shadowing in the summer of 1943 a British coloneil Bottingham obviously Bodaingtor) believed to pe the leader of the British L.S.section for all of Franceswh was in Paris Lor 5 weBrs. It seems that where Colbottingham arriveu im France he needed a carte dliaentite which Roger got lor him through the ADwehr Bureaus I.0. The Abwehr in this wa, was able to get the colonelis picture anu trace his 30 3 movements while in France Maj.von Felsmann the leader of DF, wanteu LO arrest the colonel in order to impress Berlin. However Sonder- fuhrer Furbeck talked him out of this by showing him that if tae Aowehr captureu the colonel it might Jeoparuise some oi their other agents.. In Oct.1945 the head o1 the group,Paul, went LO Loruon Lora conference. During his absence Roger took over the teauer Ship of the group. In this way tha Abwehr got possession oi alithe oruers all reports maue ta Lonuon by this group. This source was particularly interesting to the since some other resistance groups availed themselve of the radioracdlities of the Paul group. Paul returned From London on 19th Mar 1944, and brought back the news that the invasion date had been set for the end o1 May or beginning of June. Shortly alter this Paul went to central France to orsanise all the existing resistance group into the FFI. Amongst other things this same agent states that the whole production of the wellknown porcelain factory at Sevres was going to Hermann Goeringwh had ordered a special 17,000 piece Service to be made for his lodge,kard Hall. A P/W named Richana Gericen, who had many aliases and was in command o1 FAK 213, states that sometime after the capitula taor ol France the Abwenr was engaged in extensive reorganisation to cover the Lowlanus and France. He insists however unat Abwehn activities in the USA and UK hnau never really been contemplated before anle that une ropllem had then to be taciled From seratch. This of course entirely coitcilles with our experiences here. the Germans had never thought it worth while to establisn an urdergrouna organisation nere 0I any extent ana wher they reachea the channel ports they were extremely ill-equippea in the matter 32 obtaining inomation 1rol the UK. It was this that Led to their hastily-prepared anu inenicient. exploits in 1940 aunu 1941. June 29th I saw Ingram before he ledor andy. Kellar brought Gont in for a discussion. Got is here 1or a 1ew weeks undergoing tr ment for some-loruol dysentry We nae a long discussion about the Palestine Police Gort is creariy anxious thae Giles shounu De brought into the Ispal picture, particularly owing to the cases of police corruption which crop up Irom time to time. Apart from this GL Giles is a very sensitive person and if he were to suspect tha information was being withheld from him he wouua De even move difli- cult than he is already. we pointed out to Gort that once information or that pind was in the hands of the police it was very difricuit to control and their whole upbringin wouLu be conducive to their coing omething which might well jeopardise the sources The view taken by the military was that it was more important to keep a souree which at the time o1 a crisis would give an indication ol the ime,place anu scope o1 a possibue D-day, which should on no account be sacrificed for the lessar auvantage of being able to uea with a corrupt pouceman. We then diseusseu the rlew proposal that the DSO Should no longer have the Salle inaepen- dace Dat should come more closeoy tnver the I.B.stail than he i5 at preserite I think the L.B.stafl fell that they wart LO get their plans well mapped out on l-tha basis DI ISPAL in preparation for the coming erisis. This woutu meat that the ATIY would De the controllers or this source more than the DS0. 33 I think the army eds can be met but T doubt whether non or anyone else wi.ll agree to their having unrestricteu control of ISPAL. Keltar will. have to try and sort this problem out. He leaves for ralestine in a couple ol days time. THISIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 JuLu 20O I had a talk to C. about the JIC proposals, for scientific intellig ence anu suggested to him that there night be a place in all this for Victor,bot} both on the flensive and defensive side. He said ne would certainly give this careful consideration. He told me that in Switzerland OSS had beer: completely penetrated although there was nothing to show that the Woou material hau Deen planted. IL had also come out that there was an Americin oTlicer who had been working for the Swiss presentation in the USA, who had been passing information to the Bepmanss This officer had goU to know 3u that we could deal with U-poat Ultra. The Germans had been informed but did not believe it. THHIS IS A COPY ORIGINNAL UUCUMENT RETAINED ACT IN 3(4) DEPARTMENT 1958 OF THE JuL PUBLIC UNDER 200. REOORDS SECTION I told c. the present State o1 arlains with regard to Looper ana that as soon as wa got all the carus in our hanas ve should De interrogating him. 35 THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOGUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNOER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 dune oDio June 30th Curry left me part 5 Ol his raport to stuay' luring his absence on leave. I lunched with Kim when we had a further discussion about CICB. IT seems to me that we wre more or less ali in line and that it is entirely accepted that the head of CICB shall be an MI5 officer. I gave Kim to some extent my views on the future deiensive set up involving the passing over all erquiries on foreign territory to the cuandestine service. "hese seemed to fit in entirely with his owIl. He seemed also to De of the opinion that SIS ageucies 3 abroad shoulu not De uivineu u il.to delels- sive, C.E. anu suoversive movenlelsus. Aril members of the stais OI an orsarisation on Foreign territory should be able DO ueal with all these subjects. His gaunar is also Cis view. There appears to be 1o chal.ce of getting the Japs out of Stockholm as Sweuen is apparently tae protecting power lor Various Duropean interests in Japan. The Turkish Ambassador has Deal having iong conversations with Mollotov in Moscow about future alliances. The mussians are pressing not only for military bases in une Straits area but also T'or a revision o1 the 1921 Treaty in which Russia cedea certain Armeniar border territory to Turkey. The Russians are sa, ing that this treaty was couctuuea al t a time when they were weak and that it must therefore be revised and the territory returned to the HSSR. the Turcs sa that the treaty was not one which the Toviets were force to accept ana an unjust one, Dut rate a remedy of a former injustice cone LO Turiey It was wenin himsesI who saw the injusuice anu repaired it. Mototov said that ar unjust treaty Detweer Soviet Ausoiand Polalid which had Deen sied ir 1921 had TOW Dea rectitil by th preserit Trienul. Polish Govt. anu thus a long all ustomary Irienuship beuwears the two countries had beer consoliaateu. the Turkish ambassador reluseu to consider this reyuest,saying tha t the oviets were ncit ther in need o1 a lew more square metres or a lew thousanu mr e people and tha their eeyuest was therefore al expression o1 a policy of prestise Molotov then diseusseu the questio of the Straits., While he coula not complain that the present situation haa in any way embarrasseu Poviet Russia during this war,he felt that while Russia might have confidence 37 in Turkish gooawiil she might YOt be completed confident of Turkey' capaity to deend the Straits. the Turesaiu thaithe Cold of envisage a situation in which Russia and Tursey were fighting together and that the derence of the Straits would ir such ar eventuality De a matter o1 discussion peuweex their General Stafis. The dirierence betvreen Molotov and the Turk is thhat the Turk wishes to have a treaty O1 alliance which in ibsef toullu he lees give the Russians al the guarantees they require Since in the everrt of war they would be fighting oM the same Side. Molotov: on the other. hawu is macing The treaty an allliance conditional upor military bases and the cessation ot parts 01 Armenta and Georgia. Ir cerence of his request for territorial concessions Molotov said that the Soviet Union are a great ndpoweriul country but that this could never be a reason lor sacrificing the rights of tne small Armenian ana Geongian repuolic.a. It seems that the Turks at the moment are rot prepared to did more that consider tite romise of modifications of the Monureu Corvelton alongside a treaty o1 Toendship altar the ioTeT had been ciseusseu amon6 Urre couDTed- ting purties. Meanwaile there appear DO be rumouTs that the Sovieus are coruucting Buspicious mllitany activities on the Turkish easterr Prontier. July 2nd Craufurd talked to me about his tutura. He 15 in no hurry to seave the kept. and would be quite prepared to stay on i the ditions were favourapile. He apparerruly has some alternative Orlen from ICI O organise their intelligence section. I tolu him it would be impossiple to reach a decision in this matter until probably apout the end oi 3 Set. I have a nar e from nemial Johnson on iaison with SIS. He begins: HI have louna it dilficuit throughout to rinu i Section V. (a) a responsible person wilo car give a quici aeeision in any matuerg (b) a person who is corversant with ther owI fites. S a result of these deficiencies casep alter case has been a sequence o1 events o half the following is tpical. Arings me up ana aSis For information aDoud a cerua. case. I reply that I will raw our lie anu ring him DaCi. When L pinga A. is away Dut B. who krows nothing about the case, takes a message. T tue course C. OI whom as like as not I have never heard, telephones me and asks me what the whole matter is apoutt. this is I am arraii only too true A report on AmE 6 o1 the RaHA paseu on intormacion supplied Dy certain the Leadm ing personalities states that on 5 occasions aocumerts were stolen Lrou the Dritisn Emo assy in Sofia. These raius were orgariseu Dy one BUREKE anu were carried ouD with the assistanee of the Buigarian Police ana an emplloyee ol the Empassj. However', the capuureu documents could not be dercoded he American 9th army have interrogatea Va count Hiuemaro KONOYE, brother oi the e Premier 01 Japan Prince KONOE. The laminy isrelated to the Emperor, i.e. LO ou Himself 0f this eloseness to divinity KONOVE is amazingiy humble. He relers LO nis age-old 1amily history as SO much nonsense and derives all his pride only from his merits as a musician. His whole Taminy apparently. has artistic leanings Another brother was a poet who died from ariniing Loo much wine. He Started drinking every morning White sittir 31 in a bath-tub writing poems. There WES a second bath tLiD next too him and when a visitor came he had to get into it, was served with food and wine and had to listen to divine poetry. The third brother is a painter and scuupter ana Hidemaro himself eomposes an conduces operas and symphonies. He has apparently toured America ard other countries in this capacity. He has ofrerea LO ollaporate in the matter 01 psychological warfare against Japan. He says "Short wave broaueasls are usaess since the Japanese are prohibite from having short-wave receiving sets. TI such Z1 set came in from abroad the parts were taken out by the Customs. Medium Wave trarsmissions from as outpost as near to sapan as possible would be the only solution All propagandi Should be avoiued which winly have tile effect O1 hardening Japante determination to fight to the last. NO mention o1 capitulatior, punishment or unconditionai surranuer OF o1rending statements about the Euperor shoulu be made. Fropaganua should stress that we are fighting not the Japarese people but their criminal war lors. Fropaganas shounu avell on the pleasantness of peace anu should be contrasted with the reality ol over-increa -sing bombings. Propaganda should however ex loit the belief the Japunese in the mlystical and supernatural. KANOYE had in mind a special Broadcast pretenaing to come from the next world, from the ghoses o1 deau soldiers. Intelligence in apan is directed mainly against communists and is well organised. Abroad it is an inerricient service. Its main weakness is that it is split up in entirely independent services of the Army,hav and F.0. without any ertort at co-ordination The only sectlol which was working well and proaucing results was the Naval ESpionage Section against the USA. Kremer Ol stocrhoim had admitted that wnilst there he had an arrargemerit with ONADERA the Jap MA for an exchange o1 intelli ence information. Somewhat reluctantlly Kremer is beginning to supply particulars o1 the sources which provdued onauera witn strategic and tactical information resanding the dis- position of allliea forces in this country articulars of troop movements ard allie o movements on the western front, O1 the French Army anu Air Force, of British airerant industry, conditions in the Rar hast disposition of nsto-Americin Airborne units, Russian code Dooks and USA raw material position. Onaderat; information was coI- Siuered more valuable than Kremeris aru the Germans paia literally tor it. Onauera sot in ormation direct From Major Kempr, deseribeu as Chder oi the Attache dept. oi the Sweuisii WO., and mayor Peterseny Sweish Intalligelce Oilicer. Kremer sot his OWLI information inuirectiiy through Hepps the uerman Fress Attach in Stockhoim, Irom UyPS,corresponcent OI the Svenska Dagblad who visiteu Aglard, and reported Or bomD damage. He a1so got information from othar Sweaish journallists as well as From Uol.Blatt and ommander Oebent O1 the Swedtsh General Stall. Pol. information came From Swedisn M.P.S and certain officials. Tre above more or Tess confirms our view that any intormacion which reached the Sweaish General Staf Was likely to go on to Bertin anu Tokio. A document has been captured which gives the minutes of a meeting hela Dy Hibler wich Blomberg,Fritsche aederygoering aru von Neurath on lyov.5th 1937. The meeting appears to have lasted 42 hours, Hitler set out before his commanders in Chief and loreigr 41 Minister his plans for Germanyt expansion and his views on how wuropean politics would develop. Germany Could not undertake a policy of economic autarchy in the sphere of raw materials, principally copper aru tin and in the case of 1ooa. Nor,uue to lack of foreiin currancy coulLu Germany buy food in forei.gn markets in years Ol bad harvest. me liven he said in a period of economic empires. Economic motives le behind the wiill o1 Japan and itally to expand and economic need will dirve Germany to expand. Germuny must obtain agricultural space and since Bribain controls the sea unis space must De sought in Europe aru not by coloniau exansion The main quesclon lor Germany was hov to achieve the greatest possible corquest at the least possibile cost. Hitler welt On to say that Germnarr politieiane trust reckon that its two hateral enemies,Engiand ana France, would oppose the rise OT Germany at al costS. But both these countries had their weaknesses. He did not regard the Britiah Empire as unshakeable. Irerand and Inuia were both struggling Tor independence, anu the U.K. had litt.le power over the Dominions. Frarce might be pilunged into civii wa and was political unstable. Germany' tasi wound have to be carried out between 194 cna 1945. After that daba the German id in Poarmament would decrease, resources woudu be dimitea to current recruiting age groups aru the Nazi eaders would De older. I1 Hitier was stil. alive it woud be his irrevocable decision to solve theGerman problem Of rebensraum not later than 1943-45. Hitler believeu that Britain and France had already written off Czechosovakia. Poland would not attack victorious Germany with Russia at her pack anu the speed of German operations would probably aeter Russia herseli from intervenina Hitler forsaw war breaking OLLt between Britain and France on the one hand and Italy on the other in 1938 whels the Situation in the euiterranean would come to a head. He would not entar into a military agreement vithl Italy but he wouull act independently to attack Ozechoslovakia and Austria once the wedrwal started and ail partacipants were too busy to intervene. Hiter stated that the German question could De solved only by way of force anc that this was never without risk. A note of caution was sounded both Dy Blomoare anu Fritsche. They repeatedly potateu out that anghand aru irance must 10t appear as enemies oi Germany ancL they staLau that the war with Htaly woulu not bind the rrench Lo sueh am extent that the wouu Tot be in a positior Lo commence operations OI Germanyf western rontier wth superior forces. The Lad Which Fralce had gOL im mobilisation anu the smalt Value or existing lortilicacions in the Rhinerland would Cancer the lour motorised uivisiols waiion would be operating in the west more or less incapabie of movement. Special attention was drawn by Blomberg to the strergth o1 the Czech fortilications, the bulluing o1 Which hau assumea the Cherracter 01 a maginot line and which would presert extreme diliiculties for attack. Hitiar thought that the opertcon against Ozechoslovakia might Lake puace in the sumer 01 1938. In reply to statements by Blomberg ama Fritsche regaruing England and Fraucels attitude, Hitler repeated his previous statements and said that he was convinced of Brituin's nor-participation and that consequently head not believe an military action by rrance against Germany. In view o1 Hitleris informati tion uoering thought that the miitary undertaking in 13 pain Should be abandoned. Hitler agreed in So lar as ne peieved thet this decision shoula be postponed for a suitable date. According to Meissner, a member of Hitlerie Chancellery, Hitler was anxious about Hussian intentionsin the Bauans and these consider- ations together with Soviet troop disposition persuaded him that a Russian attack on Germany was inevitable. Dr.Brandt,Hituer S personal physician, estimteed the total loss from air ralus as betweer 5 aflu 6 hunurea thousante He had noestatistics For German Army losses but he understand that neitei S estimate was between L, 3300,000 and 1,400,00 killed. Steengracht, uestioned on Germany S attack on Russia; stateu that in his opinion the deciding factors Werre Russiats instransigeance her troop aispositions ana a statement oy Churchil in the lall 01 1940 that surprising evelate coalid be expected soon in the Bast. July rO Stapilora came in to discuss his future with me. He thinks that propably by the enc oi this month ne wihi De able LO wine up his affairs. He thinks that however tates over his show ought to take over one ot two o1 his seereteries,wh know au about the agents. I tolu Stoplord that as regalas Hooper he shoud get the Tauest uope From Herbert. IL seemed to me that there was at Least a fairly strong prima facie case. Anthony'an Mrs.Pitt came to see ne about 6 so-called Spaniards who hau been repatriate from the British more in Germany ana wera on their way to Spain. One of themaceording to Peppermint, is an ex-Blue Division man and another may not in faou be a pandand at alle His panish is very peculiar ana he has to. some extent tre appearance o1 a German. Untortunateiy 5 of these people have already ert. One oi them is reported to have given a letter to Sartorius, the Sparish Air Attache, for posting in Germany. Sartoriu is going on a couuctea tour to the British 2oe. Sartorius examined the letter ant came to the conclusion that hit contained a code. He had terefore expressed his intention of handing it over to the M.IR condueting officer. We cannot get hou 0 the Olliaer to ask whether- etterwas i.n lact hanat ovepe It was therefore diliicuit 1or uS to provide any Suitable grounds for interro- gating the other Jouraliaty going out. We considered whether we could TIOE pernaps hoa the m up but in the erd came to the conclusion that It woud De best LO gat nid of the. Judy 4th I #gave my Final tal.i DO the 1.0.S touay. They Seemad as peaseu aDeud Lnair cowuucteu tour as Srthe the previous parties. Milmo and 1 went to see Newsam aDoud the case or HIrSChy an 020 internee wao had on his own admission woricea 1or the Germans. HIRSCH is applying for an inJuetior to restrain the Home Secretary from deporting him Lo the allied military one in Germany where he will either remain intermeu or Dy Tereaseu according to whatever policy prevalis Locally. Newsam thought that there might be an easy way out by ettin him go to the Argentie. We pointed out that this was undesiraple Ior the following reasons: (I) it is alliea poric. to prevent members o1 the GIs from operating outside Germany. argantine is a danger spot lor such activities.(2 it is allied policy to return all such indiviuuails to the British zone in the case of Germans and Austrians or 4S to allieu GOVerrments. (5) the FBI would pe seriously concert.aa as they have specially asaea us at least to get their views Derore any people interested il the Penilsula or America are rereused. Newsalnl Saw the position at once ana entirely asreeu with our views. He as.eu us UO Let him have a Letter. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUAEMT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT ONDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 dunG 2010 Bacor talkeu to mde a lot about the uillicul ties O1 his job. He salu he nau 165 persons contacts who held a immersse variety o1 view: about how CP members alu people collecte wich other suoversive mOVemenus SHYOUU be dealt with. The Control Commission sLatau! Ware very surice Doth as resamis une or the Leit. -.01 other soverrnert depu.. some vere inelinea to lling mal out il he was ory even miluly commuuisl. Others suit they aid rot 5ee why it. maovenau. Dacon hit hau a Long talk with rinutater to whom he had givenn his views in Col.siuer- apie uetail. I had a torg talk with MortoTl Evalis about the future 01 RSS anu apout his OWAA tutura. He told me that L re was a move LO amaleamate RSS with GC & CS, arld a welter 61 incrigue was going 011 in higher wireiass ciretes. In the miast oi all this he thought that the best thing was to go back to the iilst princ: ples OI the Jop and cuusider how it coLua hest be done. He said that RSE at the momern had compiled very considerable recorus identiiying ether trailic. As an organdsar tion it was n.lact the olly unit uealing in gereral search ara aiscriminatior. It differed from the other Y.uits as it was going i'ror the unrowii to the knoWIl whereas they had a definite ins truction as to what lines OI truiiic they were to intereept. M.t. was alraiu that the eflectol amalgama- tion woulu be (a) to place v/had he feit Was a goou organisation in spite oi its chief urer another head who was not reknowed for nis powers as al orgarliser. Nobody delieu that GC &c CS had done a WOrder ful JOD but this had not beer aue to the orginisation out nather in spice ol it. Had the orgunisabior been better the results woud nave Deer. ootaineu wick far tress lebour anu highnt have pain mora interligentiy use. on the credit biue he thought amagamnation woulu certuiriy elreot economies in the engineering field anu might give his Section at better chance OI Obtaining the by- rouucts o1 the WOrK OI other sections. The real canger he thought was that is TS once got in to uC & CS it would be cut 011 from the outside vonld alu not nave the access to intelligence prarches wiuich was SO desirable AS resaras his own position nothing would induce him to continue tO serve unuer Matuy. He would however be prepured to run RSS as a separa e orgaisation or to go into GC &c OS provided he were granted a certain measure oi Ineaiom. I to1d him that I thought Finuiater stewart would be ca.ing a look at RSS and I hau already made it clear thad hesnowiu not lail to nave a talk with M.E. eanwhile I should put him wise again to the generall position. 47 ACT 3(4) IN ORIGINAL DEPARTMENT 1958 OF THIS THE DOCUMENT dune IS PUBLIG A UNDER COPY DO RECORDS RETAINED SECTION Ju/i th I hau a long talk with baxter alru Hart apout the persomue OI the LRO. We have abreea that a smaII nucleus Shoua be kept on to deal with cases ither at the Uratory or Wimbledom it and when the LEC is close uowIr. These peop.e would be unuer vesey when Baxter does We reuireu For imneulate purposes 2 or BPolish Syeakens to sort out the documents of the Polioh Security service which are now Coucealeu ir trumes uisuer peus ali over LOndOt. 4 people Would lire to stay on in ary poSGr st-war organisation. I shall be 1 seeing these when I visit the LRC. Others are to tane various jobs, 2 in Bassport ontrol, one in the B.0., anu one lor the Control Commission. I went through Dizonts charter with McIver, Airy, Hixon and Cayzer. We maae a number o1 alterations to parts which might have aroused suspicion in Penuy's mind that we were trying tO go Behind his Back. I was very anxious that we shoulu not give the impression that we coula appeal over his head to SACSEA and tha in So 1ar as CICB wus concerned he should corSiuer himself to be directl/ under tie DMI. There is no particuar reason why this charter should ever be produced, but 11 it is I do not think that any exception can be taken to its terms. Dixor is resporsible UO the D.G. in his capacity as SLO, to SACSDA anu LO DMI lor the work that he does as superintendent ot CICB. LSOS Ranboon anu Singapore will be resarued as part 0l CICB until. they 80 over to a civilian or quasi-civilian status. Jul, 6th I haa a talcwith Perleat who is back 1rom Malta. I gave him my ideas about what I thought might be grobiems in the Meu. He did Lot seem to have any particular problems o1 his own except a number o1 cases where agents were complaining that they had performed valuable services ana had not been rewarded. The Maltese are going to have sone form oi selt-government within the Empire. After a long conversation with Alley about the Poles I went to See C. to try and get the position somewhat clarilied. I tod him that KLocek of the Polish SS nad ore or two others woud be prepared to carry on but lg 9 that this mighe involve us in Fairly large cmitments. mearwhite the documents haa Deer Iarmeu out on a number OI inuiviuuals with the exception OI some 40,000 cats which wene still at Polish HQ. C.salu that as Tar as he was Coricerned he hau taker over all the documents an the caras and hau given a letter signed Wilski aemanaing the return of these documents in accoruan.ce with a nythical agreement o1 1940. The Olfensive Polish Service had beer receiving apout 1250,000 a year in 6-monthly instalments. They had bans about 555,000, 210,000 O1 which had been_withurawn against a rainy day by Gano. the remaining 245,000 being paid back into the Anglo-Polish Fund recently formed to hold all subsidies to Polish organisations in this country. Gano wanted something like 080,000 in adaitior to the E43,000. C. this 1c inay be possible to get 2100,000 in aluyincluuing the 2,000, but ro more. Amounts to Gano wowiu only be pain ouu wich his approval. It is possible that we too might be we to draw on Crs Funds 1or Polish Security. C. however was arious touo very much uritil it pecame clear which Pores weresoing to say on anc who was going pack to warsaw. He thought wes shoud be well auvised to hold our hands in the meantime. He was also uncertain what Ganots organisation wouru ao in the future. They had bean valluadie in the past ana it might be that he would still continue to use them. I gather that Gen.Anuers had some kind of Intellig ence organisation operating from Italy ana that uano was also thinking 01 operating aguinst the Russias.s From oecupieu Germar territory. Cts feeling is te less he KTLows about this the better. The Poles seem to have a comp.ex about setting up Intelligence Services all over the world with no very positive idea as to what they could ao with the information when they got 50 They it. .will prouapy evertuctuy Come Lo See the rutilicy or Crleir operetlous,sil Snce triere Seens Little likelinoou or their geutin back into power IOT a very consiaeraile time ii every THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUUENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 JuNG Do0 C.adviseu against our puctine al olTicer Wicu the British Mititany Mission at polish H.ua. as it mignc Sawule us wiual Lhie ras- possibility which Was really coIt W.U. Ore. The W.0. have LO see that Uae Pulish Ministily Ol Nauiotecll. Dalsnce 0s 10t dusageu in anuti- Warsaw activities. We Have cuvieeu Undm DO ilave Polisil Cypnets uepusiueu wiuu Cuair copy O1 an message Sert. In 2 citiou chey soua have communications mnoniLoreu atl.c. periouiceiy chec.eu. Only il chis way can they elect vecuriuyi. We than Daclkeu about the future OTsunisa tion of both offices. I outlineu to in my views on ministerial control anu aso apout a uiviaing ine perwean ouleusive anu aerensive. ne was LUU couvilcea that it would be right for the orEuisation to come under any dept. than the 1.O. He ldlt that they aid more tor the F.0. ulid wene more dependent o1 thein For Ssivtauce than any other dept. I Said that I diu TI-U thinxthis was necessarily an oostace. He was equaly responsible to the Services lor What he alu for them and to any other kept. Lor which THISISA COPY 00 ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED 50 IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS he worred. LIAGTu958 he was advisory and should erelore coule 1100 ome neutral point. He did ll sean to be convinced that SIS should divoree itsell entirely from the Passport Control, although he thought that the ola rule that PCOS did not operate in countries in which they resided should be rigidly enrorceu. C.said that he was considering the amalgamati of RSS and GC & CS, although G.P. had put up a large scheme for the continuance ol RSS as a separate entity. IT RSS joined Sisint he was thinking possibly ol making GP its technica. adviser or placing him in charge OI SLU communications For the 1.0. It is realised however that if the FO have SLU, foreign goven. mel.ts will want reciprocity C. is rather in favour of SLU as it may give him the Necessary cover lor interception work abroad. A pension Scheme in SIS is apparently meeting with opposition from Andersor. SI- may fall back on some berevolent fund. C. thought Charies might lire to know apout this. I told C. about our enquiry about Hooper and suggested that it might have Sole Dearing on the ueaage Irom PCO Hague. C.warned me about Hill o1 SOE who is now the Liaison Officer with the control Commission. He has nothing concrete but cannot urderstana how HilI is persona grata with the Russians. C. has recalled from Moscow. His final act was to hana over a complete set of the SHAEF cards, to receive the reply from the Russians that they did not want them This I think must mean that the Russians have no set policy apout liquidating the GIS as such. They are merely concerned with 52 the liquidation o1 people OI a certain eliss. July 7th Keith came in See me lon a moment ana teu.l me that Kenneto Strong has accepted The job of PWE vice Bruce LOCrhart, in preierel.ce to getting command o1 brigade. He did not think that as a brigadier he stoou any chance of getting a division as during che warue had had 1IO fighting experience. IT was U therefore better for hit to retain his pres ut rank and remain in the intelliserce worla. He is I thimi a very uisuppointed mal and certainly IIO lover OI Molt. Aliey has ascertaineu that the caras OI the Polish security service ane still at SC. Paults schoo. He is arralisig to 6bt these out as soo1 as possible. We wiil thol have th cards ana documents Looked tnroush anc see what neeus copying anu what cars pe uestroyeu. Alley showea me a copy Ol the ecuer signed Wilski which is ar alias I'or Dumnaerdale, asking lor the return Ol all documents by Gano in aceoraarice with a my thicall agree- ment of 1940. I (o not think tha L thig docuuent is Likely to do SIS much good if Lublin ultimately decides to bring an action for the return o1 their property. After consultatior with Jim Hale I am very confirmed in this opinion, and we must certainly avoid uoing anything similar lines. Toinmy Harris has just arrived pack having left Garbo in Venezuela. Garbols prospects are fairly good and a provisional passage has been booked flor him Ol July 17th. $3 July 9th I hau a tal with Lee and Mars about the proposed meeting at the H.o. to ulscuss the abolitdon of the exit permit 1on British subjects.. It is interued to Tely Solely on passports. There is a small Cap in that there will be ro check on various peuple who already nave pessports. Since however most people have not traveled Our tue last 6 vearsa they will presunably have LO 8t their hassports renewed. IT could ther be checked agained a blac list, for wnad 10 is worth. The real point however IS thia bt willbe virtumliy impossible stop pespe for ravelling. It is one thing Lo refuse to grant al exit permit buL quite another Lo refuse a passport. The ore impilles Lnat a cencain jourmey is not in Lhanal cLoral interest, owing LO the War situation old the Limi tations Or bravei anc the other that the iindividuad is not &x it and proper person to Taceive the unotection Ol H.M.G. In practice a passport is never refused unles: the case is an overwhelming one. Two Lublin Polles arniveu here on the oth July lthougn there is no trace of them in D.4. They apparent.ly larded at Northoit Aerodrome and were accompanied by r.WINCH. ve have since ascertainea that Winch is art employe of the British Embassy i. Moscow who was formerly with PWE and MOI. He was aparently told by the Polish F.0. in Wansaw that everything was in orlerfor him to brine the Poles with nim. I gather thet the F.o. are not too peased. weanwhiie they hava asked us to keep a ere or them: Harris has received a wire to the elect that Garbo has yot his visa for spain anta his passport. Harris wilI be meting him ir. Maurid early in August. 5u I spent the ulternoon ut the LRC. I thaned them all for the splendid work they nad one and endeayoured to sive them a snort veivew 01 what our conclusions vere,pased on on captured documerus and interrosations. It seemed to me that they had tore a magnificert Job and that as jar as intoration went at preset we could Sa that no spy o1 any consequerice hau been operatilghere since the beginning of the wart There had of cours been a certary amownrt OI leaage brough neutrals anu theouga signals channels DU this diunit amount ao a great deal. E the interviewed a number O1 people about their Future. I aprangad Lor Vesay anu Marannaui to Join B.IB ana For Scott,wh sueuds Polighy to come UP ara aasiso Alter won the Poisn uocumerts. Brian welland came Lo see me anu left wth me ant Mteresting memo cpout Germany Written by bache ol M.I.11. Latche emphasisas chat the problem or intelligerce im Germanly wili he largely political, and that it is clleuriy O1 value to liquidate che UIS ant im any gaps in our wartime intalligerce. The problem O1 seeping our linger on the puise of Gernan poities ane beuilg them in tha right direction is far greater and mote important. Mellana came specially to sur how important 1t was for LIS to get hold of good people to work in our organisatipl. in the uuure aru to State Lie Control Commdssion. Unortunately the w.o. do not alltogether see the point O1 this. They have appointed Lethoriuge as MGI a very nice fellow but his whole experience is ol tars ana jungle waplare They are proposing to appoint in iciis place venerat Hollanus Who was al one time head O1 MIR anu has HO experience O1 CI. matters. hey carnot see that CI is a very highly Specialiseu job needing a great real of operidlice anu that THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMATTI RETAINED SSST NDEPABTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIO RECORDS appointments such gBickts successor cannot just be made on The o1 boy! DaSiST. July l0th I had a word with Burt about the Park Lane Hotel. Undortunately there is no house aetec- tive there Burt could get an introduction to the manager but Iraniiy I ao not think this will get us very far. It woulu mealt informing several reception crers and telling then to keep a list oi callers. This would be useful but the risa is I thin too great. Observation on the Park Lane Hotel is extremely ailticuilt as there are two exits. I attenaea the JIC meeting with Harry Allen primarily to present our paper on pigeons. The Air Ministry expert Rayner hela forth at great length about the necessity oi maintaining a small. unit. He did not Ithink that our proposal to appoint some civilian on a part time basis would be dgquate. The general view of the meeting was that Rayner himself was the nearest thing to a pigeon that anybody had seen and that he was clearly trying to mase a job for himself. It was decided that since the main use of pigeons was for intelligence purposes SIS whouhd hold a small meeting and express a firm view to the JIC as to what vas required. Alley has made arrangements with Burt for a van in which the cards will be removed from t.Pauls. I ra ve t ld Allley to ascer- tain f'romy the F.0. precisely what intorma- tion they require as I do not think that ooservatior is really going to bevery proritablle. I have told Alley to arrange to get a telephone check working Or the Park bane This will probably De 50 THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINE IN DEPARTMENT UNDEB SECTIO much more profitable. 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORD A0T 1958 AOT 1958 une 220(0 July lith I tola the weekly meeting the present position with regard CO the granting of visas by PCOs. This will be test to their discretion but only genuine applicutioi.s frum business people whose bonia sides are Known to tha PCO will De granted without rererence. This procedure is alreau in force in Lisbon, the other neutral countries will De soon brought into line. I have arrangeu with Walker to Sae Arnod- Forster on the question o1 pigeons. Dick rang mne up to now if I could give him anyone to assist Christopher Blune with cable ceusorship. He suugesteu Hughes. I doubted whether Hughes could be spareu and would pe suitable. I would aSiC Grogan if he knew of anyone. Grogan Later told me ne Could not suggest anyone at the moment. I discussed with Dick on very broaa lines his memo on the future.o. the office which is really a reversion to the old DOCOE plan. His one idea is to get a grip on the SIS organisations abroad. He had discussed this in great detail with Stuart Hampshire I told him of my misgivings anu that I you let him have a full criticism if possible by Saturaay. Meanwhite I discussed the Whole problem at length with Hampshire,hosi L and Hart. I particularly told Dic. tna I aid not wish EO muzzle him in any way as regaras his conversations with rindlater, though I thought that before uoing SO he might like TO see what I hau Lo say. 57 Jimmy Dicason came in to ask me about the future UI one ol his agents ana to give me certain documents in Arabic which he had 0 tained from ain Esyptian sources I ta Brock to get Someone UO look at this and express a general view as to whether we wanted any more. JuNE THIS ACOPY 200 ORIGINAL DOCUMEINT RETAINED NDEPARTMMENT UNDER SEOTTON Juy 12th 3(4) OF THE PUBLIG RECORDS the D.G. has returneu ACL1958I todhitg about the more important events that had occurreu throughout his absence. I also told him that I was going to be very shorthanded by the end oi the month. He clearly does not understand how much work there is to be done. Whille it is true to say that most sections are on half-time or some at less, if the experienced people go most of the work will devolve on me. It is Very aifricult to see how this can be avoided in present circumstances. I have already had to handle the affairs o1 a number o1 matters which are no concern oi mine but are L and D questions. e-g. the Poles, anu the war in the Far East, not to speak o1 the conferences with the H.O. anu all sections concerned in this office in the exit permits. At the start meeting I discussea the letter I had had from al lather-in-law OI one who was employeu here in the early days of the war on the recommendation of Crocrter. There is the usua complaint tha that he has. in conseuence o1 his uelerment for work in this ollice, Deen placeu in a Low demobilisation category. Recorus show that he Camne LO us as a Sergt. From the HAC in IDec.1935 ana rejoined his regiment in Nov.1940. He workeu under Ourry but was very little use. Charles is eating with the letter. Allen and Vicery Came totalk LO me about perinits for Inuia. Vicery is ver/ concerue as the GOVIDT OT Imala ane sorongJ opposeu to people coming out unvecreu. II the exit permit sJsten is to go ana we gre LO revart to passports as the only checii, VickerJ insists that no Empire-wide ewuorsemelts sh should be given without reference. Torry came in to See me. He wanitea to KItOW about his Iuturer I gave him the usuall answer. He is TOW at Rotteraam but is being posted to 30 Corps. brunnarius is with First Corps anu Uwens at 8th Corps. Smith io with 350 Corps. In other words our people are in charge O1 all the Camps in 21 A.G. The Canadians Corps i3 going home. The following is the Censorship position. After the 31st Juy postal ceusorship WIII uiscontinueexamination O1 all maiis except those to anu From Spuin,Portugal,Sweuer, Switzerlund, China, Dulearia,Hungary and Houmania. Censorshig on the first five countries will conti he inueli itely, probabl lor the uuraui ol the war with Japan, while in the case oi the three others, ic wiilil ou.ly go on till the begining OI Nov:. It wil.i corsist of 100% watch-listing andi partial examination. Examination Oof certain transit mails, e.6. Lire-urope, will also continue. Telegraph ceusorship willl continue to examine auring the Jap war all outward telegrams with the primary object of routing by calbe instead O1 wireless those messages Which might be O1 value to the enemy. Cersorship of radiotelephone colversatiois will continue durin.g the UP war. the Information and Recorus branch OI censorship will maintain a seetion 1or the pur ose o1 issuing airectives to British aana Alliea Censorships in Europe ard any other overseas censorship stations which are stil operating rantop TEOR e14 IOLT n2dVi HuTMOTTOI aun SPutun Auto that petrotanal aureumoon spun TIO oRnTeUOo uetren at 107 LO uexmen SPM 1OTDB ouos Atgeumseid DuE nenetoeadde Atanapta SPA ouTod sTu 130EAB aTqissod gnoge suoTsuetead.n Ino pua-sautoupoan UO aonarep TO BOeT aLn pessams Sutaaeu aun TO santeun seuro.nouee 0n TO pue SU19A JIO Hutqurog S Mureua aun MBIT og SEM asodand Bur Sumaatu Meupapup me TO semnurrur run snTd hd serietms 5oTH TO equmt exam Hett -MD Wanoa and am UOTLM snuatmnoon 0ont UT a.m esul, raueMav aud WOI.T AsTt IIV aun Ka paateoe. sanaumnoon utenuen TO uoTgToaIddr StT2aroo TE:8OZ peer TOTSTATO V/Or MOIT OTTI MISTUEW JTTY ueuan B UT quoumson V state TE BTRO HIOJT aorut oTdTa 00 nassanme seaneseu tone SontTuse 0n Ltoegod TsuTSTaH MOIT seResseu "OTrot on MGDSON T nesseaty der out 61og BTUseM 0n UOCSTT uTe TOTESD TROTEIY arg RODEsseqty ITama 09 SUREETUITH tSteuon HTABTTNE DIR IER B101 aun TO esoun "POTIBA aua on HOSII UT Assngtg teded at R e.50tn "gron SIL 0n MODSOT tTaopesseaty tTTIMI run TO asou exntstomessnanv USTTE TOIT sefessam aTaM andaoetr OSTV retdoed mnoge seTTnbue -H8 Saungiu Tmaruoag TO uan.to DuR "anous totenbat user aam esaut ruOPLOT on awreg Essnam USTOTE aun WOLTOT O6M TaanH Aq aes sefsseu atao ryopz IET T wauan-T mnstios tRomEtTH aln TO asoua OSTR SE IOnSUTUseM atag ToDESSEqUIY moTatv aun ueemgeg seinesatt sseTaJTm TO setdoo (uoTapaS pTudeISondAto run) 140 MYO WOIT peAtepe 0S eun qeu? peseis SRU THAH peuru M/d V w-n eu I9 isndan pansauraaup aun on sdtus.osueo sas.940 DeITTE DII UTTUH UOu,T TeTrenBu Sutina -IOSTD JO.I "ttoTpetp asuraet au ut "nue 15 BD the minutes OI the meeting are also interest- ing because of the typically ongiish "vereinmaessigenn treatment of military questions. The idea that miiuitary questions could be deal with by a eoumittee o1 all interested parties seems to be a new one to the Germans. July ith T spent the morning at the Glad diclanill answer to Dickts memo about the future oi the office. This aternoon I attenuea meeting aL the H.0. tanerDy Carew-Robinson at whlicn representatives OI Immigration, Treasury, M/Ly Reglstrars General, were 41su resert. The H.0. want LO apolish te exit ueEmi aor British subjects, aru $405111UB ulTe passport. E said thatthe the proposal mheanE in Iaet tnat mooouy could 63 reruheu axil unless there was alt ovet-whelming Case. To refuse the exil permit moral mpuieu that under present co.dicions travel was not justiliaote except in the national interest Refusal o1 a passport however implied that the holder was not a fit an proper person to have-th proteetion ol HeM.G. This meant in practice tha t a passport was no.t refused unless the case was over whellming. By falling bacis. pn the passport we should only'ibe able to checie a mants aeparture ource. II he got ITDO trouDte alter the issue oi his passport the only thing that we should to wollu Da to get hi.m S topped ad tie port. Ever ii such aculon were to have official supyortswis Seemed doubtful, 1t Was uncacain wrlether the I.0. would be abe to soon the inuiviuual. concerned since there would not with the increase OI trallicbe any reall/ close 61 scrutiny or Britioh passports. Lastly it seemed to me liely that cancellation of the exit permit for Britiah suojecta woulu be the thin end olthe weuge lor its cancellation o1 anarlied nationaia. Im act the Scheme proposed reull,l involved the abandonmant OL all check O1 the exit UO neutrar courtiies Where trtore ware uap Lagations. Censorship might we.ll say that it was useless for them TO open iettens it travel wasrunreotiiateus The e-meacing proceeded or the assumption DAaL the Pass- port and Permit Uilice wOuLU break now oscauset Treasury haarerused them the necessary increase o1 75 persoet. IE was thererore necessary to devise nteans for getting dowrl the work oi the dept. Various schemes were suggested und will be referreu Dheic. 5o far as we ane concerad these are confined to waiving the security check on Americuns wno get transit visas to the Continent. I Said tht 1 cora quite easily argue a case for saying that even if the Japs uiu get inlormution from here there was nothing they could to about it and that it would in lact in no Way alter the course of the war. H the same time there were arguments on the other side an the Chiefs oi Stay haa Said aowi as part o1 th their policy that certain sLdans o1 seeurity were to he maintained and that censorship of neutral countries was also to be maintaineu. Unless they altered their view it was very difficult EO see what could be done in a major way. This meeting lasted 38 hours. July 4th Luke came to See me about the Tricycle group: He is trying to get them setcleu into some sort of Job. At the moment Tricyeie 6 himself is the only mari who has got any money. He uous not feel however that le can go on financing the other members of the group inderinitely. Vivian tola me on the telephone thad he was coming round to the view that some sort of amalgamation between Seetson weana ou- selves was probably necesary. We aLKeu about CICB when he said there haa been a certainamounieo opposition from Arnold-rorster who was very iusistent th. it shoulu nOL in any way be excutive. IITiS is o1 course the old complee I told Vaviall that I thought rorsterts tuea Was sheer nonserse andthat tat tire securibi piske from having contact with outslue authorities wene negagibla. Joe Lnch came to sea me. He nas been to uermany DO TOOK ITEO the WUIK oi the Fl. represencatives. He LOL me coutiventialy that from corNersabions he hau nau with the bOSS the FBE more ikery EO ueise over Baarat service work in the Tucure. There ware 01 course political obJections aOuL The FoI pecoming tOD powerrul,which might throw Are scheme out He thought however tha as things were moving ac preserit they might very wel.l get the Charter Lor esplonage abroad He ds going Lo keep me illormeu. T this is the case we seal E thiiue have backed the right horse, althoush in lact we realy DaCkeu no particular morse. We have merely oreree to assist anyoouy who hau a proper charter. Herbert,Cuseen, Stoplord ald T nad a meeting about HOOPER Heroert saw Ferny goruon, the Bmitish reregaue Brusselers Pern Goruor Sad the He had introtuceu Hooper as early as 1937 to his pripais il Dertin. He 63 had ill lact proceeleu CO Dertir wiul hooper. From that point he hau rather area O1D of the picture out head understoou from penu- mann that Hooper had Deen ii Teeuuar employ o1 the GIS from that late ouwildse Hooper had n lact reporueu OI this Jourudy to Berlin with Perry common LU bI buE he hau never said aly telling aDouL the inerouuetion TO Felumatin. Wihel. he Camna oventn sugust 1939 he made cIe pubio sbiut unct ne shouru set Ueninu Perry goraon anacl sLabdisn const tacu with his principal 12. ict ne must have ITOWIA at Lilat time LAELL ne Was Dacaing ona certaintI, al.u he may huve miSuLeu cls 0r1 this point in oruer impress Crlem mora alU get himseti tiran on. He misht nave thought that his previous connection with the GID in Bertin would hve scateu them from taking him on in 1957, ano therefore withhela the information A aillicudit point lor him to get over is however nis denunciation o1 tari Krueger about which Giekes has spoken. There is no doubt chat Hooper knew apout Krueger whier he was worHin at PCOS office up to 1936 ana where appears also to be no doubt that at tule pesinniuy O1 the war Krueger air Noc curn up at a rendez vous, According to Giskes he was picked up by the Gestapo al excecuteu. It is also signilicant that about Unat time Hooper had told SIS that he thought that the Germants reW apout thrueselt. We decinau that before interviewing inyHerpert shoula have a tali with Stevers who is -now baex in this country, anu might chrow some light on toe Case. Hooper Shoutu ther pe interviewea b/ Heroert anu toporu,suarting in a frienaiy wa,o one telin hiin that there was cercaii informallon which haa been received From Germary which neeuea clearing up. We all 1216 uhal wrosecutior was prooabily wuesiralle. 64 Hunter came to see me again about his staff. He will be losing certain pouicemen who have been attacheu to the FSP unit. I said that T thought that ii we wrote to the COs we couLu probably keep t em on for a bit. Meanwhile I thought it desirablle that he shoulu take active steps to get receuits. I Said I wouin write to Dick Whice aru find out ii there wene any FSP being uemobilised who mnighe wish UO tare on he job. Hunceris main uilriculty is that he does not know what he cal ofer- He put forward E she. sone time ago to .Bralach alid has had no reply. Juuy Loth T aiscuased wi.th Tommy Harris apaut his going to wadrid. The question is whether he Should go under business cover or as a Govt.oilicial. I tolu him that if he was taking his wile I thought he would have to go as a business mIal. and we should have to support her application on the grounds that She would give him the necessary cover. If he went officially it would De impossible for us to make a Case for his wile. He is going to think it over. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 June D0o b5 THIS COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 sune 290 Grogan Came LO 0en mie cnaL & decision hau Deer reached to maincaif. Ireverersr Censor- ship DO ali neucmad countri2s. that would men that travellers in tralisit via Lisoon wouud have their papers looeu &t and that Hll traveles Dy ship would have their pape examined il it were XNOWIA trat tie Ship was touching neutril territory. II this posaib- ility is not krowI to the traverers, unere is not much purpose in looking at their papers, an J-ot much risk. Kenneth Younger came in He nas just been fighting the Grimsby election dor Labour against homersiey,Mirister OI Pensions He thinisthat he stands a gcou chel.ce oi geuting in, as Womersteyis JO0 is HOL Ol a kiirid that is likely LO mane him popular, although Kenneth generously States that he thins he dia as much as ne Could. Ken heth says that he tninei the Dralgt o1 the baDour Part chances resus im uhle LaCD that most O1 the eluer mers at any race aurins une periou belvidal the LWo wars Left that they had run deal icliu unat Lhlit is Too long a periou in a mat.2 lite wait IoT improvemetus. The. tueretore ireuer what the/ peuleve LO be 31 SOTU CUL througn natiolalisaulol Kemnetn,iln does ALO Bet his seut,is anxiuu to come back LO tue olfic cild. ne is cemobiliseu. 66 I Saw Holt OI PID. He wants CO senu a certain numoer o Gernans, Gernans,austrians scrians and other aliens out ior PID WOTi in Gernary The H.0. ane promising them that they willl be allowea buci here but has coa them thet they will oe subject thereaicer to any decision OI the H.0. regarding 2C2 their ultimate repatriatior. lathieson of the Registrar-Generalts Dept. rang up to aSi whether we shoulu back a suggestion that identification camu numbers should in lucure appear on passports. I said tha while I aid not think we could press for this il it gave a great real of exura work, it would in fact be ali addition- al identity check which might Da o1 value. He Said that it woulu give no atra WOTK as the special space would be made in the application Form for this numoer,whic woulu automaticaliy be repeated or the passport. Arithony ana Mps.Pit came to tallr about the Tucure ou B.1a. Mrs.Pitl is prouabliy leaving Sometime 11 September ana avar i1 she were to stay on alter The reorganisation she wounu like LL chunga. Since there are quite a numDer oi important aserts it recessary O linu a successon. David Sche scheerls name Was suggesteu. I nave since ppaken to the DG wilo approves, id Kirby- Green Can spare him. Curry asaea me about the Illad form ot his report which would inaiactebe an implied censure on the DG ana perhaps on others for agreeing to the caruing of loreisuers resident abroad by SIS. Then Would also be an implieu criticisin o1 tre mechanical nature o1 our registry ana O1 the decision to split oII and F divisions From B. 67 I said COAD II tlouunt that il ne was objective ir nis approuch, chere was IO harm in his expra. sing these views. viv.ras up about E proposal to exchange intormavion between america, anu British COS. He SEW IO opuectior providea certain categories OI iruormalio were TOU passeu, On this nutter hae woua issue all instruction to RCOS. I have 81so Sporer to Hollis who sees no ODjection. T wid however maie it cear to viv. that it was o1 paremount importance that ii alt American PCO refused a visa to a travellerhe shoulu not say that this had peen one OIT the basis OI iliormatior Teceivea From the British. July i8th Tomay Harris came to tell mne apout a proposal Dy SIS that shouud put Luruo au fait vith the pouiticat situation in Spain her. ha touches at 1i5uot. His ship is at uneser.t at Trimicuu. have tnere- lore wired ifte structing OuT oficer DO tell Garuo tau We to nIoL thik this is a very boou iueu LL tha t om win. maat him in mganiu as arrangeu 2tt1 .oon as he gaus there. Two Americalis Came LO sas me from 12th army group intarrosetiol centre On the recommen- nation OI Vicbor. I was aSeu LO give them a talk OI intelligeuce gereraliy ana t the WOPH ne olnice. The/ ane to go cowI to see the registry or friaay. DG has approved the arralgemert lor the liquiuatiol OI LRC persouted. Nightilgale L Lane is to be closaa UOWI- shortly as well. Vie shall retain 6 Ollicers under vesey to ao interrogations as and when reauirea at the naw camp au Wimbleuon on the one for women at Camnon's Pari. L fo Ailey came UO telt 1 thad tie walltau assistance in reading back Poish necorus I toll him LO arrange witli Baxuer CO 680 Buzzard. O. rang uu to say that he hau 10 opjectior to b/Leader Beaumont being appoilteu as Air Attache to Bucharest a weigteuesbut that he stil thought thatanig wite was uidasirable anu that ha presel.ce in RuSsians spheras of intuuauce might be embarressilg. Briscue can.e in LO tal 1 ne that the reconmematigi. Li 01s avis ol nau cear placed il toucn with iienicer', alt American who is Chair anl ol che American Institute o1 National Research, Chemical Branch, ard is in fact responsible Lor al.l secre experimentin WOTK OTT its lor cae various Amefican services. The cuescion o1 excharse 01 information aruse. hichder said Quite irunly that there were propuy 4 tesories UI thormatior aluu chat 1d wouuwu pe possible 4o Io excaalige on category 1. There micht howevel' ud an exchange O Calesories 2,3 alrU 4. Briscoe seid tulaL propupuJ the same coruitions would prevail here. ricncer is su1x.u corsuto nis chiels when he gaus DLCh. T told Briseoe thlal I wuuu Speoi to euuut olie mnauver, as it mislt have a uiscurping inituence Of: our present reuatiols with various Americal Orsanisatiuns. they might feel that we wene going behinu uneir UaCnS THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UJNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Junc 2o1o 69 ThisIsACopy This A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBUE RECORDS AOT 1958 JMNG 20ro Archer caite in about the case oi LACHMANN. There is to be a high Level meeting at the H.0. on Friday to decide abouu his future. Tt is our intention tO sa that he shoutu eo DACH tO Germany Montabu Came in Lo Da L Ie about Pan Miucemeat. The documents have Deer uis- covered in the Germart Acniraiuy recorus with Doenitzts signature on the appreciatio made b che bermall Navei Irtallisence. They came to the conclusion that the documents ware aosoludely eluine alo OI course we know that the/ actau on Uulem to the extent oi sending 4 divisions to ureece, ce,incuding OTE armoureu aiviion. The uocumeres nau peen extracuec unu photogrephed by the spanish General stati,a Officer of which had passeu th-n on LO the Germans. There seels no reason why we should not use the iaet in our protests to rranco about the continuation 01 GIS activities in Spain. it would be a rictiny erd to the case.. Two points whdeh apparently aeepy impressed 70 tha uermas wene (+J a mention. im a Letter 1rom hlountoatten CO Alewather LLOuT seruirg nim a tin od baruines as Mlese were uitui cult LO bet unu now on points. The bermatis ueauceutrom this taatthe target o1 autsCk Wa: Saruinia anu the.y air in Tact insure to a considerable axtert b/ seeing reinrorce- ments. Aecoruing to Kaiteutis records they anticitntec an attack on siciny out thought it was/llikelly to be the main atlacic. (2) the Dace that Che oflicar had in his pucret the counterroils 01 two thectie tickets which gave ure uate OI the may before nis aeropuane was supyopeu Lo have Left the UK 1or Afnica. we ane getting photographs oi a the documents I01 our like Aaaitional apprehensious effective uurilb the past quantar in the UUA have brought Ule total 01 aiau enemias appransmueu LO 1o,073. 01 chiS TunGer 2,873 are ac precont interned ald 5,000 are au hiberuy Or paroue. 2592 have peal I'dueaseu. As neuc OI over 23,0U0 searches OI alid1 enemy premises 5988 were cppreheuueu all or uctiol. oy aien anem nearins LOAII. By biey LSt 1945 the told CI Del uneturati acions petitions nau uel. 11131 i1 the USny LOO Cartilicates he Del caneelien, 195 cases wer ulsmisseu air 02 Cuseb ate sci11 ul.uep hicigaciol. P/V has givel al. intesctin acouull UI the explosion i1 the Mtich Deer-celuar in 1940. apparently 8 maL Called ELSER uic the whole Business om nis OWIr He maua the iniernat machine alu cuL a hole in &: pillar just under the gaary whene the Fuehrer usually sat. He maue a uunmy woouer casing to cover the hoe in thd pila 71 anu woreu rihely lor tlout S morihs. It S0 hapyered that on the particular occasion Hituler made a much Shorter speech than usual ashe hau LO 1o6o01 LU Berrin U urgerc business. the whole meetin6 WaS over hali 21 hour before time art HLLaP had gone. Haa he Dean there he wouiu undoulteall have beer klLed. DLbER was caught crossing the twiss Irontier. the would not have peen i1 ne haa LOL rather foolishily goue back LO have E final 1ook at his apparatus. This have the bestapo time to get 0n his tracis immeduutaly after the expllosion occurtaa. They dla quite -smanb pieee O1 detective WOTK all imltaneoushy ordered that all the Irontiertl were Lo De close. A report on an interrogation 01 Goering about Hitlert more GE living i8 Crl intenest Goering does not believe that Hithor alowed himself to be shot. He tasi Saw hEm oh Lhe evening oi April 20th about 8.30. Durlig the last 2 or years Hitertp uay WES a13 yo110W5: he WELE waKenEu at ne peaa the newspapers and slept some more. AL 11.550 he got up and the uaild routine was begun. Then Came the thiseusston the military situatlon Wilaich Lebteu ganaraliy 1rom 5-4 nouns during Wich iiter Woucu get 1 terribifexoiteu uvenoous indutuinb Goering, hnaa Co remain throughout the conTerenee. Then he ead user anu uuringth evening he would Dilk LO some Olicer from +.0. Alber adscussing Sioation he wouit 60 Lo Deu all 9 andscll midnight he woud get up again, He WoLlLu then hola a 2-hour corlerence on the military sit ation. Every nythin was brought up there to the ast little uetail ant numerous decisions vere Daren. 77. The minutes oi a CCrerance new in Hitleris stuuy in the Raichscianceitente oi tE ru May 1959 nave bear captunau. Present wera Goerirey Ruewars vor Bruuchitachgkeiled, Miich, Huge ablar oddcara. Hr began o giving alysis OL une altwatiol cllu safe he 5aW Do SowULOT WII ICOLL invasion O foreicr ScaLes or atuaci loreisn property. His resume he our gauy aciiavea cousiderabie Success but TULJT aims coulu not be reached without the sheuaing ol DLooa. Danzig V7ans Lot the subject of heulspute atabe Wa question o1 exparuing germant living- Space to the East aru securing look sup- ulies and o1 a gererui settlement Ol the Baltic probiem. He ha T.O use Lor coones. He Said nIf fate brings LIS noo comrhirct with the west tna possession of extensive areas i the east will be auvaltayeous. The Polish proutom was inseparaule Item the coLTlet in the west. Poranat internal power of responsato Bolshavish was HOuDDIIR Thus Poland Was o1 Loultrul value as barrier cainst hussias he thought it guestionabie wretherr a military success 17. the west could he achieved by at obic decision buD ha was convinceu that al attaci on Poraru Shoulu ba iauncheu at tha inst suitate -pportuzloy. Hiter diu not wish a murtaneous corliCt wit the westort powas but var'e not certain the t 2 hermuu-poish corllict woudid lIGL leau to WLTY in the wasit them the fighe TUSE primarily he against Dngiand Trince He thoushtethat the isolation 01 Poana Was a matter tbtu polities. (He MEJ at this momant nave hac in mind che aliance vitn hussiaj He aoulbtea the possibilllity of a peaceru. satllement with anglanu. It was therefore necessary te be 73 prepared. "ngiand 548- in our development the Ioudetion OI a hesemony which Wuuid weasen Engillide Laigali is Enattelote: enemy cmla tne collect wich will te EE tite art ueati strusghet The loltow- ing are extracts from his speeeh: the Duten and Beigian Air usas must be oceupieu by armed once. Declarations of neutrality must De ignored. The iaea bhat ve can get oiT cheaply is uangerous There is no such possiblitye We must DUPR our boits anu it is no longer a question o1 justice ot injustice but iie or ceatn TOT 80 million human beines. Every countries armed forces OT Govt. must aln at a short war. The Govte however must aso prepare for a war of 10-15 yeans uuratior, The moment onganais 1oou supply rouLes ane cut she is forced NO capiculate. onBiuerations ol right and wrong or treatiles not enter into the mattalt, A coltry-eaou-De colrtiy Drought to daread all air borca. It 15 impossible LO attack alt obuecuives slmul- teneously anu the iapue L rima ol a taw minutes will avoie uerensive countur-measure The aim Went always D tu Force anglatu to nar kheesi. The JIC have r'avieweu the vapamese aibuation up to tie 6th Jury. They believe that the primary preoccupation oi the Japunese Hish Command at present is the uelence o1 the home isanus, especially Kyushu alu Hone -Shu. For this dlelence they may dispose bythe end of 1945 more than 55 active wdth divisions army plus troops 14 wiii cepot total diviisions, over 2 which midion men. AlL available alrcrait will be employ- ea in the delence oi the nome isands, mainly Lor suicide operations. Their air effort might amount initiaily to 4-500 sorties by combat-type alrcratt ariu 2-500 of trainer tpe aircraft during a 24-hour period. This error wilI however cecine rapidly. Similarly al remaining Mava. units will be employed in suiciae operations in aefence of the home Lana. The secondary preoecupetion of the Japanese 5 to built up their forces in mlanchuriaykore and North China against the Soviet threat. They might have about 1e million mer Dy December of this year. They are urlikely LO have much air support. ALL other areas wili reganded as of minor impor tance only. Politically Japan will mane dasperate ertorts to persuade the USSR to eontinue her neutrality, il necessary by opening important concessions while at the same time making every ellort LO SOW uisouna beLwean the Americarls anu British on toe old bine an the Russials OI the other, ani may even mare a serious aasemnt 6o Lse ite Join ad a meaiator in eruins the Wal. The Japarese during groups are aware G desperate military situation alu are increasingly uesirous lind unconditional 0I a compromise surenuer peace unacceptable. but still The Japanese people would probabi prerer national survival eve through surrenar, DO virtual extinction. They believe however that unconaitional surrenuer WOLLO De the idea equivalent O.L foreign 01 national occupation extinetlol. of the home: The lana, loreisr custody OI the person o1 the mperor aru the loss al prestige entailled by the aecepuance O1 unconai tfonal surrender arte inosL revolting LO the Japunest To avoid these conditions ii possible and in any event to ensure survivar OT the institution of the Emperor the Japanese might well pe wiling to itharaw from all territory they have seizeu OIl the ASatic continent are if the southern Pacific anu even to agree to the indepenuence O1 Korea and the disarmament O1 their military 78 ionces. For surrarder to he acceptable tD the Japanese Army it would be necessary Tor the military leauers TO believe that it waula permit che ultimate..resurgerce. o1 military Japar. JuLN 19th 1 SaW im,Buster act CoriI about the Danish detainees all their return to bet mark. IT WaS subesteu that borin shouuu deal direct with the Danes here. This-wa generally agreeu to be the correct line. Major salwyn Cilbe tosae one on the intio- auction O1 Cass. He has had 2 months leave but wants a permanertt Job OI a post-war Hint I told him that we cou.LU rot Mane any definite Offer ut the moment but that we might be able 50 to-s0 Latar. Meanwhile it occurreu to me th t he might do an ASSt.uso job possioiy in Singapore. He would T thETK ue prepared LO take this o1 provided 1t was likely UO Lenu LU Something. He does rot want to ste in the Inuian Poilice arter the wan. He is now 011 loan to the Army and has operated t tasi lord on the H.WFrontiet arid aho on the Atakan rOrt. He creates qute a iavourable impression. I had woru with Caversish-beutincs, He is I think quite pleased with his appoint- mert as Amnbassanor 5O Polanru. some R.u.man from Mdd East taking Over ho Jop. I arien him a letter about burns the Presa Attache in Maariu which he promipeur Look into. Burs apparertiy He UTe DWO 1 the Spandsh Jourliaisiiz WLIO wa1a sant back LO spein vid this courury were in iuct Germalis. zk Hart anu stopioru have baal intarrogacing Hooper are may all have gatred a very umevourabLe impression. Hooper has aumicteu the mneatirga wicu whom he anew as DrcerHAftbl but bulsatea that they were in response LO tecuers chat ne wrote to various Irm: out a ceaT 11 aircraft engines. hie-nad diiscussea oni engineering mtters. The dates he gave tor the meecings were precisely those given Dy GISKLSE The wer a number OL discrepancies which were not satislactoriuy axpiaineu anu botHY Hart anu Stoproru rercouvinced that hooper and for lor the Germans was paid by them before the wat. The air nOD think toat he interued to WOIK tor them arter the outoreak oi war, or that he has in lact done anything uuring or since the War. I had a word with Fish who is leaving. He has promised LO door into: the uiamoud smuggling case and to give us any haip in the future that he Carie D.G. has written a ver fulsome minute OL the B.L6 ne ort by Mrs.Pitt Which shows now completely the Epanish, Portusuee and ouch Americar Embassies have Deen coVarul siuee tae beginriing 01 the war langey wue DO the ingeruity Broomar-White The D-G. thought that it was & really sreut achievement July 20th I attended a meeting al the H.U. with woe Archer. Newsaly, Lockspelser o1 RAF Farr borough, Merer Air 1inistry security al Carew-Robinson, were present. we han to ueciae about the future o1 LACHMANN. We came LO the concLsion chat his Case Was really bound up with that 01 German research 77 wonkors ana sciemcisus wau wene LO De UfoushD DVa nene WOTe vii0s poor Jecte such ab ToCaals ol wilicn t3.l na a sncat ueut OL proereso LOCnsDaiser thought that O1 pauance we SLoou to gail avel. i1 these peope haa urrescnicteu access to firms atio other scientists aTO Were able to travel corocu. Iidir DIains wouO put us lu/thing from D-D yer'e aneau anu the ris.. OI theur imparting some o1 tileir knoweage either during or ai'ter a period OI work here would be worth taring. He thol thought huwever taet it Your be for consiu- eration when we hau uickea theirprains anu trained other people in Their line ol thought whether at that stage they shouru not be sent home. It was pointed out howevi that such a course wounu on generil H.0. grourus extremeuy uinlicuut anrl woulut aoubtless meet with a good yaau o1 wuuse, LACHMANNIE case was slightly uillerent as he was more in the nature ol a aesigner that a scientist. LOCrspeiser suit that he Would obviousi, De useful LO any firm buL unat he would Nc put nim in tlre Simle Category as the sclentisoa. Ic was aeueT'ealiJ asraeu that in the position o1 chiel cesiser to a private compal.j a mat WEU aanenalny spearite uanucerous as the Worth nave accass the uoverialelitiy progreamne lot the next Jeurt. While we aid agreeu that it would De Letter LnOHNLANI to 60 hore, it was Iele chat une action COLLL TtOU D usvilied DO che puouic il GemeTI sciembisti nilo hau Dersl WOTninz aucilsi us during the war were allowau DO odcule nereyever lot a limiceu period. Jerius is back Irol Eg.U. he is ather worriac about tae sugsestior lor setting up Passport Control, anouu winich one came out to see him He gatnens tliat is going to say that the DS0 is 78 aurecay Covering une BToure cluid Lnat & PCo Woulon be supeniulous. I You Jelins that I iu 1AUC sae that iu was pupsibli3 LO Jo ver much about the hueue OI Miu List unit Wo hua 6oe Eile pabic duas 2s0101.5 Sacuieu o1 our neratiols with M.1.6. Mart antu Stugroru have coulnulteu Hooper with GILKEL Hooper DLazeneu iu out anU said Chattne WoB tning WaES 2. uepmani Irame-up. UISICES tola him vLt me late O1 KarL KRUEGER mau eete. He has bean aerounceii to the Gesispo altu Hac cuamittee suicide. Hooper uelieu that he had aVar tola GIENDS about HUDGLR although he au Tait wi.ch the case. previousij aumideeu tuau THIS COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED July 2151 DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 Junc 2o(o 1 report ITOMSHAEF JIC gives a aceotte O1 Hitleris last was. Hither hid already worr himself out pefore the else came. He may nave SuiLiereu a SCTOre arter the 20th July plot, for his left arm Dean incessantiy LU twitch. when he spore to clle Party Leaders last winter he atuueu UO his health for the 1i15t time. Freaerick Line Great,he said, on return from the wans wa3 prokan man cutou this Waly hau left its metrk OM hime "My hanu Sncues, and I hope chis with TOL sprreau LO my neaa a snany aecu would De a. natuicap, uut this you can 9a sura, m/ orain will Temaiit iee-colu.i the oveecli nau a gepressiiig elect, nis nLealn brrey WOr'Se ana by wpril he was i1 a veny LOW state. The crdsis Came OIT the 221u rprid. A conferer.ce ON the situetior. vas LO be held. Himmer aucelueu D./ nis cniel OI all,borger, Calie dowir From tae north. He haa peen pajing a pecuuiar game and ST uarer SEU peTeme at 1700 leeds DTO eH 1ac07 SM IRM e1n ptt nes neU 130s STu 9803 pasrmae.l aserr-9 m2u DIB uTRa SEM JeTTh nni Ts aH auto SET aun JOT eTH MRS uomomo.d em neUIV TO IeasTurm' Tedo R ABU ITU URTM But 0n peAToseI DSTR SBM ITaev 1OGT aun IO weTatH uTof on yoturw HOut HMOT-T neu OEM uORIH rTTeE TIT perreme.t BAtu on nanettea OsTE ST UURULTPH ODUS STH Leg TLTOM au g2ua paounome Fregempeup into aua TO antemnan SEM out sangeon pue uuad TIU nmnoM E 1u E.T DUIR Mens uoTsipep sTU UIT UTTETR nateue aH paeooad DeU ou TTIdV DICZ axen uTTag art pure nacm TTOM eu 3310 BttAaza to nras ome esdeTtoo snonau WIOUT pavetins au qaTu get nounot ATuadoud punoa aua on GO0T STu and gou oinoo au Us gemnb aumoeg aTeT BUTHonTMg STu "atdaind amrme BORT STU met 1a32ntoo Puouns Det au awraum mepems dnoo OTHRuOIdTr aTos I,IO TInd Stteon Sutueaur SnMot m Bars: IIRO Ttteor fTuou pyes put fadem pABU on PEPS ST au ueuJ, aeTooad teaD aua nafIem aug 1sOT anRu OUML I ou ST AT HsTad 0n seAresan ATTDEoaU uanot 101 ShU andoed UETTaD aur "tonT aun ITT am Ta ST2U SaS atr MO1T DIIB a1r on netT aAru saaTOT neme pur uan.In run our DTO1 atrO TIOUI etc Detepep see atotrene feuof on Bete RuetoeAsu nsaupeeds OOSOIPRORTEUO SUT TO ato: PMBUL eTH 7 Tuapprio urtaeg anBeT 02 ath poatn-oruth UTO M-aueM sTaoTTO Kute MET ATttO sueur uetorg ATagerduop o0 12 fft atb HETATH i1ral DEITI TO dnot9 TTPUIC nemratiass? eoeeIID au yattm fraIaTT EIIT emreTTeoupun sToTey FUET TRETE TITTTET ETBuS URTSSnY Mee.ITN annonnttes on saTeet-aonad ano atmhand been DRI HTAReT vote IThdous 64 yo a release from a hard lie o dldsculties. He said that he could hot go out anu tie fighting on the barnicades as he was afraid OI merely bein woureu aTiI being captured Dy thu Russians. he wouta there fore shoot himself anu he hau maue arrange: ments IoT his body to be oremated So that the Russishs would hoit usa 15 161 phepa- ganaa purposes. No one yet Knows how Hitier met nis ena. Hc Was IOD at some Gar IOEAnIS imagine poisoreu Dy idngilly his uoctor, Lince Morall hau last Berhin before the en. He was accoruiiig 0O the OKW transmittin messages Lp Lo the 28th Aprid. Between then ana the first 01 May he probably met his death either by taking poison, shooting himself or by ordering his dug-but to be bLown up. the Russiens still persist in saying that there is no evidence that Hitler is uead. ol.Bartik called here this morning. He has come back to collect certain docu- ments which wilt be Tauuireu lor the trial of the Hacha Govt. He says that hhings are beginning to settle aowa and although a numberot his olu coLle! coleagues agues were liquiaated there are not neurly so many as he had anticipated. A gouu mauv al them ere working lor the unvergrounk and are now back in their old jobs. The Russans are leaving matters more or Less to the Czechs anio oriy nave a small number oi garrisons in some of the provilnces. From time to time they asi yor agermare to be hanaea over this is ona 11 une ofrence 1as beal carrlac out or ruSSLen soll. otherwise the mant ia intorrosateu an and returned to the Czechs. Transport his very iIficuit, but a syntentie oil plant sed up by the Germans is being used with great aavantase. pparertuy une heau of 81 the Gestapo and about 20 others wena working for the Cecns. Ine head O1 the Gestapo who had formerly worieu under Heyurich, olferea has services armose as soon as he anriveu ir the area in 1941.. He could TTOE OF course Save averybouy but he uid save the bilves of huitiaus Dy delaying taetics an by uestroying documents He is il conseueree new teDeptye the Germaus anlu Hunwarians who formerly hau Czecn citizenship nave Dean ua-naturaue ireus It is open to-tem 6o appuy tor 0zech citizeship again i1 they so uesite. I suggested to Voil.Bartik cnal he might Tike EO establish contact with Dic. He cannot uo SO on his present visit Dut said that he might be abie to meet him in Dresden or if vick coula 6O to Prague ne would of course be aelightea to see hdm. At present he is working through the Legation anu Passport ontrol. Julv Lra Caulteild brousit Phitips, the new ADNI to see me. Caulieila is retiring ir about two weeks Dime. Furnival-Jone: came to see mes He is leaving before long lor the Bricish zone. He had heard from Ramsbotham about the incident of the SHAEF carus having been offerad to the Russiians anu Was arous to know the facts. I tolu him that I uid not think the Russians were neully interested in the Liguicetion Or the UIS as such and I doubbed whether ir any case they hau the necessary stari LO harule a complex mattero that Kind. bich rang up about D things: (1) reeruiting o1 FSP pensounel lor Hunter He has spoken 6 Ryder who says that there might be some suitable people Droviued the pay conditions were good. He thought that we should pay the equivalent rate o1 pay anu aluowances lor a sergeant. T sadu that I woullid Look into this anu net him now. (2) He then spoke about Storm-Rice,who LS wanbal by Kellat for work on ISPAL- Dick Said he had he an offer FrosIs. #ctualiy of Course SIS WarTt him for the same purposar ne wants to knaw the precise arms arIU th nature oi the work thad he is going to be asreu to 0o. This Wi. be expiainec D7 Kallar Whan he visit 21 AG. (O) He wondereut whether the control Cummiasior Colli have tha sorvicas Lestatteoi the IRC. Said that I had thought Di gatting Lesgett into tuis onice although L beuievel he wanted UO Lo the F.0. 1 would however talis to him when he came Dacio. Posainiy he could LO the conurod Commusion Jor a time and come to us atar. I nad a talk with Cayzer aDout poatings to the Far Must. I sugsestea that Seiwyn Ight make art assistart USO CO birgapore. He suggested thet Downes mithe BO aS assistant to Hunt HC Rangoon and Later pe replaced possbly by selwya. wreanwhihe have the services of Ricnetas 1or Singapore or Rangoon. We are cabling our suggestions to ikon. Two girls have leit lor Rangoor but more are required. We ame having the usual airTicuuly with 0.estaolishment branch will the resuit that we have to go oh paying tor ariy commi commitments. Kiroy-reen I gather is very anxxious to stay on with Lis Dut Charies aadl a certain responsibilit in allowing him to ao se-unss we can get the police or the Treasury to Let him have at Least tI portion O1 his police pension. Normiby he woula lose this i he Joimea uso I 83 told Charles that I thought it was axereme- Iy important to keep Kirby-Greents services as he was quite excepulonal as LI LSO. He would pe quite prepured to bake on the Caribisear station. July2ath I had a Long aiscusion with Curny Doth about the tucur'a O4 the orTlce glad about his enepter 5 by thu large he tndttao that the proposade o1 the Lines o1 Hartts memo Drovinte the Best solution. I Lod nim that rindlatarle ina saamede LO u working in the same dreccion. hecoruine TO H tetter tnat f hat ITOI DLcic he semea 6O be on the luea OI ore orgaisaton dealing with Seeurlsy Intellicance cllu one soto 012 nacoreusi. He-Walalatipressed mpnested Dy the position DL Broo-bootil lrorking alongsiue SIS. Kembal Johnston cale in LO sa goouoye. He is going to the JAUs pepe. He seems uite please all does TOt as Lar lis 1 know bear the Office any in-willl. July 25ch Tommy Harris is having Considerable aitliculty aDOLL getting suiladie coyen visit GARBO in Mauriu, 4- IEW sugbustion has however beer maB CIaG ne mtht for MEW it cOldetion with the tracing 01 art treasures 1im Milne ras Lip EDOLT the Ankara Leanage case. The F.0. are appuretiy tatuer wonlied the lstripution o1 tas information and ane asilg now maty people in MT5 knew about the casar 1 toE Mide that ne couda tell Bromley thad use a number O1 officers inB.bivision knew about it because TIO 1e8S than people had volunteered inoxabion under interro- gation. Mitne said thud ne woul DB showing EL copy Ol the report to Paurson ol 0ss aince Inst at any rate chose interroguted mau Coma From American zoe aid hee ready pepurtete tD the Aneni- cans though not OI coune im any great detail. Milne told me chat Molkemtaller report altla Hothe the Hosisch report hau uot! been serat to the FO. I tolu him that we were preparing a cousohidatEL report an0 it well propopeu that Cslni the DG should write a joint letter OI protest to eadogan. Allley Came 10 talk apout the Pores. It is going LO be arranged thad we approve the payment of Certain sums OF money through Gano For the liquidation of PoLish organisations here. Alley thought however that we ougnt to set up certain o1 the Pores here who woutu keep us iniormeu about their compatriots who were working tor the Russians. The COSe you De something Like 27,000 2 year. T sadu That I noubteu witether we Could justititbuly ao this, uite apart From the poitica aangera 01 the other nanu E saw O objeetion O having contact with Cartala Poles who could give userui intormethor. They ought LO bov and seccle themselves into jobs al we would pay chalnt a CerLein emnoa t on resuu-tr There Was treut die rereuce between this and naviln ta oDsan- iseu Ponish wnoe-uime Lourter-Intebrigence Orgemsatlonetinanced by cie nicisrl Lovt. In any case L thoughit Lu unwise to commi ourseivesat the momnerst sihee we reuty mhu lot how Who O1 the Does would pe returning LD his OWI courtrJo We counu however deep the pot boiling learwmite DJ a roving grants lor liquiuacion. Teresa ar.d Hollis haa a talk with me apout Jack. wve agree thad it would De too much CO Sat asiide thd sum UI 220,000 Lo pay nim a pelsior. in cercadi. evertualities. We thought however Lead there shouus oe some Bor0 UA compromise. The DG I believe thitios EHE he ousht LO oaci to his ballk ana Lo whzad work he can IOT us in his spare time. Stay ve Pataer ail rcult. Luke catle to cai about the proposa.l of Cersorship to send on ai Lettars corcemneu in the last 6 years. He thilas that ltnis may Lead to colsiuerabue coiplicatiors, aithoush all .1A Leuters o1 any importance are actually in our possession. I amn trying to tind Out whether the tasi of reviewing all conuemnea letters is a manageable one. THIS 1S AOOPY ORIGINAL DOCOMEMT RETAINED July 26th. IN DEPARTMIENT ONDER SEOTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 Juoc 20(0 T snw Sir Findlater Stevart this APbermoom for nbout in hour alone, and ins then joined by Herbert. Findlater went over the charter of B.Division and nsked me various mestions about the duties performed. It seemed to me that npart from the inefficiency of the present organ- isntion and indeed the dangers of its inaecurncies we, as a Defansive Service in this country, should renlily be doing the work. The output; was very small and rarely included the things which yet wanter to know. WaS in my vievr necessary to have an automatic system covering the 24 hours which would enable us to sort out all the various personalities and eventually to concentrate on those who nppeared to be engagi.ng ir peculiar nctivities. Findlater agreed about this and JI think will look into the matter when he starts) enquiring into S.I.S. E then talked to him about R.S.S. and its future. It vas proposed, I understood, to place it under the G.0.&.0.S. and so under the Sigint Board it vrould just become another monitoring station. I axolnined to him that the npproach of R.S.S. Vins quite different to that of other Y Stations. R.S.S. was engaged now almost exolusively on general search and Was therefore proceeding from the unknown, whereas other Y Stations had different tasks allotted to them on certain fixed schedules, e.g. Jap-ilitary from Stockholm to Tokyo. R.S.S. had built up an extremely efficient library under Morton Evans, who wa.s really the directing hend of the orgnisation and the person responsiblle for its fficient running. His ultimate aim and object vas to create a library where all types of traffic would be catologued and to which reference could be made if someone wished to find oh whnt the commmications ware; for example, the Argentine P lice; they would find details of the time schedules, frequencies and procedure. his annlysig of the ether had been carried ot for some time and undoubtedly there was a tremendous ndvantage in enlarging it and keeping it up todate. It was hovrever, vitally important that n person in control of this general search should be in the closest oontect with all branches of the Intelligence Serices in order that they might receive the fullest guidance that any intelligence clues could provide. Provided, therefore, R.S.S. was given quasi independence under the G.0.&.C.S. there would be no bdection to the nmalgamntion. In fact, there might be certain advantages in that R.S.S. would be mone likely to bet the by products from their other 7 Y Stations. The danger was, however, that R.S.S. might become stamped and thnt the old practice of keeping them apart from ourselves, which durihg the last year had been to considarnble extent broken dovm, might be instituted again. Harit than joind UB and 8V6 FIndater his own 6X- pariences of where Section V had falllen down and how important it was for quasi executive departent to know the full T'nots of any Case from the outset, nthervise it was impossible for 18 to give ralinble advice to government depart- ments who wane ultimately ltimatelyraapor raaponsible for the action taken. I tola Findlater that T should like some tome to talk to him again, particularly nbout the Foreign office Security Service, which hed let us down badly on a number of ocGaBions. Hazt is seeing Findlater again tomorrow at 3. Disk rant mhe 17D to Bay that he had received my Letter giving informnthion about Colone BARTIK'S experiences in Czechoslovakia and that he entirely agreed with my views that n station in Prague on the lines of the British Military Mission in Brussela was highly desirable. He wanted to niake contnot with BARTIK and is going to write him EL letter which T will pass on through SLOAN. July 27th. Hart has completed his raport on HOOPER and E have today submitted it to the D.G. The conclusions nre: (1) That by Mareh 1939 at the labesat HOCPER hna bacote an agent of the German S.S. woricing under Mnjor of FELDIAN P) Dr. WEICHELT. (2) The on two occasions in the spring orY Summer of 1939 HOOPER met Oberst Leutnnnt GISKES at Cologne and now him to be an officer of the Gorman S.B. disclosed to him: (i) That Dr. Karl KRUEGER Bed Godesburg, a Germon subject, was EL valuable agent of P.0.0. The Hague and that he HOOPER had learnt this fnot while in the employ ofP.0.0. 68 (ii) That Henry Christian PIECK was n Russian agent who had gonneotions with the British R.O. through which he hadobtained seoret infor- mation. HOOPER icoqpanied anied this formation with the suggestion that the German S.S. should take lntter ateps to obtained obtain from from PIECK the British information F.O. which the (111) That or nt least two occasion in the Bpring and Summar of 1939 HOOFrR WEa paid sums of money by tha Ger'man S.S. for his york as an agent, (iv) That HOOPER daliberately one cenled from S.I.S. in August 1939 and Bubsequen. the fact that he had had any previous contnot with the German S.S. other than with Gordon PRRRY himself ana deliberately misrepresented to S.I.S. that he had any sugh contact. (v) That HOOPRR S report to S.I.S acted on 23.8.39. 21.8.39 on and E meeting by his with subsequent Dr. WEICHELT reports at to Cologne S.E.S. of his comeations with the German S.S. were designed by HOOFER to mislend S.I.S. into belleving that he had-had no connection with the German S.S. save that disclosea therein and that for this purpose ho either fabricased himself ot evolved with the German S.S. the lattars which he represented to S.I.S. had been reosivedtb him from Dr. WEICHELT. Probable conclusions are: (1) That HOOPER: became an agent of the German Se as enrly as Maroh 1938 and that he received Sums of money Fron them at o2 about that time. (2) That in disalosing to GISKES the informntion about KRUEGER, HOOPER may have bolleved that he wes not talling the Gormans anything which they did not alrendy lnov, since HOOPER had probably realised from rending a book by Landru HAlI Fair 11 that considerable nformati in about KRUECER had already been published and may have been lcnown from source in P.0.0. Tha Hague'a office that KRETIGER han been senrchon by the Gortapo. Similarly, HOOPEP must have lchown that in sigrestiog to the German S.S. that they should exploit: PTECK'S source in the F.O. he wa.s making a uiseless suggestion, since the connection between PIEOK nnd the British F.a. bad at that time been broken. Stopford, who end.orses these views, states tha't it is his fir opinion thnt there is not a shred of evidence that HOOPER has eedisloyal during the time that he has been employed by this office, even if some of his nancinl tronsaotions have not been entirey antisfactory. These transactions relate only to athe? heavy expense charges. Stopford adds that he has found HOOPER to be of outstanding ability and that he has done first class work. Pnokenham and Tomy came to s8e me about the latter 's visit to Madrid. We have finlly decided that Tomy' S cover should be that he is going out to Mndrid to examine some of the German archives which have been taken over from the German Embassy. The D.G. came to talk to me about HOOFER' S report. He thinks that in the first instanoe it should be Submitted to "o" for his observations. Crogan is examining the question of the fate of bndemned censorship letters. He is telling Censorship thnt in our view all letters condemned by the Security Service shoulld be re-examined by this department and a decision reached as to whether they should go on or be destroyed, or retained. Al letters which might constitute evidence in the future should be retained. All Letters from or to enemy oocupied territory should either be retained by us or destroyed.. Other letters should be examined in the light of circum- stances. Grosan ppints out; that there may be grave objections to the publication of certnin letters which refer to military equipment and might have a bearing on the Far Eastern war. He is also D pointing out to Censorship that if trey send all letters on they may find it; extremely difficult to explain why any particulnr letter was held up: in most cases owi.ng to the lapse of time, the reason will not be apparent, and in other cases, even if it were, it could not be explained in public. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 dune D.o(0 11 Caulfeild has passed me a letter from inlanne Portar, who is now in Belgrade. He gives rather depressing pioture. He sayste I cannot sea at the moment any alternative to a complotely totalitarian regime, kept in power by the traditional ruthless methods of communism - as evinced in Russia, allied to the natural cruelty of the Ballkan peoples, Everyone who really thought that tharo was something fundamentally good as well as new in the Partisan movement is now very disallusioned, At the time any possible alltarnative was worse, and T thinle that still holds good - there is really no nltornative except chaos and one can only hope that aB the present regime gets more such of itagir. it will badame more tolerant. At the moment it becomes daily more intelerent - al the young comunists who hold key positions are out hand, I still think that many of its top men are, within their limits, "men of good will bu't the political comissors in the nrmy, the heads of police departments, the secret polige officinis in other government depnrttents - all the middle bloc of manngers, managing clerk, captains, maors and colanels, superintondents, eto have the bit between their teethe Daily we come aoroas instances of these people ignoring orders from above, and undarnaath, the peasant, crafty, ignorant and suspicious, lives as he has always done, Demooraoy here is meaningless, and if it could be applied as we understand it Would lead inmedirtaly to chaos. Benovolence, D year ago, would have seemed possible; now one can only hope for tolerence. I can Beethat before iong ye shall alll be a bit on each others nerves. We cannot go outside Belgrade novr without a permit. There is no social life - few fearful official parties, No amusements, only one restaurant and that dangerous owing to large mumbers of drunk Russinns, usually armed. But politically it is very intereating, Such. a chance for something really new and good, and gatting daily slandarer. 11 a SHAEF J.I.C. in their official apart dated 9th July give an interesting account of Russiats policy in her more. Their propagand, which i8 directed to ahowing that conditions in their zone are far better than those in the Allied zones, is probnbly lnngely due to their oWI1 inferioty complex. It has achis ved a certain auccess but is rather yitiated when the faats ultimntely become known. Food is in fact very short in Berlin, as also is coal. Meanwhile Garman machinery is baing moved to Russia and are numbers of the male population are being rounded up for reconstruction and agricultural Labour in Garmany, Lrge members of them have also been moved to Rusaia 3 including specinlista who are required to rebuild Russinn induatry. he Russians have been ruthless in their round up of leading Nazis in their zone, but soem to have bean willing to accopt the smali fry who could claim that they wore party members only in order that they could hold their own Jobs, to fill minor adminiatrative posts, This is not unlikely singe the Rusaians do not possess any large numbers of competent administrator. They therefore have to rely on the Germans governing themselves with a minimum of aaministrative supervision from. the Red Army. There are no signa as yet of the Russiana sponsoring strang communist party in their own sones. They arcourage political nctivity and are permitting trades unions to reorganise. A Combined reounstruetion committee has been formed including members of the oommunist and socialist parties. The Red Army and the millions of homelasa Russlanss and Polen live off the land. In Berlin itself, everything transportable has been stripped from the U.S. - British zone. Out of the 36 telephone exchanges in the areal only 8 remained when the British arrived and furniture and fittings have been treated in the sama way- Russinn policy appenns to be simple. German industry is to be used as a means of rebuilding Russia and of eliminnting niln possible political opposition in their own territory. It remains to be seen how far 13 they will contime the economic policy which they have instituted in Eastern Eurpoe by eliminating all lange land owers and collectivising ffrms. They seem to be in different as to whether the Germans have a bare subsistance to Live upon this winter and to regard them merely as A useful 6ouROB of cheap lnbour whose future is unimportant. Since this ruthiless pollicy is clear; they do not worny unduly about such moral policies of non-fratarnis- ation. In Germany no cse of overt resistance traceable to an organisod resistance movament has been repor- toa. The rapid collapse of Germany. and the theroughness of counter intelligence methods have broken up alll effforta of the S.D. to form reBlstonod groups and encourage werewolf aotivitien. Subversive activity now only means sonttered and unconneeted instances af sabotage, in fact active resistance davelopes in the future it will arise more from aisarfeaition during the prolonged occupation than from the original werewolf planring Ribbentrop hus been careruldy interrogatad by two political ofld.cers lrbi SHAEF. ASheu any Germany had invaueul Russins ne repied that it was the greuteat mistase in history anu was a complete reversal 01 his fundamental rorelg police He nad never been able to cebermine precisely why ard wher the uhrer hau deciuleu on Invasion. There were Venicus eamnelrts 1T his decision, iueological groudsy and Parti anu Army imuence. Lt was IsO rovoked Dy certain ineiuelts such lor example as the peoru thet um 21 or 22 Russien uivislons were maSSEET along blue boraar 01 Ease Prussia. here Was the Last that the povidi urtae uesesatlon ran Bhowr mote Intendue in owtenIne 011 ens1ve thay cefensive armEmertre Army left Teun nues TUR UTOd eua on TU8T BUeo ITROS anrppeut SBM ebuendeooe SI UTTEIS Horgueqary entered on mTU Butse utteas on ureIaren 2 pues on Death JeTaTH Aureupd Monoprstansun STM ssersoid and urTueg UT SeTETIVID alIpun eTSSnY au Data penaens are SuOTARTOReU ASATJ V eussny TM Surpuensepu TROTITTOd 03 amoo on fan 0n TTOTSSTued doaueagry area uodneuetn aH rssantsna on pinoo auo WOUM UATM uu B sooT aHu Atmeotreudite paweuau put "aRr Sttrens on AoueT MOOO JJeTATH "MODSOW UT VW uotlTen run mhueg uaan not UTTI au aprd MeaTTtur AuTmeTAa umeng TO a.mgotd tIOTOm SEM BTSSnH UOTM Temeuporddaa TROTATLOD E ndmanne 0n auun aug peptoap Sraueeddr uotus atapyout aun mpu peouTauop PU ITTUTT wreuun, run MOT toTrSoddo araapisuoa HTA neur pey anq sueTSENH aun unTA auamaupoddea a IO InOABI ug SHUMTE mu ou grua ptes doqueqatH petnyo eq gou pmnoo OUM Matteuosued 2uons 2 Sam atatHu Ammntana ppes ou ang "eTatH on TIOT1DR yons SUTAn HUTem Ruo.ns peeAttan Ru donueaat naueratr TTUTT Tu PTRSOY 30e0e00 TTOESTozerP Bun aTnoaf TRTTeD on Lssepau are IPAO X3R83276 TOTOD mEToenit TO aTeudxe TO BoTId au ETTTO 7atT9 an TTnom A MURsseDan etmoEn none 9Te5ny are. TTTP TFOM ern to TRM-010 TRM sum TT TOERUPOLROT pevrer AULIy aun SEHTE uEnoun potentiu U mnensca 01 9OT TOHIT DRO BTSsAH nLRS amon OT STR2M eatt toThatndo TIma ST R put etTAOtTE TRAOIdde put EPPeTAOLST emeran BUTAOTOTOIET EE RTSRSSEH TO toTaedrapo eTssne 11 Taaew urea mou Tarua uons ITETORRRTIR Tutuopen SEM RTseNH 93ua hb 1S while the two countries haa been pouring filth over each others heads (the russian expression was "iiquid manuren) there was no reason why. they. could not cone to an agreement and before miunight ol the day oi his arrival he hau araftea ard signed a non-aggression pact. Ribbentrop proeeeded unctuously to say that his policy oi rap: prochement with Russia was designed to establish peace in Europe anu to enable Germany to come to an understanding with theBritish Empire on a basis of equality and carry out Hitlerts pians to get nearly all the Germans into one Reich. These last remarks seem tou give the tone of the whole conversation and indicate how nitte importance it is possioe to attach to any- thing Ribbentrop says. His sole object was of course to mase out that as a goou German he was forced to carry out the ruhrerts orders but that he had allways use his inluence in Engianui 1avour and inceed that the ruhrer in that respect was large- ly of his own opinion. JuLy 28th I talked to Buster,tommy anu Mrs-Pitt about the case of Onoire GARCIA,whr has writter a rather blacimailing letter to the H.0. He wants to be given complete freedom and compensation to be allowed to 6o to Mexxico and re-establish his lite there. We pro- pose to say to the H.0. that we have no objection to his going to Mexico or indeed back to Spain. We do not however feel that hecould be deportea to Spain against his own wishes as he would undoubtedly be interned if not worse on arrival. He was originally interned on account of certain indiseretions and there was also a certain amount of rather tentative 9 evidence that he might have been made use of by ALCAZAR. I have asiea wr's.Pitt to go through all the files and put up a rote showing exactly what the case against him is. We will then taae the matter up wiith theH.0. Jim Hale came to asi whether he couia have the services of College For a weer to examine two parties of Germans returning from Canada and Australia. These German were interned here and deportea to the Dominions at the beginning 01 the war. Cyri Miils has sert us records o1 the Canadian lot but I do not think we know anything about the other party. pome of them will have to remain in internment until the Control Comission is ready to receive them but others may possibly be given their liberty penaing the return to Germauy. Herpert tola me that he had had a long talk with Findater yesteraay. He had told him about the working ot the GC & es ancalso a certain amount about RSS and in particular RIS. He had 1eit with hindater a copy of his memo about the re-orsanisation of the office. Certain do.cuments in the Heeresarchiv have disclosed various projects by the Germans before the war to penetrate SIS abroad One of them relars to HOOPER and to a meeting that he had with two agents sent from Hamourg in Sept.1937. The document which is acted ct.1937 showe that a further meeting was to be hela at Innsoruck in Dee.1937. HOOPER when questioned admitted that he had been to Denmark but that he had gone there in order to carry out a deal in smuggling maras out o1 Germany. He was 7 doing this on behalf 01 a Dutenman named de Vries. The negotitions had come to Nothing. He also admitted that he had been to Inssbruck but for the purpose of finding a suitable hotel or boarding house for himself and family who wished to go there for winter sports. This visit had also been abortive. He had however while in Inspbruck tried to check up on some individual staying at a hotel there who had been cornectea with the PIECK case. When confronted with the evidence he was quite unable to explain how the GIS had propheti knowledge in October that he was going to Inssbruok in December. Joe Lynch came in to say goodbye. He is going back to America with his wile on accou of the serious illness of his mother. He is not quite sure whether he will return. If she dies he will probably have to try and get the Bureau to recall him. July 30th THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 duuu 9% THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 JuLy 2010 Klop came to See me. He wonuered whether there was anything further lhbat he coula an I said that I thought there ought to be some Ashcar. characters Whom he could very well sea He the aseu whether by any Chance we knew the whereabouts OI HILGER, formerly H representative ol the german Embassy who had been in Moscow roughiy from 1920 O warus. As it seemed to us both that it wou1d at Least be interesting to discover precisely what led the Russians to make a pact with the Germans in the eart days oi the war and what cause Germany to attacro Russia in 1941. We ascertained from Stewart Hampshire that HILOER is at present held by the Americans. Stewart is going to try alld fina a plausible excuse for getting him over here. I saw the DG about HOOPER. He thinks that we should send a copy oi the dossier to that as soon as he has readit we 3houid have a joint discussion as to how the case can best be liquidated. July 31st Victor is back for a day. He has fixeu up an arrangemen with Wing ol the LRC who is preparing exhipits for the MIS museum. We discussed the joint inteliigence scientific committee and agreed that we Should be permanently ra resentea. Victor ieals that JuLy THIS IS A COPY 2010 ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED 7 IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS we have rathAtTaDiowed this LO LO by default. If we are not represented we are not likely to know about developments either from a defensive point of View or of any which might have a bearing on our own technical appliances. I have recommen- dea to the DG that we shoula stare a claim for permanent representation anu that Victor should be our nominee. TheDG,Hal and I Lunched with Passy,Manue and KnoCK. They were ull very frieuly. Passy tol me that he would tTI to work out Some system by which he coula use the holorith machine for the detectionof 5th column activities in France. I told him that we hau tried tha holorith machine we for had censorship got vary material little out but O1 that 1t. in That fact might be because by and large we here in England had not had much trouble From letter-writing and as far as we kew no evidence of extensive use of codes,etc. We had however a very elaborate registry S stem which had served us well and it might be that his problems could be more effectively dealt with in that way. I said that ir he cared to send over an exper't we should be very glad to place him in touch with the officer hera who had run the holorith and also with the head of our registry. I had a talk with Bill Stephenson who is over here with Donovan. He sai that our election re-ult had been a great shock to America. The Americans had given us a very good forecast of their eleetion results and it Seemed to nim a pity that we couuu not have forecast our owI moTe accurateiy This would have considerably lessened the OLOW. As it wan, there was a tenuency to alarm and to freeze up on Lease-Lend. Milino anu I hau a tal wich Rawli about the future O CSDIC. He will have UO mare recommendations this month about the Cosin down O1 all camps in this country. we sai that in the present state O1 allains We did not think it mattereu since we could now sent military pergonrel tO 020. t was however essential that one or other OI us shoura keep some Soft OI cany open here lor the more important cases; as they woulu be of CI nature it seemed to us that 0.20 should probably carry the obligation. I saw Maltby for a moment. He taliceu a little about the future of RSS but told me nothing I did not know arreaay. He is I thins anxious that the organisation should continue on its present lines and not be merged with GC &c CS. Peter Hope came in to see me.. He is now attached to Joe Stephensonts office in Paris. He is From all accounts doing very good W rk and T gather that the British Embassy are very pleased to have us there. Stopforod tells me that Hooperts colleag'( from CO The Hague who WaIS evident a party to Hooper's operations with the Germans, died in 1945. We shati not there- fore be able to get any corroborative evidence f'rom him. August lst Stratton came in to sea me. He has just returned From Inaia on uemobirisation, only to find that his firm will not have very much for him to CO or the nexu year. Ricketts of NID has now Joined us and is ultimately destined tor Singapore. I talkea to him about the office. He is to have a short course here ana then 6o out to Kandy penuing the re-occupatior of Malaya. He is anxtous to stay with us permanertiy I had a talk with Herpenrt and rouunu apout Gwyer, who may be coming baeri to us at the end of this month until his demobilisation. It seemed to me uesirable that there Should be Some Sort of positive line o1 amarcadion between Biru anu Gwyer. biru sugseuted that Gwyer might look into an. casas OT parer tration ineliaing the latest evidence obtained about penetration attempts from the Heeresarchiv Dick turned up this evening IOT a few days Leave. I think he is Iainiy convinced by the arguments that we put Torwaru against his SID or DOCE memo,although I antmdtt that his point about gatting some sort of con- trol of SIS stations abroad is extremely important 1 do feel however thet this may be achieved if we call get some sort of permanent representation aproady and & close liaison with whoever is the SIS representative in the local Embass Dick had an interesting meeting with the Russian General in Berlin who is it charge of CI matters. He confirms my view that the Russians are not interested in the Liquidation 01 the GIS as such anu have Lot in fact gou the stall or the records to aeal with the problem. They ara working on much broauer lines,ire.removing removing the machinery and putting certain classes on manual labour anu liquidating others. They were particularly interested in the werewol organisatior and Dick told them that he woul give them all the intommatoon in our poS- session. The Russians ane concentrating on the Hitler Jugend as they think curing the winter months they may become active. The tmosphere was a bit Stilted at first but gradually softened under the influence of different kinds o1 vodka ana immense quantities OI food. The Russians are still sceptical about Hitler. Dick was Shown all the evidence, namely what were alleged to be Hitler's teeth and the Charrea remains of Eva Braun. He to1u the Russians that in his view Hiwlr was almost certainly dead and in any case it was a mistare to broadcast anything to the cortraTZ since the illusion, il it were an ilusion, that Hitler was alive wauld stimuate the underground movement Actually Dick had a report the other day that Hitler was residing somewhere in. the British 2on0. A raia was staged but without any results. The whole incident is being kept very quie August 2nd I had a talk with Alec Kellar who returned last night from the Middle Easto He has had long discussions with officers in Pales-- tine and Cairo about the possibility, suojec to very rigid safeguands, o1 the Palestins Poliee being put in the know about OATS. The danger about having anypoay i1 iie Giles, a somewhat ambitious policeman, au Tait with inflammabie material OI the kina, is obvious. At the same time the military feel that the identification of certain personalitie: which can ony be efected by a certain amount O1 kowauge being imparted to the police, is OI paramount importance, since in the event of ar upheaval it would 1o3 be possible to effect a gr eater number of arrests. Previously they had been afraid of compromising the sources lest it might jeopardise their chances of getting prior notice of D day. All have YIOW agreed, thaa't the police should be brought into the picture, but whether C.himself will approve is another matter. Roberts has had two representatives ol the Jewish Agency orking with him in Egypt. The other day when a convoy of food-sturi's or other material was proceeding to Palestine,one Of the lorries broke down. White it was being repaired there was a Siight espbosion and ultimately 25,000 rounds went off. The driver of th lorry was a member of the Hagana and the Jewish Agency representative was in the driving seat with him. It is not known however how many other lorries contained amunition. Kellar went to Cyprus and is convinced that we should have a DSO there. A possible candidate is Klingopouas who has served with SIME under James Robertson,and knows Greek. THIS-I THISIS AG A GOPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UIUDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Juy 010 At the staff meeting today Iraised the question of giris leaving the office who might possibly get appointments abroad. Horrocs said that he had a list Of such people anu that he would never be at a loss to find a suitable penson since the stali would have to be considerably ou reduced before long and a large number would consequently be available. Tour mOrE giris are to go out east. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 JJuu I suggested to Chares that I might approach Harolu scott and see what could be done. He was quite agreeable to my going this. I pointed out that our overseas commitments would by and large e bound to stand hatever Findlater Stewurt Said, but I undertoor to review them all anu try to put up a comprehensive survey lor the DGS approval. I attended a meeting in the DMIS room with sellar,Marshal-cornwall,viv.,R Ryan o1 CICI and certain other I.starl ollicers. Meanwhile CICI would continue to run these agents in a semi-overt manner and would also collect overt intelli- gence as before. CICI1 main office would retire to Kermanshah but wOuLC leave four good officers in Teheran who would either be a British Military Mission or be attached to the MilitarJ and Air Attaches. It has already been decided in Potsaam that both ourselves ana the Russians will evacuate Teheran. I suggested tat we might perhaps do a deal with he.Russians ana suggest to them that as our Liaison in Teheran haa peel (0) mutually beneficial we should suggest to the Persians that we should both retain a small nucleus in the cppital. Nobouy seemed to feel that this was a goou idea although I am by no means convinced that it would not work. I expressed the vew too that we might even,arter the total evac ation of Persia,retain some sort o1 overt security liaison officer who would be in touch with the local police authoritie AS regards Abadan it was decided that te "ngto-Persian Oud Co.shotrd provide their own security, but that CIOI should not aSK them to eugabe in any inceliig ance aotivitles outsiue their area as this might possibly queer the pitch for SIS in the future. Actually the 01 company are not at all anslous to get mixed up ir intelli- gence matters as they rear that such activities may compromise their position vis-a-vis the Persian Govt. Speer, the Reichsminister for Armaments and war production, has been very caretully interrogated on the affect of our bombing policy. He said that our first attack on Hamburg in August 1943 made an extraordin- ary impression but that it was not followed up at suflicient.ly short intervals or sufficlently extensivly to have any really Serious efreet. It did however affect morale rather strongly at the time. Graau- ally however the Germans became used to these attaclks and stoou up to them extremely well. Indirectly they affected the country in that man-power nac to te diverted by the ARP Depts ara evacuatior anu disperala Ahad to take place. By lar the most effective of our raids were the ob planned assaults on industries, particularly bottle--necks such as ball-pearings ana chemical industries. The attack o1 the IZth May 1944 caused the first serious shortages of indispensible basic products and was the greatest anxiety Inr the future conduct of the war. From August 1945 onwaras, Speer and Miich had pressed for the COlS- tnuction of fighters. Nevertheless the High Command orderea bomber production tr continue as they were of the. opinion that it was only by means of retaliatory attacks that the allied assault on Germa towns could De slowed up. This accounts or the fact that even in 1945 the consorue tion O1 4-engine bombers was ortuereu once again. Moreover considerably more impor- tance was attached to the 11ak programne in the battle against the bomDens. IL was programme. given higher This priority was switched than the OT fisher the orders of Hitler himself. It was not until Early 1944 that air attacks became aecisive. The attacks on the che mniical industry were most difficult to deal with since before activity can be recommencea at a chemical factory the entire plant must be restored in at least one phase 01 manufacture in onder that the chemudcal processes which form a self-contained unit might pass through all its stages. The American attacis which followed at definite system of assault or industri 1 targets really caused the break-down o1 the German armar ments industrit Speer believes that strategic bombing alone, i1 it had been directed at the chemical industry,wou have sufficed to render Germany dererceless Further targets of the same kinu were to in be found in the ball bearing industy and power statios. II the armament anu waT 107 production inaustries the conduct of the workers could be measured in terms of output which riight up to the end of the war did not diminish;despite all the raids the production ligures improved. Moreover the willil to rebuild the factories remained unimpaired right to the end. Neither of these results could be achieved by means of compuision but only by viirtue o1 the voluntary response O1 the German workers. In the bufowaite the shortate of liquid fuel became insupportable as From Sept.1944 onwards, since as from that date tie allocation was cut down to 350,000 tons a month,whereas the monthly requirements amounted to between 160,00 to 180,000 tors. Attacis on synthetic oill pllants by night were more effective than those carried out by day. Untii the last stages 16 hed beer possible to stand a plant up again wi thin about 6 or 8 weens o an atuacr owin.g to the very erlicient repair measunes.. Armament prouucts would have been materially weakened over a periou Ol two months anu would have been brought to a complete standstill at the end of about 4 months if (1) all ball-bearing plants had been attacked at one and the same time, (2) the attacks haa been repeated 3 or 4 times at intervais of 14 days (5) each attempt at reconstruetion had been attac. eu every 8 weeks by to consecutive heavy raids, and if the execution o1 this total bombing policy had been continued 1or 6 months. Bomb plots are deceptive and should be aisregaraed in a policy of this rina. The manufacture of U-poats would have been stopped i1 we had concentrated on the elec- trical industry whi.ch supplied the motors anu the factories manufacturing batteries. ou SEM T ouedug aun WOTI foAte reroeds 2 9R uorsetu seforoy Bpunid TO esodin aun anoge DTES ag DTUOD anurrep autuauros ssarun gRua Amne 4481 out HO paUorp SEM JODESSIQTIV den aun CH der 2 0a Bumpoppv TBOT DIIE ATedod To tothonasep IO MatA TO utod eug MO.IT 19oq aamgpenre asom au am sattepueour pusgtH JO spent quoq pexem 48u9 sruTun ends AHTOM Tede efbup quoq put dHV u'T palotdte auam atdoad SUOTITTU ET oa UOTITTU E 4842 pegputase ST P IT VI-6t IBaA oun JOH unH aun ur ndano tIT down atqeaeprsuoo B peamnseu anBt pnOM suep ReTTeA auny Touno run JO uomonunsap snoeuet mTs euu steam B TO esdet- enre pesonseeuet Ienem JO sotrddns genbepe enaMou STu enpdsea ATTS DuR pnul Ag uotoe TO ano and SRM duny aug UT notes 2urdund 103BMA useIJ am pepooTi SEM LaTTeA june eun auyow run TO Hmuoreuq aun yo amnser e SV nsu19m1 Thenas TOI Jutauog TO sgoeI.ra aua euodasod HOTUM eu9uoD eug put reonpo.d traemnec SHOOnS dn PTTRO put sawreset 31e.1D 0a tossodut ST 0T aet seleuds LTLo aun Eye AInsnptt 919 run DUB STUL TTuSIEOS B 02 Gregetpetrt anti oTTand DUT Rmnsnut IO aTOtM etn 9IDRUIT.IG JO esuet eaTgoetre aso 8t9 ST DER sneotiins eNBu DTNOM toTonpod Temod oToato 1e1on aun IO 909 IO anTTPt 8u rsg0e0 Sutinseaan neu enu nmnom ratios antsueueud -1I0A Atatetopmns 9 to JE SEOTRAS emod owDeTe wo 3oente the neue 584s. eads went seem peuopueqe teec eneu nmom $10a-0 LIO troTonISUOD peho.nsan teaq pEt AT TI rqoBU1 peureueI IeAourH e seronopr esau JO ase91 au sol 1D possible for the Soviet Govt. to give a re- ply. To this the Japs have stated that Prirce Konoye is to seek the goou offices of the Soviet Govt. with a view to the war being brought to an end by their efforts, to set forth definite plans in this connection and at the same time to discuss the establishment and implementation of a co-operative relationship between the USSR and Japan as the basis o1 the latterts foreign policy both uuring ard alter the wan An American citizen o1 German origin named Walter Henry John LOHRY hasrecentiy been arrestea in the USA. LOHRYIS father left him in Germany in 1924 for his education. In 1933 LOHRY Joined the Hitier Jugenu anu in 1936 he returned to the USA where he is reported to have orgari ed a Nazi Youth Centre in the New York anwae In 937 he enlisted in the U.S.Army and was sert to Hawaii, where he continued his pro-Nazi and anti-semitic activities. He was given an honourable discharged From the Army in 1959 ana proceeded to organise Hitler Youth movements on the American west coast. With the assistance of Frederick Aunt LUDWIG and in company with two others LOHRY left New York in July 1939 for Berlin on the under- standing that he and his frienas woua offer their services to the G.I.S. In Feb. 1940 LOHRY returned to the USA where he told hiis father that he had beat trained to work for the H.I.S. and that he was instruc ted in the use of secret ink, radio codes a and the operation of short-wave radio equipment. He had to watch Brditish Ship- ping entering and leaving Philadelphia. He forced his father to acquiesce by saying that his aunt in Germany would be penalised in the event of his failure. He purchased a hallicraiter short-wave raalo transmitter (10 with a wide range of Irequencies. In April 1940 he was suspected o1 complicity in a burglary and his housewas searched. He was found to be endeuvouring to eat a torn-up card which he had pulled from his pocket. This eard was a print ol an enlargement from a micro-photograph of wiraless cypher instructions. Also a pllain-language code and instructions for the use o1 secret ink. In the house was found a mathematical slide rule which had been converted into a simpl ubstitution cypher o1 a type famllar to us in early espionage cases. The New Jensey police released LOHRY apparentiy ithout comment as he was not connected wi with the burglary case. LOHRY was them employed by the Arundel Corporation which was eons- tructing an American Naval Base at San Juan in Porto Rico. While there he was found on ore occasion to De leaving the works in possession o1 a detailed blue-print of the d dry dock area and raiway communications. He wasgdetained as his explanation of the lgeitimate interest was accepted. In Jan. 1943 he was automatically aralted into the US Armed Forces. It is said that he announo ed his intention at this time of deserting and passing his intormatiion to the enemy. on Noveuber 28th 1944 he was interviewed, apparently for the first time, by the FBI when he denied then whole o1 the above story but nevertheless committed himself. The father when interrogated confirmed many of the detaiis. According to statements by General BLumentrit and a Naval Captain Assmann, Funustea't was concerned essentially with an assault in the area of .B.West. They supposed that the main point of contact would be at the Strait of Dover,aiming at both sides o1 Calais. The points in favour of this supposition IM were (1) that it was the shortest sea route to the continent; (2) here were the main areas in which the Germans haa their V.I and V.2 sites; (3) the shortness o1 the crossing facilitated the provision of air support anu supplies; (4) after a successful landing a quick advance by armoured forma- tions could drive along the shortest route to the German frontier anu threater the Ruhr It was however clear to the Germans before D day that another landing in Norman dy would take place,ane possibly also one in Brittany. There was no information about the precise spot For Normandy. Some attempt at deception was carnieu out, the purpose be-ng to show that the west wall was far stronger than it actually was. This was done in the form o1 maps arta reports passed through agents in Pard's ana Switzer- land. Similar attempus wera mede to lead the allies to believe that there were more aivisions in France or moTe coming thar was actually the case. There were not even Sufficient troops to meet an attack in sitrength in both Normandy and the Fas de Calais. The Germans therefore had diliicul- ty in the disposal o1 their reserves, il it were necessary to send them to both fronts. Rommel fought for the principle of having the bulk of the mobile reserves close to the threatened coastal areas SO that they could be thrown into thebattle at once. Von Geyr (ex-M.A.London) was of the opinion that the mass of operational reserves Should be kept in the area of Pari.s. This asproved later to be unsound for the advantage 01 mobility was lost due to the state of the railways. It was known,according to these P/WS, during the first wea.cs O1 the invasion that another Anglo-American Army Group was held in readiness in SEEnglard. P/W states that 14 days after D day he and 112 Rundstedt no longer reckoned with a second landing near Calais because,according to' their appreciation, the Britit and American had no need to take this risk once the land- ing on Normandy had proved successful and they were of the opinion that all available troops should be moved into Normanay. This was not approved by the OKW who were still afraid that the main operations would be in the Calais area. The above is o1 course further proof of the efficacy oi the Garbo- Brutus deeeption plan. P/W States that information about England was extremely scanty. On the evening of the 5th June there was an important amnouncement to the Resis tance Movements From which the Germals realised that immediate danger threatened. Owing to this announcement Alert Stage 2 was given in the 15th Army area between 8-10 pm. The Army,Nav, al.u Air Fonce non Services produced better Results about the Army and Air Force units but could not follow their movements sullicientiy cleanly to draw any delinite conclusions. P/W did not know nything about the DFing oi ormati -ons as this was rot within his sphere. The bombing of the briages over the Seine betwee Paris and Houen and the briages over the Loire between Orleans and the river mouth signified to the Germans that the area of Normandy and Brittany was being isolated. Travel bans were fairly quickly known. They were partly regardeu as decep- tive measures, above all the diplomatic ban. News of the renewed diplomatic traffic between England and Sweden caused some interest as it was thought that this indica tea the conclusion of allied invasion prep- anations. This may refer to the proposal that the air line should De reopea. t 13 According to P/W the proportion: of Allied front line planes to German planes was 20-1. Later the proportion increased in favour of the Allies to 30-1. Recce flying became impossible. The visit of F-M.Montgomery to the Meuiterrane early in 1944 was negarued as a aeceptive measure. It was also thought that Monty wishea to keep in touch with divisions to be Withdrawn from the Mediterranean area to UK. On the third may ot the attack the Germans captured the whole plans oi anl American Corps giving the targets to be reached by the alllies OL certain days. The German estimate of divisions in this country prior to Duay wais about 70. A aiversionary attack against Norway was considered a possibility. The German failure in the west was consiuered to be due to(a) too rigid a defence,( (b) com- plete allied air superiority,( (c) iestruction of railways and briages (a) allied superiority in material, l,training and mobility and (e) lack of proper operational airection. No freedom of action was given to O.B.west after the landings had been successful. (r) too much reliance on the Atlantic Wall and no substan- tial defence in depth. 3rd August The DG summoned me and Harry Allen to discuss our representation on the Joint Scientific Intelligence Committee. It was agreed that a Letter should be written pointing out our interests have a seat anu on suguestiny the coinmittee. commI ttee. that we Wit It should was also agreed that Victor could fill this job very efficiently. Vesey talked to ie about accomodation Lor the LRC persomel. When Bater goes he would have to waste his time nickir-g his hee at the LRC. I am trying to Bee ir it is rot possible to fit the LRC stay. into SJ. Malcolm Cumming Iinus it coveriert to keep them where they are as a lever against the Office of Works,i from whom he is trying to get accommodation For the transfer of BLenheim. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 JMuy DoLo. Buster is a little worried about the interrogation ol SCHELLENBERG at 020. There have been SO many charges owing to the approaching transier O1 020 overseas on Aug.l5th that the interrogation has not been very productive and questions put by the War Room have not been answered. Buster has taken this up with Stimson in Tin-Eye's absence on embarxation leave. Harker tells me that the Jugoslavs want to give us all fuecorations. The diiliculty is that as from June 9th Tito has cancellled all previous oruers and nouncea a series o1 naw ones. It is doubtful therefore whether the King; orders ane stiid Valid. In any caseyas the DU put it, the whole business in relation to its importalice to us is not worth the time ala trouble cause by the correspondence it entaits. Personauy I am not aware o1 having uone arything Tor the' Jugoslavs. I should not be surprised il the whole thing were not inspired by Tricyele. IT may be too that the Jugostavs hope For reciprocadl treatment. S I saw Maxwell about Tricyele's naturalisation He is prepared to exercise in Tricycle's 1avour a clause which waives the statutory period for those who have done goou work in the service oi the Crown. He cannot however consider the application until naturalisation is re-openeu as a whoe in about 6 monitths time. Roland Bird tells me that the question of getting Germans out of Ppain is rather hang- ing fire and may leeu a roeket From C.to the FO who do not appear to have one anythin I spoke to Haylor about Wibroe. He said that he wanted him Ior a G.2 job in Oslo comected with security and involving liaison with the Germans ana Norwegians. He di not think the job would last more than 2-3 months at th outside. I said I would speak again to Wibroe and let him KLOW the result. THISI THISISA CO A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIG RECORDS ACT 1958 Jey 2010J WL I had a long talk with Clayton about the future of 0.C. E have asked him to get out a memo showing what on present evidence our Future organisation hould be. He shou also state the number of officers required. I regard as firm the cOmL itmelts il the Caribuean,Malta,Gi ,Rangoon,Singapore, Egpt,East Alrica covering West, and outh, Aden, alld possibly Cyrpus,. Lou arILt HongKu It seemed to me that there was no particuta point in waiting LoI the resuu OI the Findlater Stewart erquiry. II we could get E DSO scheme approved Dy the C.0. we could then go to the Treasury. This woulu enable us to make firm Offers to people like Kirby-Green. I tolu Clayton that I doubted the advisability of having other th. a purely A.Branch aaministracion Officer to real with colonial matters. II we haa an 0.C on the lines ervisageu by Ede it would I think have to work or the basis of limited knowledge,which woula be unsatis- factory, or ultimately absorp most Ol the office. It seemed to me that we should have an intel lig er-ce section to deal with the Caribbean area, with the Mia East, Far East and African areas and that the prouuce of DSO points should be fed into these section By und large I think Clayton agreed with ti He understood that it was essential that the person responsible Tor the area should know his DSOS and alll the people with whom they had to deall in their are, and that this WOIK could not be divorced from the purely intelligerce product, We have received c paper fron the J.I.C. with proposals hatgermall scienciste anlu techologists sshoula be alloweu to escabiisi themselves here with their wives aliu famili under certain saleguarus. I0 is tet that ((7 since we are some 3 yeans bentinu tie Germana in certain developments, the secunit. risk of bedding down Germans in our armament industry should be take. The argument is that we have little lear from germany in the future and that She wil not have the opportunity of beneritting from any intorma- that these scientists might ultimately carry to their own country. This view I think postulates a goou ueal. I would sad that it was by no means certain that Germany woulldl not have a government of her owi within the met LWD Years and that She would not have ortunities of maniactuning armaments el ther in her OWIT county OT abroad. There is also the possibility thau she might come into the Russian orDit. Apart from tnls it is quite iuory to thite that the German scienbiste can work here in vacuo and that if as is proposed they shoud on occasion be placed in touch with industrial firms they will not get to know everything about our armamant development; both nOW ard in the future. krowleage of our armament programme for the next 5 years is perha S of more value to an enemy than anything Else. It is eually an uston to make distinctions between Nazis and Germans. Gbermans abroad are not fundamental loyal to the country in whicin they resiue and the/ do not become assimilateu until the 3rd or 4th generation, Auzust 5th JIC paper 01 31,7.45 states that the Soviet bovt. had refused at Potsuan to relax neir demands lor bases in the Ptraits au it is evan suggestd that they will claim the 1ouY Aegeun islands guarding the approach to the Dardenelles.. They continue to put forward. ls their Claim to the two provinces Ol Kaz and Ardahan in E.Turkey. This attitude,com- bined with continuea prees and rauio criti- eism oi Turkish pro-Fascists etc. suggests that the Soviet Govt. ultimate aim may well be to bring Turkey, ilke Russiat other neighbours, within the Poviet orbit. Meanwnile Jugoslaviats press und rauio attacks against Greece ard in particular against Greek creacment OI the Slav minority in Greer maceuonia have recently increaseu in violence. bungaria, Roumatia, anu Albania have now Joined in with similar attacks on Greece and Dhis gives the impres- son that the concerted campaign is under the airectior of Moscow. The Jugosiavs accuse the Greeks of having been responsible lor frontier incdiuents anu shooting on the Jugoslav-Greek frontier. Even if the incidents have in act taken place, they were O1 minor importance though the danger exists of more Serious clashes at any moment. The Jugoslavs have suflicient forces in the area to invade Greece along her northern frontiers and to seize Salonika. The Russians have for ce in pulgaria estimated at 15-18 livisions,and the Bugarians about 17 divisions. they could easily seize Greek Thrace ana eastern macedonia. Moreover a consiuerable number of Russian troops have been reporteu in Bulgaria along the southern frontier. It is doubtful whether Jugoslavia or Bulgaria would under- take ar act oi aggression without Russian encouragement. The problem therefore is mainly one of Russian intentions. It may well suit Russiars DOOK at some given moment to encourage Jugoslav anu Bullgarian aspiratin to the Aegean coast either Separately or as a xxrzing supporting action coinciding f with Russian military operations from Bulgaria against TurkeJ and Turish Thrace. It is not thought that any such action is imminent. UNVERSAFT, who has been a prominent member o1 the Abwehr since 1940 has under interro- ation admitted that he was concerned with the despatch from Brussels ol no less than 16 agents to this country. He states that the only two successful agents whom he rar wene Neukemans and Fanto. The atter was a D.A. The former was hangeu aite he had spent 6 months sending out fabricateu ana worthless information in secret writing from this country. Hugo BLEICHER @ VERBECK is producing valuable information, particularly with regard to the penetration of SOE and SIS networks. Through KIEFER @ KIKI he perstrated the Walfenti or Brutus organisation and subsequently used Victoire in rounding up all the members. He then used Victoire to control the SOE agent Lucas He arranged that they Should both come to this country, the idea being that Lucas would receive instructions to unite all important resistance activities in France and that BLEICHER would then through Victoire uncover all the organisations. This plan came to light whei. Lucas anu Victoire were in Englanu and in fact Lucas returned secretly to France while efforts war being made by false W/T traffic to persuade the Germans that he will still taking part in discussions in Englana. This was success: ful but Lucas was subsequently betrayed by one of his ssistants. ubsequently BLEICHEF completely penetrated.another large SOE organisation and by turning round an agent continued to run it for some time and even to satisi] Doudingto who himseii paiu a visit to Franca. This visic was uesiberat ly facilitatea by BLEICHER who was able to persuade his superiors that it was wiser to permit the SOE officer to raturT Ergland thining his organisation wis in order, than to arresit him anu bring the orgarisation to art end. Under the alias O ol.Herri, BLEICHER susgesteu to membars O. this SOE group that he himseii shoua be brought to Ergland. It is not as yet Cueat whether this was an attempt Or his ow part to ge Tavourable terms with the Britioh,who he believed would win the war or whether it was a bold penetration Mlove authorised by BLEICHER'S superior officers. BLEICHER also ran with similar success at Least 2 W/T agents for SIS who were arrastea in 1943. The Japs have opened tentative peace negor tiations through their representatives on the Bank of International Settlements at Berne, the Swedish Adviser to the Bar, and Dulles, said to be a representative oIthe US President in the capacity of special adviser to the american Legation. the Japs are pressing for some guarantee For the safet/ o1 the Japanese Imperial family and the national structure. The Americars are still stickig to unconditional surrenden but are throwing out hints that this would not necessarily imply the removal of the Japanese Imperial family or the national structure. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMSTIT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT I9R SECTION 3(4) OF THE RUGLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 uy 20(0 and uotdepem TTBaAO IOI quamandap TeTeds B dn 3as on Then asn[ DRu H SESeG DOU pe MIO aton Hired STM Futyatiend uoreH eToum eun IOI Nottor toTadeoan OTI SBM ereua 1Run unOT eu uuemovetn UO.II ao yooa eu you "uOOS 00 rewue JTEM run ano SITTI eseun TO TOTORaTed omBmuags/s run pentetT pu Hegueteuos RULITI LRmeD Trautuoad UTM STSEG TRuOSed 9 1I0 cp91uOO asoTo pru s.ref IEM-ad aun UT IeTnoToued "JueMaV eud TomDINI pmnous yoteH aun UT eotJo TonuaD a1n pet2 enemou SRM uomn pATDtop H quaudmha TPOTOan nur Rauou UTM peprroud aTdosertan nsuxe eeun setgutoo TRneu UI YIOM JIRM-Sod JOT anop ueeq sBU oTuensAs Furunou "uTTI onut negeseuagep peu ueya Aq to HOTUm'tI oTum"TOTBnORNe TUM uaBnoRne eun JOI saunseeu UQIJ uede qeun uoTuTdo WUJITI 0u TO ST Pequetteuos IOM eotaes nouoes TO RTARJg JO auueo Thed eun "sernunoo uteoI UIM 1080100 TO MOTTTqTSSOd aun mnoge puRS SBM DOM ON euon SBM aunar Bu ToTOpd B TO BUTUoN sauameAou punoaTapun TO ebueRIttenuT IRM-asod TO yeeds neJrp Lnogou eUA run on onn Lrefuet'aseuanut etaeeprsrtoo fan TO uoeq see uomefoenut S IDHCHNGTTHOS QOU mone 8961 10W S080338 omand aHl 30 (6)E NOILOBS HRONn LNHIAIHVDIOINI O9NIVI9H INBIn3OO TVNIO1HO Adoo SI SIH d he never really got going. The diirerent departments showed little enthusiasm for co-operation as they were very reluctant to offer and release their high-grade communications for the purposes of deception In Jugoslavia the German Minister Dr.Neubach- er intended to provide arms lor apout 40,000 volunteers of Mihailovic in order to win the movement over to Germany and to use it as a fighting unit against Russia ana Tito. This plar failed owing to the strong resil tence of the Wehrmacht which haa no confi- dence in Mihailovic and his organisation, though it was increasingly incllined to trust to information that Mihailovic was pursuing not SO much a pro-communistas a pro-British policy. As regards Russian espionage Schel- lenberg mentions the Rotekappelle. This was the name of a wide-spread Russian organisa- tion for espiorage working in Berlin from the end of 1942. to the midale ol 1943. Some high German officers and officials ocepying important positions were involved in it. A Major on the General Staff of the Luftwaife called Schultzer-Boysen was the principal figure. There were others in the Air Min- istry, the Economic ministry and the F.0. One Semenov in the Russian Legatiol in Stockholm was concerned in putting over aeception material under the direction o1 a central o1fice in Moscow. This was eventually discovered by W/T monitoring by Amt 6 specialists at Wannsee Institute. There were two Hungarian agents called Lobmeyer and Eltze worring under ciplomatic cover who were in W/T contact with London. (Source Nero) Many reportswere received from the Spanish SS and FO including all the Duke of Alba's despatches. Schellenberg always suspected Mue.ller,heac Ol Amt.4, of being a Russian agent and spoke about it 23 with Himmler who did not trust Mueller. Schellenberg thinks that in the and Mueller went over to the Russians. He also Believes that many members OI Amt.4 were prepared to do the same. This is interesting in view O1 what Bartir told me about the head oi the Gastapo in Prague. Ostro was regarued as the best agent ic milicany intelligenca in Portugal and according to Senerlembere nad a group of from 10-12 men working under him in Lonaon. (our assumption was that all these people were notional) Schellenberg however maittaine that he could inform us how much of Ostrots reports were invention and how much WaS allied aeception. He himself had great doubts but the Army backed Ostro. Johnnie Jebson wa's kidnapped at the Portuguese-spanish frontier. Hansen had given the order. He was taken away in a trunk by Kubarth ard another officer. Schroeder in Lisbon aided and abetted the scheme. Jebson Well under suspicion because he sent conflictling reports to uiflerent departments,amongs them Amt.4. He was handed over to Mueller anu wa.s accused of working for Britain. Scheldenberg does nd know his late. A Polish General Staif Colonel who worked in W/T first rom N.A Anica anu ther From ae Gaullets headquarters in Versaitles, was an agent O1 the Germans. He is said to have transmitted a good report about the imperd- ing invasion of Burope. 'Ryan in Berlin helped Schellenberg in parachuting two Irishmen over Irelanu. Ribbentrop and Veesemeyer who were Just preparing a revolt in Ireland,were furdtous owing to this interference with their plans. (we have no evidence of the preparation of a revolt). au The head of the Turkish Intelligence Service, Naci Perkel, collaboratea with the Germans in running agents across the Caucasus into Russia; through the interception of Turkish telegrams the Germans Learned that the Russial haa protestea to the Turks about these activities. Schellenberg alleges that in the middle of 1944 two men were sent oy Mil.D (sabotage) to SAfrica. They each received $5,000. Doth vere Germans and had lived in .Africa before. Their task was to sabotage Snips. They set ou from Spain. The British Soldatensender West was very successfully directed and had a most demoralising effeet at the end of the struggll on German civilians and soluiers arike. The famous Richard KLATT who was in charge of the Sofia Meldekopf was never wholly trustea. It was found that he got his intelligence From a Slovak lawyer ana Prince Turkul. The latter huu a White Russian line to Moscow. Schellenberg asserts that he a contact inside the British Embassy in Maurid. He has the highest aumiration 1or the British Intelligence Service but clearly knows absolutely nothing aDolt it. August 8th I discussed with Harry Allen the Dualey Cark proposal that we should not only puplish some! Official document about our deception during the war but also put out a film on the subject. Dudley Clarke argues that a good deal is already known about deception and DAS and that the truth will leak out and that it is therefore much better to get the credit for what we have done byxsekAkx issuing some official publication. io my mind this 125 is no argument. People wili never KIOW what is true and what is fiction. II however the official government seal is put upon publication the document Wil.I go into the archives of War Ministries ana Intelligerc Depts. everywhei, to be puled out at the appropriat moment. The ruming o1 DAS is as important in peace as in war. Even if the practice is known, the less said about it the better, We do not want the Germans to rate ustoo high in intelligence matters. The more stupid they think we are the easier will be our talk in dealing with them and other countries. For this and other reasons we shall strongly oppose Dudiey Olariets suggestion. I had a talk with Roger about the diviuing of F.Hivision between Russian anu German blocks. He seemed tO think the scheme was a good one. I had a talk with Leggett of the LRC,W Who has ben in Potsaam interpreting lor the PM in his conversations with Iussians anu Poues. He seemu Lo think that the Poes had put forwaru a fair case Tor the occupatid of Germany up to the Neisse. They say that even with this ternitor theywiil stail be about 20% short ann willhave to rteorientaite their whole ecoromy. Ethnographically they elaim that there are & large number 0I Poles in the area and only about million Germans H large number o1f Germans have O1 course already gone and will probably not De per- mitted to return. The Fussdans evidently intend to run thairzo as a separate unit imposing their oil administration ithout any regard to ourselves. NO Final uecision seems to have been reached on this matter. The Russians are stripping the country ana conscripting labour from the younger men, 2 requisitioniig whatever the wunta and eavin the rest to the quasi-communist Germar regime. Legsett thinks tiet they may well decide to stay ir Germany permaneutiy. There are still 5 million people ir Beriin out of a population O1 42 mithion and house al and food problems during this wilnter are likely to be appaling. Leggett is but determined to take the F.0. exam. II he fails however he might like to consider a Jop here. Meanwhile he would like to go to the Control Commission either to thu Economic Dept. or to C.I. I had a word with Joe Archer about the pro- posal to bring German scientists ana tech- nologists to this country. He things it important that they should be confined to resaarch ana development and not allowed to stray into the Field of designywhich would inveitably Lead thing into contact with industrial firms Where they would Learn our future programme. The DG has agreeu to my getting scherr back to take over the contacts in weanwhile there is a drove to get Kinpyueeer to nun the Internat onat Police ir. Tangier. this is being resisted. Kirbyureen does not want to do the Jou anu cannot De sparea from Gib.at the moment. Ultimately he woua line LO be DSO Caribvean. Htighes talked to me about the axity of the Post Office in prosecuting people who use wineless without a licence. In 9 cases out of 10 they Cordone the Oflence by giving the man a licence in order to regurarise his position. I have suggested to Hughes that he should get out a memo on tae subject E 27 which we will either discuss ith the GPO or pirt becore the Security Executive. The first atomdic bomD Tell esterday morning at 1 am on Hioshima. As yet thereis no reiable estimate o1 the damage. It 13 said however that tests carried out ir New wesiico resulted in two mer being knocked oven at a distance of 6 miles. The DomD is 400 lbs. and is said to have thesame explosive value as 20,000 tons of TNT. I have just been reading a report basalon the evidence of Huntermann and Giskes from what is know as the Nordpol aflair. Under the cover name Ol Norapol 5F of the Abwehr obtained almost complete control of SOErS aetivities from Sept194l to August 1943. AS a result of this a very large number of agents were parachuted straight into their hands, when they were turned round or Some plausible exxcuse made for their liquidation. It was only wher two agents known as bprout and Chive succeedea in escaping ir 1943 that SOE really tumbled to whut was going or. When we oreviously looked into this case on their behalf we came to the conclusion that they ought to have wound it up at least 6 months after it began on the evidence that sas available to them at that time. It is interesting to see that the Germans hau the same difficulties in faking sabotage as we did ourselves. They finaiiy gave it up when they adopted the policy of taking hostages wher ar aet of sabotase weeurred. Even the Germanst conscdence Seains to nave rebelled aguinst taking hostages for acts which they had committed themselves, alc failure to do So would of course have made it clear what was going on. Thee finally made up their minus that there was no organisation controlled 1rom London about which they did not know which might bother them SO they confined themseives to reporting any real acts o1 sabotage and many imaginery ores to SOe,who expressed themselves as being thoroughly pleased with the results. Many of these reports presumab -ly appeared in Sitreps. The Germans also penetrated SIg to some extent by alloving to rematinat large two of thein agents, called Apollo and Brutus (Not our Brutus) Brutus was finally arreated byt apollo was allowed to think that he hau got aw with it. In Dece.1943 or Jan.1944 he Wab allowed to go back to Enghand in order that he might inspire confidence. 3F arranged lor a carerud watch to be kept upon the Wireless Signals o1 aircraft operating From the station wheuce agents were des- patched. They knew almost invariably when an agent was coming because tre re was always a trial Ilight during the altemnoon. Like ourseivesy the uermans serutinised carefully the traces 01 all low-flying aircraft. August 8th I attended a meeting o.1 the JIC at which the paper on German scientist was ais- cussed. Generaly speaking our compror suggestion was accepted, amely that the scientists shoud come here for a limited period during whiich British scientists would be working alongside them. The idea would be that they should absorb their ideas and when the Germans haa been sue ed ary we should eliminat them from the pictures We alsosuggested that the Germans should be kept out of design ana not permitteu to visit factories where they would get access not only to the work that is being one but to our future programme. It was Suggested JJuLy THISISACOPY COPY Doc ORIGINAL O0OUMENT RETAINED I2ct IN VDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3141 OF THE PUBLO REGORDS that the whole position Shouiu De reviewaud again in a mortinl time I wars asheu tu communicate with the H.0. ard obtain their views. We also discusseu the telegram to Mid East regarding the taking over ol certain Iunc- tions o1 CIOI by SIS. F.O.. are apparently apprehensive apout CICI leaving 4 Officers behind in Teheran alber our croops have withdraw. They think this maJ be resaruee as evidence of bad 1aith athough they aumi that the Russians are certain to leuve people behind in one guise or another. The matter has therefore Dee.. left lor discussion between the Ambassauor ana GOC Paiforce who will De bauly placed as negare information if CICI has to close cown in Teheran. Stopfora came in to say goodbye. He will be available ir required. His Sweuish conta will be maintained through Miss Glass anu the general direction oi the section will come under B.1B. Grogan came to tell me that there is a move owing to representations made by Brazil and China lor the restoration oi the privil previously granted to consuis to communicat in cmpher with their Ambassido Or with their Govt.direct. The FO are arraid thet if we do not give these facilities the Chinese will reluse them to our consuls in China. This would be a very serious handi- cap, owing to the enormous distances involv Chinese consuls here are at Liverpool, anu Glasgow,an since their cyphers are probabl extremeiy insecure the Admiralty may not mo be ve anxious to have them in a position where they can report the movements of ships. T suggested that this matter Should be dealt with other than through Censorship channels. Milmo came to talk about his successor. He thinks that Martin Forrest should take over his section and the duties of B.IW. I am arranging this with TAR. I went to see Newsam about the German scien- tists. He began by saying that the HO could not express views to the Chiel's of Staff and they could only talk through the Home Secretary. at a Cabinet Meeting I pointed out that this was not likely to be very effective and that it would be lar better if the HO views went forwara in consolidateu form to the Deputy Chieis of Staff. I suggested therefore that Newsam should come to the next meeting of the JIC which he agreed to do. I have SO informed King-Salter. Serpell of .Division has made an interestin discovery with regard to lars. de PFEIFFER about whom we hadia certain amount-oi troubl She was employed in PID and had had access to B.J.S. She wanted to rejoin her Spanish husband of German origin in Spain who had been threatening divorce if she d.d not return. It now seems that Shough one Mervyn BELL in PID shewas placed in contact with Claud COCKBURN who asked her to collect information for him on her return to Spain. It has further transpired that Mrs.de PFEIFFERTS sister,Mis: Paul, married JuuTHIS THIS COPY 910 ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED 3 IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OFITHE PUBLIC RECORDS J.H.Williama Twug8has a long history in. the underground movemert of the OP and is closely associated with Reginala Bowles. Mrs. de Pieiiter has in lact been staying with the Wiiliams': Tor some time. I to rot think all this could hve allected the decision that Mrs he Pleilier should go bac to her husband, but SIS are being iniormeu. August 9th I met Arrotu-Forster at the club last right He told me a lot about the history O1 the atomic bomb. Although our scientists had made considerable progress up to 1940 there was a wide gap between the theoretical possibility of making a bomb and the practi application of what hau peer discovered. It was due to Akers OI ICI anu some of his subordinates that an entirely hew line of approach to this problem was discovered. At this stage the PM arralseu with the President that owing to the danger O1 continuing operations il this countrysrut researches on a combineu pasis shoulu be carried out in the USA anu that British scientists should go over 1or this purpose. He also renourceu alt future rights in the military or civil application 01 the atomic theory. Later Nits BOR the Danish Scientists considered to pe one o1 the most mnowledgeable of those concerned with atomi reaearch was got out O1 Dermark and went to the USA. About a year later he returned with a message from the Presi- dent to Winston Saying vertually that he (the President) was prepared to tear up the previous agreement, the validity of whic in any case seemed doubtful, and substitute it by somethingon a 50-50 basis. The PM for some inexplainea reason was relucta to receive BOR. However efforts were made to get him to chalige his mind and ProI.Dale want So far as to say that he would blow the whole business if in a matter which affected scientilic development throughout the world the PM persisted in maintaining his attitude. Ultimately the PM was persuaded to accept the message from BOA and agreement was ubsequently reached with the President. Meanwhile we and the Americans have coucentrated on buying up al the stocks of uranium on which we could lay our hands. There were apparen -ly certain stocks in Austria for which we made a bee-line when the Germans courapsed. We got this stocrr and also all the leading wcientists and their papers. 12 o1 them have been brought ovar here. Pro. +.Darwin thinks that all,w: the exception of one, have extremely valuable contributions to make. Probably if the Germans had peen able to make the jump that was made by ICI they might ha ve produced the bomb in EL far shorter period than the USA. The real importan't Factor in the whole matter was the new approach to the subject aiscovered by ICI. Other stocks o1 uranium are in Canada and in the Belgian Congo. There are also certain mines in the Urals, but nobody is very clear as to what they are capable of prouucing, or in fact how far the Russiars have got with the whole proposition. About 18 months or 2 years ag the question arose of bringing the Russians into the whole scheme. There was a good deal of argument for and againstiand finally it was decided against, and the first that the Russians new about the successful development o1 the atomic bomb was at Potsdam, where they were told that one of the bombs would shortly be dropped on the Japs. They had in fact, rior to this agreed to come into the war against Japan, 133 Which they did last night, on the somewhat cynical grounds that the aps had refused to respond to the Anglo-American ulltimatum. It is doubtful whether even ir they were gi -en the results of our experiments the Russians could get into proauction in 2-3 years. During that period th erelore we should have the whip hana if we careato use it but clearly we shall not do so. Arnold Forster said that he was rather disppoirted by the Labour Govt's perlormanc at Potsdam They had talked a lot about the Atlantic Charter and apparently haa very strong views about the suggested Polish western frontier. They did not raise their voices beyond saying that the would not give de jure recognitioni.to the new Poland until the Peace Conf srence. I gather that an Offer has beer made to Sinclair the present DMI to tane over as second in command to C. I had in lact already heard this From another source. A.F does not I think feel very sanguine about this appointment, particulary since C. has askeu him to stay on in order to deal with the policy siue of the office. He does nos quite see how his position is going to lit in with that O1 Sinclair who would be CIs Deputy. He wonders whether he will be able to make his influence Tilea. Although he has a good business to go bac.k to he is attracted by the WOrK oi SIS and is evidently rather anxious to stay on. He told me about Findlater having intervieweu Cis people abroad. I said I thought that probably what happened was that indlater met them in some mess and was introduced to them by our officers. It would have been rather unnatural if he had not asked them about the work they were doing. I thought 9su it woula be a pity il this were misinter- preted an trying to pull a Last one over SIS, tacties which wene quite out OI the question in a man like Findlater. Cecil had a long tal with C. who was aso in the club and curiously enough haa no idea who Rindlater was. He did not know that he was head OI the Home Derence Executive or indeed what the Home Defence Executive was nor did he realise that findlater sat on Chiefs of Staff Committees and attended, Cabinet meetings when proposa.ls affecting his work were raised. I saw Leggett and told him that he had the opportunity of taking what would probably be a 6.2 job with C.I. on the Control Commission as liaison Oficer with the Russians, or going to the Economic Branch of the Commissio as a G.3. He prefers to take the CI Job. THIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCNENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 ouuy 20(o. I spent the afternoon at Barnet. M.E showed me over his excellent general search dept. Hd is aiming at having a complete library in which will be recorded by countries the various types of traiiic on the air. The recora will give the times,irequencies, spations and peculiarities, In this way will be possible to monitor at a moment' notice. His methods Of indexing are very, elaborate and provide at least 4 or 5 chances t 35 o1 identifying any particular message piceu up. He tells me that B-P nave now set up a depth on simidar lines out o1 course with considerably less experience. This is a clear waste of time,money and man-power. While I wasthere Maltby rane through to say that that Finalater Stewart was coming down to RSS nexxt Weanesaay. The whole circu was going down with him and the line was to put the emphasis on mobile units. I do not know on whose ins tructions this orger was given but it is obviously an extremely stupid one. F.S. already knows about the work O1 RSS and will ask many pertinent questions. He will not be impressed ii he observs any attempt to cover up. Hollis Shawed me the Mussolimi-Grandi corres pondence discovered in Italy. It made it perrectly clear that Mosley was being sub- Sidised to the tune of 960,000 a year. It also deals with the period wher Rother- mere came out for Fascism. He had apparently been won over to a large extent by ward rice after the latter had hau an interview with Mussolini. The assoeiatior between Rothernere ara Mosie aid not however last very long. His first quarre.l was over the organisation being named British Union of Fascists He wanted them to be called British Blaekshints. Erarui in ore o1 his Letters gives a uescription ol life in this country ana hisestimate OI the tecadence of the British rade. He concludes by saying how stupid we are in the light o1 allthe developments o1 modern wariare to place any reliance on the English Channel It would do him a worla o1 good il he were tolu to learn nis letter by heart and reuite it 6 times a day. Little did he anticipate that nothing less than the channel save us from destruction in 1940. Auust 10th I have asked Jim Hale to tare up the case of Emma LINDHORST with the H.0. I attended a meeting at the FO with Howard in the chair at which Viv. A-F, Rex beeper and Bromley were also, resent. It was todiscuss the proposa. that we should assist Greece in setting up a Central Information Service to real with foreign intelligenc and home securiity. I had pointed out that the Greeks had So far asked more for advice than an adviser and that with all the political complications it might be better to deal with the question on an ad hoc basis. We could then feel our way to some morerpermanent iaison. This was generally agreed an Viv.is to go out with Leeper at the beginning o1 sept. for a preliminary discussion in order to ascertain precisely what is required. I gather that there is a move to get the Greek PM over here at the time of the first inter-allied gonrerence in order to show the Russians that the present Govt. intends to pursue the same policy towards Greece as the previous one. We evidently intend to retun our howu on Greece anu to see that it does not come within the Russis orbit. At the 12 clock meeting Cecil mentioned two indiviuuals,C0oK and CREAN, who accord- ing to a report from the Field were trained in sabotuge activities Dy Groening, the same man who trained ziezag. It is not rnowi what their mis sion was. They returned tO the Channel IsLanas in 1943 possibly to report something about them from some o1 the characters in Ast Nantes who have ja ssed 137 through our hanus. Meanwhile they are to be prevented from eaving the isanu. Brook-Booth came in to see me. He said that as war as he could gather Finu- laterts visit had been a great success. He expressed himseii as being thoroughly satisfied an as having learred all that he wanted to know. During the conversation SIS came up and Brook-Booth very properly suggested that finalater should see some of their local representatives. He actuall; saw Harmer and Harmer had asiced that should be present as he him- self was an ex-MI5 officer. A rep ort had been sent to C. on the interview and C. had protested to Findlater. The posit ion as regards the King in Belgium is to remain in abeyance. the real Case against him is connected with his visit to Berchesgarden. Brook-Booth went with Van Achere to see Schmidt,Hitler's interpreter who was present at the interview. Tha King sister had urged her brother to collaborate fully with the vermans ard he ultimately had agreed to to SO athough he had never put his signature to an document. This collaboration incuued the ceaingioi Antwer] to Germany anu also Eupen-Maimeuy. In retu lor this the Belgians were to have Dunirk ana Lille. The King haa askeu as a conui- tion that alt Belgian. reported shoura be returned LO their country. Hitier had Ilown into a temper all the eetilis had broken of without any Iixea agreement being signed. the wLemish Catholies support the King as they feel rot without reason that the bocialists and Communrists are trying to get riu of the monarchy altogether. Ii the King were to apdicate this might very weil come about. The 08 ultimate solution may well be that a Regent will continue for the next b-Jears aars until Prince Baudouin can sueceea, on the King's apaication. II the King Wore to returr HOW there would undoubteary be civil war. A plebicite would probably result in a 50-50 vote. De Ganzhoi is on the side of the King, who has on several occasions Deen very near to abdication. He apparently agrees to apuicate in the evening but revers es his decision on the Following morning: There is to be a meeting this afternoon on contraband control at MEW. The idea is to cease control in Gib.the W.Inaies etc., and we are opposed to this until we have got the GIS remnants in neutral countries back into Germany. As luck would have it an agent of the GIS who was at one time destined for the USA was on his way to the Argentine and was picked up at Tniniaad today. He was idertilied by a member oi the FSP This will considerably strengther our case. Baxter came in to say gooabye touay. He will be a great Loss to S,although the LRO is now reduced to very small proportions. Ketlar is having Long conversations with Gort who apparertly likes his new Ministe. He says that like himseii he is not an intellectual an that they therefore get on well. Creun Came to Say goodbye. He is on his way back to Canaua and hopes to get into External Affairs. He is still however open- mindeu ara might be gind to Ajoinyus. ORIGINAL DUCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Jury 2O0 139 Thornton (Tremayne) came LO Soe me aoUE his future. He does not want to 80 buck into the Poo ald kick his heels. BTOOK- booth ma bpe abe to lind him a Job as there is a chance of a 4.5 vacancy on his stall. Luke talked to me about Panto who wishes to go back to Beigium and become a Delgian citisen. We have warned him that he may be in trouble with the Belgians but he seems quite confident. Brook-booth on the other hand says that the Belgians tate a poor view of him. We can only Say that he has worked well since he came. over to our siue. News of the Jap oiier through the Swiss anu Swedish Ministers to surrender on corditior that the Imperial family was preserve came through on the L ofclock news. Aurust lth Dick Ellis came to see me in oruer to examine a report we had received From the War Room about aocuments of the Abwehr or Gestapo found at Bad Blankenberg. They relateu to various enqulries rather of a B.6 nature which have been carried ouu in pre-war years even before the Nazis came into power. They give the impression that forgeries were being planteu on ourselves and on others by a number of Russians. ELLIS said that he knew quite a number of the personalities. Without any taining he hau been thrown into Europe to ory and Duilo up an organisation. He had met these Russians in Berlin, Kiga, Beigrade, vienna had and other obtained eities. aserul From inormati some OI buD them he he was aware that they were it certain cases maing up documents and selling them to the highest bidder. He knaw that the Germams were on yud his tracks and he hau to pul out after the revolution. By and large however he regarded the work as unproiitable. Alust 13th Dick came down to Tring on ounday, when we had a long talk about the future O1 the ofl- ice. He seems fairly satisfied that most people in SIS agree that overt liaison shoulu be carried by ourselves on C.I. matters. I outlined him the sugses- tion that in future the ollic0 shoulu be divided into territorial biocs, the Russian bloe to inelude not orty the Russian sphere oi iniluence but also the CP and mOvements o1 the Leit ana the Germarploc DO include Fascists and moveents ol tha Right The other blocs Should be I think a Mid East, a Far East, a Carribean ana possibly and African bloc. 0.C. would aisappeur, DSOS coming into the appropriate territorial bloc. This did not mean of course thet any Russian activities in the Mid East wourLl not be passed to the Russian section 1or information and cousuLtation. Equally it would probably be necessary to maintain ANthonyt section deaing with the Embassies and Legations on a technical basis Dic seemed to agree that this was the best arrangement. I talked to him about the CP and the dfferences of view about kee ing a Close wal watch on all Party members. We Came to the onclusion that it would probapily be neces- say to continue this work on as detailed a basis as manpower would allow. Dick himself has recently peen face wich a very difficult case. An oTlicer or serseant in the FSP who had been doing extremely good WOPK and was veny been about his job CLA had been Round to be a member of the C.P. Ramsbotham spoke very highly oi him and wish to retain his services. Dici felt that this was a Case in which he Simply could not take the risk. There would obviously be a good many papers in the Control Commission which i ii they leaked might seriously Jeoparuise the relations with the Russians which he was trying to build up. He would have no guaran- tee that this officer when on Leave would not report his activities to King St. He had therefore decided to transfer him elsewhere. Hollis had told me only a few days ago about a ease OI an SOE officer who hau Deell given an important jobi in the Miu East against our advice, and had lite recently come back to this country and reporteu everything to the .P.heaaquarters. He made it quit e clear that he had sueceeded in bluiring John Sentel Maunselll anu everyone else. From numerous cases that we have had it is Iairhy clear that whenever you try amu tare a liDeral view about .P.members you are invariaoiy Let down. Dick wants Klop to to a tour ol Germany in order LO get the stimmurg anu while there to have E tal.s with Hilger who should oe bole U( give a great ueal OI interesting information on Russia from 1920 onwarus. Waliker came to tare to me about a broadcast tha't was to take place on the use Of piseons in war anc counter--measures with hawks. It saems impossible tU prevent this broaa- cast which is to take place at 4 pm touay. While it will not do much harm it will. certainly do no good. LN THIS COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 uuu 9O0. Luke came to tal to me about Mrs .Paulson, the widow of Paulsen who worked for B.LA he has been looking after one O1 the B.LA houses in which birs. RUSER has been living. rS.RUSER is now going to stay with a relative and will go back to Spain as soon as her son can get her there. Mearwhile under agreement we have been looking after her. Mrs S.Paulson OI the other hanu and her son cannot remain a permanent commitme tment. I have suggesteu to Luke therefore that he ghouia have a talk with her anu find out what her plans are for the future. She will have to leave the present B.1A house which we are giving up OII the termination o1 the leas Lee tells me that the H.0. .contemplate the total abolition of the exit permit not only for British subjects but lor aliens as well. I said that as War as we were concerned the only danger spot would be Palestine after the termination of the Jap war. I have got Alec to wire out to Palestine in order to discover whether they have any entry permit system. The only other possible alternative would be to declare Palestine a military 143 area unuer the military permitsystem I saw Atkinson, who is leaving as assistant DSO Mata. August 14th I attended a meeting OI the JIC to discuss Dudley-Clarke's paper On deception. Our view on this matter were accepted in toto. It was decided to compile two memos, one for the personal use oi the Controlleris successor and the other For the use of high-ranking staff officers only. There was no be no document issued to the Press ana no documen- tary film. Grogan rang up to say that there would be a Censoship meeting in a few days to uiscuss the winding up OI Censorship. I said that I did not think we hau anything to say. It would mean ol course that allied censorship would cease and that in SO far us Germany was concerned we shouu in uuure have to rel entirely oh Cersorship by the Control Com- mission for both inwar'a and outwara mails. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Jucy Too Dofocon uu I saw D.M.I. about the proposals Dor deaing with members of the Jewish Brigade who wish to take their leave in this country. We were prepared to accept any British subjects after reference in the case of Jews. Foreigners in the Brigade Should however in our view tare their leave or the continent. DMI was prepared to accept this arrangement provided it had the backing of the Colonial Ullice. I spoke to Dick about a request that had come to us from M.I.1 for a GSOT to be employed with the British Mission in Holaliu Dick saia he already had a man called Rhoues earmarkeu for this job. He thought he woula be an excellent candidate for a Jou similar to that 01 Brouk-Booth, anu that he wouua probably be prepared to stay on as MI5 representative in Hoialiu il we were ulltimat ly iver the job o1 conauctint overt liaison August oth Toaay and tomorrow are anourrceu as .J.uays Gort came ir. He had seen Tinulter btewurt and given his views about the Security Servi He will undouoteuly have exxpressea his aprre ciation oi Kellarts services but apart from this I do not think he is very sound about the organisation. 149 A propos of the Jewish Brigaue we agreeu that it might. be ol Value il we could get some representatives From the Agency posted to the Brisaue in order that they might deep us intormed about terrorists. I saw Bill Stephenson at Clariuges. He haa Guppins with him. Guppins was holuing Forth about the wonaers o1 SOE. He said that they had not Lost a Sirgie plane in any pick-up operation I do not feel able to throw a spanner in the WOrLS. There was however the obvious answer, that the Germans allowed thing to go on for their own purposes. Bill told me that he had had a long talk withFindlater and that he had been very fraak on the question or SectionV. He said he would like to have a copy o1 the report or at any rate of his evidence. I said that I could not promise this as I did not know whether I should have a copy of the report myself If I could get him a copy of his evidence I would do so. He then said that he thought that the Du ought to write him a letter,as he had ha d a very nice one from Herbert of Censorship. I unuertook to mention this to the: DG although I lelt that ary such etter woulu have to be very carefully worked as it would probaouy be waved im Hooverts face Anthony has returned from Germauy and has brought with him Queen Victorials letters to One Empress Freuerick. They are ony on loan. THISSACOPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUGLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 July 200. The interrogation of Herert WICHMANN, at OY time Einz Marine in Hamburg, has given us some interesting information. ne first Joined the Abwehr at the end OI Novemper 19. He says tha Canaris was displeaseu wich une WOrA done against Engluru urine the 2 years prior to 1939. In WICHMANNT view they hau one practicaiy nuthing. Altemuts that he made to get hotu of members ol Brilish erews Sailins to Hampurb wene unavailing. A certain amount ol information wus apparent Ly obtained from the publications HRuddert "Yachtingn anu "The Navy" which were OI interest to the couS truction uepu. O1 the OnH. He refers to a Dutch art ueaer lamea RELCH who made 2 trips to Engtand in 1938 to recruit agents but laiteu. The Ger- mans apparently studied the papers very closely For the names O1 people wanting Gerwan business connections. For their internal communications in Holland they used newspaper kiosks which proviuea uncontroreu deliver For Inails. Expressing his opinion on officers in the Germnan Aavy, WICHIAIN says that the young one's are inclined towanus Russia who they think will. need them as they have few dailors at a moment when they would obviously expand their Tavy. The older Officers incline thowars this country SCHELLENBERGI interrogation has been interesting. There is no doubt I think that party owing to fear 01 being regarded as deieatist, no adequate stay-behind plans were made. Those that were made were very much on an ad hoc basis and have probably been broken up entirely through the work of C.I. inything that emerges in the future will probably be largely new in conception. Not only were there no adequate plans lor Germany but the same applied to the neutral countries. There exxist howeyer in Portugal,opain ana Sweaen so-called I networks provided with money, ana technical equipment which were meant to come into action il relations with the country in question were severeu orif an invasiontook place. The primary condition was however that the Central OIlice im the Reich would continue to Function. The reations Between the GIS and german inaustry were never on a very organiseu basis. Certain OIlicers oi the Abwehr had their own private connections.. SCHELLENBERG had envisageu a systematic penetration of Germat: inuustry with both the spirit and the ILesh oi his dream child the Geheime Meldedienst, which never in fact came into being. There is no doubt that firms like .G.Farben had taeir own intellig ence service but it was never system- atically tapped or tied up with the Abwehr and SD. SCHELLENBERG likewise had big ideas about deception which never really took shape. There had been a good deal of Local deception but it had never been highly centralised. SCHELLENBERG therefore in cooperation with the different General Staffs arranged for ali reports concerning invasion He to be thought anitered tha graphicaliy by SO doing in he special could recog charts. nise the planneu Work oi the enemy' Secret 1u4 services. At th same time he Saed himsell the obvious question "What was being done on the German side in the deception of the enemy?n The answer was disappointing Neither on the political nor the military field not to mention the economic, could any trace O1 deception be found. The finda- mental cause was the absence of a Reich General Staff which worrteu on a global basis. The execution OI SCALEELENBERGT plan was still completely in its iniancy by the ena of the war ana the different departments showed ittie enthusiasm for co-operation, as the./ were very reluctant to to ofrer anu release their higraue connections for the pur oses ol reception. In Turey SCHELLENBENG saic considerable support was receivea from the Turish Secret. Service who suppliea Caucasians,georgiar etc who were smugoled into Russia by the Gemulis through the Caucasus. This Lea to violent protests by the Russians through the Turks. Fritz Kremer in Sweden he believeu hau some mar in Englana, mostly Swedes, who reported on the aircraft industry. (This may be a rerere ce to the reports From CERVELL) whi( reached him through the Swedish General Staf: August l6th I had a talk with Ryan about the future of CICI and its officers. August 17th I talked to Milmo and Forrest It was agree that Forrest shouuu tare over MiLmo'! Job urtil he was demopilised. THISISACOPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 buy LO. (497 THHS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENTUNDE SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 uu 901o we nae peerT asreu CO supply DSO Hong Kong anu are working on the idea Of getting Aan Roger anc Carstairs from CICI. Miss Glass has writter quite a good report 01 the Charne.. ISianus for the Home Ollice. By and lare the aititituae 01 the Local population to the Germans seams to have pee quite lamentab.le. M.E. taliced to me about the Visit rinlater to RSS. G-P anu Maltuy were both there, and M.E. dia Lot 6eu much o1 a look-in. Neither dia finduater see a very Cear view or what was going or. M.E. via however succeeu in shoving him his yererai Search section. I saw C. at the club this evening. We tali ed aboutthe future ol SUE. He Said that as a matter OI policy he haa not opposed their continuance, though he thought it could lead tu nothing but trouple. I asked him about the future O1 RSS. re Said that SLU would 60 to the FO who would be astib- tishing wiretess links with all their Emoassies, while RSS would be apsoroea in G.C &c yC.S. and come under the Sigint Board. He new that there was some reseurch going on in GC & CS but was ooviousiy mnis- informed about its exteiit and eticiere/. I impressed upon him Very Stroigiy what al excellent fellow he had in M.E. He agreed wita me in this and Said that he was propos ing to ffer him the jop 01 second in command of General Bearche I doubted 150 whether this would be enough to retain his services. I said that I thought who- ever ran General Search should have Freedom of access to intelligence depts ana I outlined to him precisely what our require- ments were, namely (1) a knowledge o the intelligence network o1 potential enemies (2) the detection o1 illicit wireress From this country,(3 some sort o1 policing oi the ether against leaage oi our iniormati services. LastI] we were interested in the breaking o1 certain services which hau a bearing on securit/ in this country. For all these reasons I Felt that we ought to be represented on the Sigint Boara. C. aid not weem to Le convinced about this,cs he said that the Sigint Boara uia not assess priorities: However he will think it over. Aurust L8th A character called MULACK has been reported on by one BISCHOFF OL the Abwehr. MULACK was despatched to Canada in 1940. He is a naturalised Canadian OI German Origin. On arrival in Canada he tola the RCMB he had been buck to Germany to settle Claim again -st the German Govi. He was close.ly interrogatied anaowing to his past connec- tions with the NSDAP in Canaua was interned for the duration oi the wan. The police are now anxiousto prosecute him if they get sufficient eviuerce. Newsarn rang up to aSA whetherwe woua agree too aliens who were Or a visit OI tmporary Visa beng aalloweu to go out O the country without an axit permit. Britisn suoects wouiu have to have simian raciities. I Said tra as far as I couu sae there was no opjecti-I, but that I would have to consider the matter and pass the elquiry /st to Adam. One Ur Fritz KRANEBITTER has give. some interesting intormatio about the penetrar tion OI SOE and SIS in I taly uuring 1943 ard onwards. There 1a 1IU doubt that SOE in the Mihant alea Was Lhiniy Waid wife opal Algust 2Uth Kellar has got nyar. to agree tu release la Roger anucarstairs SIS 4o not tepparenti, require Rogerte senvicea. They ale appoint ing someone eutirety new, aliu proviueu ther is an officer il CICI who can explain the network anu any other imtormi tion o1 value, that will be al that SIS will require. Springborn of the LRC came in to see me. He has come back for a few days from Holland. He would like to continue working there but coes not wish to sign OF for another year if it means his transler to another country. I told him that I would write to Dick and let him know the answer. His present work as interrogutor at the Dutch Interrogation Centre,where he has two Duten Captains undar him, wiut come to an end in November when the cap Will D hanuea over DO the Dutch authorities. I spore to C. about the KLUGMAN Case. Me Was extremely worried to hear that was involveu since the latter it au present employed I told him that he really ought to nesu the report himseli. He promispu reached him. THIS 1 A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIG RECORDS ACT 1958 buy 9010. s2 T attended a meeting at the Aamireity where we discussed the abolition o1 Press anu Cersorship and the system o1 Notices which presumably have to come into force again. I pointed out all the inerliciencies and dangers of the sstem and said thi I much preierreu the Air Ministry methou of taking the press what they coulu publish rather than wha they could not. It seems however that il willl be necessary to give the press some proad directive as to matters on whichwe shouu like uiscussion with them before puplicatiol. Thornton rang up to Say that the DPR had jibbed about the relusal to grant Leave to this country to alien members OI the Jewish Brigade. He thought there would be trouble if Parestinians were excluded. I explained to him that Palestinians were not legally British subjects though they were British- protected subjects. Most of the Brigade however consisted of aliens, Poles,Germans, ustrians etc. We thought that a division between British subjects, irrespective of the shape of their noses, and aliers, might very well be made. Thornton thought that making a distinctiol between Canadians and Palestinians might Lead to trouble. He did not semm to realise that Canadians were British subjects, and where Itold him that they were he asiseu me whether this was purely a war measure. He seemed astonished to hear that Canadians could not be refused entry DO this courtry whereas citizens of the U K. could be rafuseu entry to Canada. We had a meeting i the DGs room to discuss the abolition OI certain DRS. The orly ones that we were seriously coneerneu about were 80A which we thought would have to EO unless $3 unless it was supported by the Ministr o1 Food ana BOT and 88A ana C. We did not think we could make a case for either of these. AS regarus 18B(a) we thought that this should remain untilwe had got riu oi netalnees from Britath Colonies held under this order. Thereaiter any simitar cases would have to De deait with undar the Aliens Order: We had van Angereri, the General Secretary to the Dutch Minister of Justice, anu van Moyan to dinhe. Var Arserer was veny 1ul Ol cooperation the uture on a completely fralli Basis. He hinten that before the war a goou usal hau been going On in Holland anu a great ueul Ol morey expended in the running o1 useless DAS. The Dutch new the Germans better that we did ald NOuld have been onl too glad collaborate. Vanangerar same quite sincere although we had the impression that he might possibly have been hinting that coperation with the Ministry of Justice might have been more proritaole than with the military This has a bearing on the suggested visit of Col I.Einthoven on Dick S recomendation. August 215t I saw Merritt, who is ugsestea as candidat for asst.Dso Egpt. He seemed LO me to have a pleasant personality and DO be well qualified for the Job. He has been an asst DSO in the Canal zone lor some time. He has a Certain amount o1 money of his OwI and no commitments. Oussen and T went to the meeting Called by Admiral Thompson to discuss the sbolition O1 Fress and Censorship and the importance 01 indicating tothe Press wha we withea to keep secret. It was decided that each Service shoulu issue a road directive and that the old committee o1 P.U.S.s shouic be reconstituted. Cayzer ard Clayton uiscusseu with me Clay- tOrE memo apout Che rucure o1 our DSOs abroaa. I saiu that pelore proceeding further we ought DO arrive Som estimate otttheeeost of our DSO points ana o1 the persorrel required to rut them. These ligures and the pre-war Iigures wouud give us some sort of estimate. Milmo taled to me apout getting KALTENBRUN NER interrogateu Dy Klop at some suitable place. We agreed that this Shoui be one with 1ull safeguards. I dined with Barty. I ased him lor his estimate oi the balance sheet of SOE on his experience in Italy anu elsewhere He said that he thought SO- had done some good jobs and some very bad ones. In Italy they were wide open in the Milan area but had other stations which survived un the advance. Broadly spealcing however he thought that the suppiy ar arms and ammuni- tion to partisans unep-oruirated with an immediate military operation was a waste of time. Partisans could 14ot hope to operae against regular troops or ever De more than a slight irritation. The orly ellect o1 our operations in Jugoslavia hau peen to buil-up Tito, who was now a thorn in our Sides. His activities AL the avery most 130 might have diserveduth attention of a division and a half on a part time pasis. He was not in any way responsible lor the German withdrawal which was part o a general strategic plan. Fitzroy MeLeun an F.0. character and the PMS special nominee with Titoy had got the whole thing completely out of perspective. He was directly responsible to the PM and created enormous diiricunties for military statIs who really never knew wherethey were. IN Italy SOE had one some very go0r Jous in conjunetiwith mniitary operations. Having liltared in agents ald partisanls LO towas whiich we proposed to occupy they were able to holu these until our troops reached them, and also tosome extent to harrass the enemyis rear. This hau bea Ol consideraote value. August 22nd Scott came to see me about nis luuurev He would like to stay on wiith us. I gave him the usual answer. Mearwwhile he is trying to see whether the is a Job lor him in the consular service. I said T would make enqiiiries but I doubted whether on account of his age he was eligible except on a purelly temporary basis. I had a talk with Hurloke who has Just returned From Palestine. I lieu him personally and it may be that there would be some DSO job for him in the future. We are under no obligation to bim. I had a talk with Klop anu Miimo about the interrogation of KALTENBRUNNER. I spoke to Dica about HILGER anu apout Springborn. He is ready for Kupto some Su out at any time. He wanted to KYOW the precise date on wilich I expeeted him back. He thought it should be either Oct.7th or 17th. The extra days were on account OI the leave he kad ta-en in this country. Denis Page came Lo see me He is going out to thandy to take Ionides plage. D gave him a lull account as could apout OICB and the various personaities in the areas August 2na The DG sawharry Allan, Briscoe alnu myseir ald ased us to urait a Further JeuteT to the DNI about our sugeesteu represertauior on the JSIO. The Du anu I saw Maxwei. alu Newsam about the proposad to bring over Germal soientistl We covereduthe ground very careruiy,giving all the arguents areudy enumerated. ve went further and diseussed the uesirability of getting some policy about incorporating aliens into industriessuch as the machine tool industry where they could obtain full information about our war potential. Newsam undertook to raise this atter aiso at the Chieis of Staff meeting. I had a tal with Horroc.s about the fucure organisation and outlined to him my ideas on the Subject. He dia Lot seem to be in disagreement and said that ne could Tot get the DG to make any move until altar hind- laterts enguiry. Ian wilson came to say goodbye. He has put up a note the Tricyele group with a recommendation that Tricycle,Dreaunaught and Freak Should De given some sort o1 award. 17 I had a meeting with Viv.,Cussen and Park when we drafted a note on the aspects of intelligence and the C.I. that we do not wish the Press to talk about, without prior discussion. It is proposed that this rote Should be inciuaed in the N.0.memo which is being given to the press. I saw the DMI and coachea him in our arguments about Germar seiertists tor tomorrowte meeting of the Chieis o1 Sta1. Hughes talked to me about radio amateurs, who will be allowed to operate after the abolition of DR8. The bad feature of the whole thing is that the GPO never take any action wher people bransmit without a liceree. We may have otake this up ol a higher Level. PINSCCILLS Aupust 24th RpOug Se I saw Tommy at the club last right. He askeu me to go back with him alter uinner and taive a look at certain papers or which he wanted advice. These papers were in fact German F.0. teregrams which haa been found at Marburg. Presumabily they were micro films which vor Loesch had taken out of their boxes and buried in the groula. The order was rinady giver to have them destroyed but in Tact the SD unwittingly had destroyed only the boxes. The tele- grams in question were dated about June- July 1940 and sent by Stohrer and Hoyneigen- Huehne, the German Ambassadors in Madrid and Lisbon respectively to Ribpentrop. There were also some from Iibbentrop to the Ambassadors ane one think either to or from Abetz. the Iaet that ADetz had something touowith the scheme subseuunetiy revealed in the telegrams might Suggest that BEDAUX was behind the whole thing. The telegrams Showed that the Germans had made a very determined effort to lure the Duke of Windsor back into Spain from Portugal ana to prevent him from taking up the post that had been offered to him in the Bahamas The Germans never appeared in the picture but through the Spanish Foreign Minister and the Spanish Minist ter OI the Interior in Lihsbon as the guest of Esperito Santo they sent agents to the Duke who was staying SILVA, the head of the bank o1 that name which of course is known to us as an agency for the transmis ssion OI Iunas to German agents. Various statements are attributed to the Dure by these agents which are not of a very savoury kind. Athough it seems doubtful whether the Duice was scheming for his OwIT restoration, it is ladriy clear that he expeesseu the view, which I unuerscano he has expresseu else- where on a number DI occusions, that the whole war wab a mistakce aru that 11 he had been King it evar would have happaneu, He clearly rather left himsef ir the roe of mediator, if his country had linaily collapsea, but he air not think that the moment was opportune for any sort o1 intervention. He Seemed to believe that he understoou the German people far better than anyone else. The Germans went to very great lengths to persuade him not to embark for the Bahamas ana SCHELLENBERG, who was in Lisbon at the time, was reporting to the Ambassador and organising acts of intimidation such as the serving O1 anony- mous letters with bouguets O1 flowers to the Duchess warning her that the offer of the appointment in the Bahamas was merely a plot by the British to do away with him. 9 The Duchessts maia was alllowea to go to Panis to collect things frrom the Dukets flat and the Germans intended to get the Spaniaras to delay her raturn as tong as they could. Meanwhile Walter Morkton,was sent outto persuaue him to Leave at the earliest moment, a matter ir which he was ultimately successful. Before the Due Left he fixed up, accoruing to the telegram: some kind of code with Espirito Santo SILVA in order that he might fly back to Portugal from Florida if his intervention was required. It was furtherstated that about the 15th August a telegram had beer received from the Bahamas by Espirito Santo asking whether the moment hud arrived. My auvice to Tommy was to check up as far as possible the telegramsy some of which would be verifiable from records; this would enable him to get some sort of appreciation of the reliability ol the reports which ware ultimatel reaching the Germanss E wamned him that in our experierice agents in Spain anu Porbugad hau throughout the war shown a strong tendency to report to their masters precisey what the thought their mastens would lie to her. Apart I from this, the intormatior in the telegrams has probabiy been subjected to transation into 2 or 3 diflerent languages where there was generally a fairly wilae scope for error. On our side we could if he liked interrogate SCHELLENBERG who was under our control in 020 on the part that he hau played in Lisbon. This might of course lead to his pouring out the whole story and the information thus would become available to the interrogator. T explained that the interrogators had to deal with highly confidential matters and that we could I thought ensure apsolute discretion He agreed that this shouuu be done. The other erquiry chat we could make would be to tate a Look at any tele- grams sent to the Banco ESpirito Santo around 15th August 1940 since in the light of our personal knowledge we might find the code telegram referred to. explained that we hau been interested in t is bank for otherreasons ana that there might therefore be a record in our riles. I gather that Censorship obtained during the early days of the war a telegram from Mme BEDAUX to the Duchess in the Bahamas which seemed to pe o1 a singularly compromising nature. There were a lot of blanks in this telegram Dut the sense of it seemed to be that the question either of the Huke's mediation or o1 his restora- tion was discussed at some previous date and Mme BEDAUX was alxious to Know whether he was How prepared to Say yes or not. I gather that the Durce is coming here on a Short visit to his mother in the near future and that he with ultimately settle at Ca utantibes, allthough various JobS for him have peen unuer consideration, such as the "overnorship o1 Maures ana amoassauc in washington, eter Tor ali od which he would saem to be siguarly unsuiteu. Bevi is al fait with all the information given above and is endeavouring to recover the copies and films o the tele- grams in questionysince Dy any chance uh they eakeato the Amnerican Press, a very serious situatio would be createu. /bl August 4th Briscoe and T have arafteu a reply lor the DG to send to Rushbrooke about out repre- sertation on the JSIC. We have pointed out that although the primary object of this committee is to discuss enemy scien tific weapons and information receiveu egarding them, in so doing it is irevit- able that our ow developmerrts will also come under discussion and the committee provides a unique opportunity of not only keeping in touch wiith that work but with the various scientific seetions o1 the Services. Tommy Harris has recured from Spair. When he Left Garbo had not yet made eonbact with the Germans although he had been on one occasion To the appointeu rendez-vous. He will maae arother attempt lor which he willlgobaply try aru visit the area where the Genm ns are at present congregateu. He does rot apparently wich to remain in spain and contemplates going to S.America as soon aa he has been able to aseereain what the German plans are We have agreea to pay him 250 a month for the time being. The Germans leit Garpo 35,000 pesetas in June last which seems to inuicate that they still hope DO mare use O1 him. The DG has received a replly Iron C. saying that he does not think any useful purpose would be served by making a protest to the F.0. about the Ankara leakage. He says that the 1.0. are already tully allive to their deficiencies in this matter and that any letter can only cause irritalio. Whether this view be right or wrong I think that we shoula now place all the papars at the disposal OI Findlater stewart tb? and ask him to go into the questior as being directly relevant to the WOoTk of the Security Service. Stopford was show Viviants reply on the question OI HOOPER ana agrees with our view that there is To possibillity ot our empioy- ing HOOPER in any capacity in future or of giving him an recommendation to a commercial firm. At the daily meeting Bind prodaced a letter from the German N.A. here dateu lyo7 or 1938 to Einz Marine in Berin or Hamburg indicating that a Mrs.Crooks,apparenti, cooK to a British admiral, and a man cal led Bolt; would constitute useful agents. Our files show that irSCROOKS was only in contact with the Germans by a visit to the Empassy when she signeu her name in a book. She had Deen approached from Denmark. BOLT has so 1ar not been positiver iy identified, but a man o1 that name has just returneu from Germany whene he has been more or 1e53 at hiberty throughout the war. If he io identical it would seem unlikely tha he ever did nything, ng,otherwise he woullu have been lert nere or sent here during thu war. Another List also supp by the Naval Attache gives the names o. certain people who Should Form the nuc 06 an Abwher Station in Hodland in the events of war. The 1s0 includes Gustav LACHMANN, Hans SELIGO and others who are know to us. I thave askeu Bird to try and ascertain whether we could get into touch with the ex-N.A. aru find out whether LACHMANN had in fact agreed to carry ouD this task or whether the whole arrang ement was one which had not got further than the N.A.s mind as a goou idea. eepr poor B SE put SVIN aug urea yeuomni 109 gou peu LOTUM ago SRM queue Me atoum run Jauneym IO y5e1 STUA ano Ago peade Ut pu NNYWHOVI euneum mho DUTI Due VN-xe au UATM uonog Onup 189 pmnoo am euneum uTRaeOSB Due Ain RITH nasse BABu I sn on LMOTT BIE OLM seuno put ODIES sueH 'NNVWHOVIT ARaSnD sepnTout ISTT 1I9M JO ntene eta UIT PURTTOH UT 1OTROS IGUma u 9o monu eur ULTOT pmnous OUM etdoad trader 0 sauu sent 8uoene TRABN 44 La ddng OSTB 3STT augoty CTEM taun Bttunp aeu auas IO atau aTI treeq BAPU DTHOM au astmeuno'BuTiAtE astmetno UTH ALTE nir eNe eu 1809 Testtun maas DTnOM AI TEOTaHOpT ST ou II UBMA due nounorug IeaIT SSBE TO euou uaag see au eU Lusuaae to peumnned asno see ampu gun JO IPII E ana parmuept LT -eATaTsod uaed gou ITI OS SRU LTOg rueue WOTE peypeodde uaaq pru aug yooq B u auRu Jaw parts ats TTEUM Asgrqug ayn on 4T9A B Aa stTeLIeO euq yTM 109u00 LTno SaM SYOOHOSI drug MouS sthI Jno ssanafe TnTesn ennntasuoo pmOM ITOH ETTD LEMI B put "TeTuP USTATIH B 0a 3oop ueurdd'syooug'suy B 1 E4? BUTeRoTpUT FngurH .IO uTTeg ut euTeI Ztt1a on 826T IO LO6T peqep eeu VIN ERUTeD eua toI e4et 9 paonnod PUTH Butneam ITTEP aua V UI TREOELIOD R 0n uotRpuauoped He urTy SUTATH JO TO amant UT Angoedeo FUP UT HadOoH But -otduue InO TO MTTTaTSSOd on sg aeta gun MeTA no UATA seeite nue HAdOOH TO toTIsanb ou 1O Atde SITETATA UMOUS SEM TaoTdons reotaues Mopnpes eu JO MIOM eua 04 ueneta ftapeutp Buteq se noTasanb are O9up o9 0n tutu 3S1 DuR suTehoe 09 SEU al TE G3u9 SABs au ATUPLITH pagonptoo Futeg utTOS SRA Aimnbue ePt -put aun en' TU ueyen Futag SAT On Suto atqeotdep e.On eua TTE SI UoTaBATRST CD JOTId 1nouatm UOTAETAUT S IHH eun TO BT aua ta eotundeooe aun a3u9 syutun eH TTOTTROETOnD Flessabetun asnea pu UOTIT6Od Renugbas B 0n usTunuuoo to IHd run UATM UOSTBTT stH anmama 0n nuan TOTM s/es au totumyso ou 0n 11314 SISTTTOH uedoy on Sumapergon ATA Ra DenTeap fTsnoTaaong WOAT pru gu au 99u0 enna em TeMoUS na Bu Manseel aun TT 00 aun renoudde-e9 0n edou aM UaA apafans eug to ometr uno UATM UOTO ouInEttos UIT enruTase he dn and pTnoD BM 1BU? OF PROIqe snuod OSa SnOTA aua an003 sTRaM TRTOUIRTITI ano 139 on aueasuOr S8EH ua TM pammee OSTE am raneedsap 9utngas ST LIOTETOTS due pue 'oe suntou OMD ITpen BO.Tm UoXTA aouts auon ueaq eapu 0n seadde SUTuon epanaau LTouesin Antey TO.T 7 euT reJodesute IOI Z PUE fpttey TOI Z "9uoN SoH TOT peumbed 8e OML setageaes ATuBmoTaEd saurod OSa rose az/eo nue setiruo UATM Mtea a pet I Fepung to BArem Put Fapon HENNOHHNCLIVY aupoen pauIe SE pmnous dory gun peproep OM Team Sutog SRM uoTPHoENUT aun JT pauod -nsod ad PTOD eunaedep SHdOTIH geua ad quaTu AI yoTESoeUT reero shep 2 1a9 prnom eu wet Fepunsuo OV TZ 09 On doTy JOT EMeotreup Tuo eut, Tenseupem to on TUtuseM on yoed avas Fureq SEM HSYIIH gnu0 Aes on Fmprensal petoudaten oa asnani 19/ Stephenson he wili proteat that his position with the FBI is beirs unermined ard that there wiil be a protest to the F.0. by the Ampassador ALIL this of course is SO much hooey concocteu by Viviun. His aistorteu mind probably imagines that this is ald a put-up Job by NIS to obtain a footing in the USA ard to pre-juuge the enguiry. The plain fact is th that neither the DG, myself, Viv.yPhilby o1 anybody else can tell the FBI what they want to know. Their request for Roger visit has been repeatedly made ano is entirely spontaneous. Frankly I think that this is the most malicious,obstructive piece of Work that Viviart has done since the beginning oi the war. He clearly drafted the letter which C.has blinaly signed. The suggestion that Stephenson woulld be upstage about it alt is moon- shine. Stephenson is only too glad to get experts out and does ot care where they come from provided he effeets che introduction. T I nad a talk with Klop about his future plans. He has seen KALTENBRUNNER touay and gets the impression that il carefully hanarea he might have quite lot to say. Personally E am rather uoubtiul about this. KALTENBRUNNOR evilenti/ thinks that his interrogatior up to the presert has pean directed towards provine that he S a war criminal, and he complains that he has never peen allowed to talk freely. Hevis confident that he has quite convinceu us that he had rIOt really been responsive lor the various atrocities that haa been committed by the Gestapo. Krop disiluusion- ed him on this point and explained that we were not interested in that Side. we were merely interested in getting intorma- tion and So far he had told us little (60 apout Amt 4 in Which we were ver interesteu. KALTENBRUNNER enteu up b/ saying that he would tell us everthin that we wanted to kro. IT waS ueciueu that KLOP Shoud eave for Germany tomorrow and that Stewart Hapshire shoura continue wiith KALTENBRUNNER. August 27th E had a word with Craulcnd about his memo on possible trenus in IuLure German espionage. I said that I would like LO have these memos passed through me as I lelt they ousnt to be consiuereu im the light of all the information avalable. T felt by and large that they were al too speculative a nature to wurnalt distributid outside the office. Information that we have received showed that in Iaet the Germans had no set plans lor the future or that at any rate such plans as they had were completely in the air owing to the general break up of the Abwehr cnid SD. It followed therefore that for the moment there was nothing really proiitable to say. Matters would doubtless erystallise in due course when we could devise plans to meet the sittion. I went down to 020 Where I saw Stimson and Scott-Harston. I arraned that SCHELLENBERG Should be questioned about his activities in Lispon in June and Juy 1940. II necessary it should be made clear to him that we hau uefilite inorma- tion that he had carried out observation on the Due and Duchess ol Windsot. I was anxious to lind out precisely what he had done in this respect and what he knew about the plans ol the Germans. L gave instructions that there was to be no ibt miking of this part of the interrogation and that I was to have the results Set to me personally. Dick asked by telephone that a tetter should be sent through the W.0. asking or his return on Oct.b.th. He tolu me that Klop had arrived that the interrogatiou of HIIGE was proceeding. I haa a talk wi th Harry Allen about the new JIC papar on the barman scientist which is goirg up LO the Chieis OI Sta and will be diseussed at the meeting on Weunesday. the doeumend was not a ver satisactory one, from our point O1 view, and did not go nearly So lar as Newsam had Led me to believe. I tohu Harry it was impossible to make coments umess we had a copy of the minutes of the last meeting of the Chiefs O1 Staff. In the evening after a conversation with Newsam T went roun to the Cabinet offices where saw Kembala Secoord. T arew his particular attention to two paras where the H-o. were mentioned. In one the H.0. were made responsible for saying that the V value of a scientists presence here out- weighed the risis involved. This was a matter for which the sponsoring dept t.should be responsible as the O.could not possibly assess the value of a scientista. The other point related to aturalisation. It should be made clear that it was impossible to commit the Home Secrecar./ to any question ol the naturalisation of ar alien, which would have to be considered at the time in the Fight of all the circum- stances. Amendments were made acconaingiy. UAL THIS IS A COPY or 67 ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4)A0FUSE 2IC RECORDS ACT 1958 Tangse came Ir to way goorore: the seems to be going away quite satisiiea. He has a joo with che Daily Express to write Hickey! colum. He has been given some slight retaining fee, nd will Keep in touch wi ch the OIlice. Rolana Bira came in to discuss the Future O1 the War Room. It is proposed to cur- tail some ol its functions and to reauce it to about 12 in November. .J.looked in to see the papers about German scientists. He Said that from his own knowledge OI British, American and German scientists, he could say that in pure science we were seconu to none and the people who were coming over were really ergineers. The Germans were to some extent ahead o1 us in jet propulsion,liquid fueld, naval asdics and supersonic weapons. He entirely agree with our view that these SO-called scientists should not be aalowed to bed themselves down here inderinitely. He couii not see why they should not conuucttheir experimnts in Germany under OUT supervision. He then talkeu about his OWrI future. He is intending to retire Iron FIAT and thinks that the office shoura lit him ir. He is appareritily writing to the DG in this seise. Personally I cannot see how he lits ir. Alllen ol G.P.0., Hughes and Solater came. to discuss the Post Office attituue in regane to the prosecution OI people trans- mitting without licences. We satisfied Allen that thepresent position wus lar 168 From satisfactory. TU Saemeu posulone that the daw was inauequate. All said quite ITarriy taL ne Could sed no reason why prosecuuiols should not take place lot transmitting in the same way they did lor receiving without a licencer He promised to lookinto the matter anu Let us know the best line or approach. The DG called a meeting about our set-up in the Far East. It was linaly agreed to send one more secretary to Collombo, 2 to Kandy, to Kong nong ana 2 to Singa- yore.. The G.thought that Ceylon ought to fade out of the picture, as OI no security interest. He was Ql course thinking on purely a war basis. I said that I could see no difference in having 2 DSO Malta anu having ore in Ceyton. It seemed to me that one of the fu.ctiols o1 DSOS in peace time was to look alter indigenous movemerts. Apart from this there was one 01 the D.hegest naval bases in the world at Trincomalee. The D.G. was quite auamant o1 the point 50 I aid not pursue it. came over au my request. I CUIL him that SCHELLENBERU was lost hiery to be here much longer anu that it seemed desiraple to gat as much out Of him about Veno as posiole. Thia was idficult as we had never ween usloweu Lo see the papers saiu That Guthrie hau Deerl making eltuiries, arru that he entirely green with our view that uu ou information reutirg to Vello, Hooper, Schultze-Bernett tCushoulo be ppoleu, since in this way we might eveltuaily discover how the eurage in PCO The hague Office had occurred. He said he would tr. and get authority Tor us to have all the /69 papers although he thought he might nave some uililcuuty. Jim talis me that he is making a cortinentall tour to visit our awuieu opposite numuersyaltel which he will be retiring From the Oilice- I andeu him What would happen too his division,but he hau no very adequate answer. I saiu that in fact it meant that ou Alley artu Co. would be coming to me. Miss Bagot came to talk to me about a document received frol SIS which indicates that tho Ozecns are setting up a military C.E. anu E. Bureau aud also a dept. under the Ministry 01 the Interior at the heaa of which will De Col-Bartik, assisted Dy a Capt.Pichler. It is tO deal with "political and security politica matters. The bureau will have representation in foreign countries,includin Londony under a Col. Krcek. IT wiil report on subversive activity O1 al sontS and to enquire particularly into all German activities at home and abroad. Kreek WOIKS through a Major Lias. He also has a contact with Major Zhemcniuznthov, Soviet Military Mission in Londori. Auguat 29th rHowe,w who has taken over Couringtonts 1ob, called on the DG toua He WatS formerly our Minister in Abyssinia. The DG told him tha L we nau the impression that his preueeessor thought that his work had nothing to ao with us. Howeclearily knew that Chis was Codringtor's view. The DG felt that security was one and indivisible, and made it quite clear that if the leakage in Arkara hau come to out o knowledge before D may, we shouta have ween! forced to reply to various enquirias by the Cabinet that although we aia Nol think that anything important vasigetting out of this country we court give na suanartee that eaks ware not thing place From Embassies abroau. This woulu 01 course have led to a seriou situation. We Felt that it was urlair to the Security Service to keep them the dar'i about this matter Since we might De conducting investigations here, the answer to which was to be found n one of HM Embassies abroad. If therefore the FO ever had cause to think that such a leakage was taking place, Either through agents aproad or through cypher breaks,M should Like to be kept informed. Howe entirely agreed. Burt tells me that through a CID OIlicer, Spponer has heard of an assessor who claims to be able to get inormation from MI5. The information related LO threcase of ole otto LUDWIG and his wite, MrS. ua Silva. I ascertained through Horrocis that the iile relating to these people had not moved since 1945. It was quite clear though thath D.Division of the CID knew about it. From what Burt teuis me the CID officer mentioned the last that MIs had been formerly interested, upon which the assessor said he could get the papers, and later, that he had not got the papers as they wera in the courUry. It looks rather as in the aEsessor hau some line on the uepti but it ma De that his frierd here has turneu him down. Luke thinks that decorations Shotild De given to and possiply Father, though he is asking Chnis Harmer for his view about the latter. 171 August s0th Kellar has had a word from Ryan saying that Alan Roger and Carstairs will aceept the job in Hong Konb and that Thistle- thwaite is prepared to come to Lonor. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 JuL Do10 Colledge now wants to 6O to the Education Dept. of the Control Commission for a yeer and -then return to his university at Liverpool. This is rather a disappointment as we have been training him for a permanent job in the dept. Vesey tells me that Markee has had an offer to go to PCO Paris. He walts to return to the Security Service later i1 an oppor- tunity presents itself'. I have recommended that he should go. Finzell, the Australian looked in. He had had a fairly successiul time although he had experienced considerable difficulty in getting about Germany. His pestlinu was at Friesingwhere there were records o1 the Auslanas Institut. The most interesting document was a recommendation by the NSDAP to the FO date 1942 about the Future of Germans in Australia in the event O1 a Jap invasion. It was thought that either all Germans shoula De brought Back to the Reich or that they Shaid be segregated in Tasmania. There were also list OI various people in Australia who were preyarea to act ir Germany'; interests. Finzeil said that there were quite a numper 01 miles relating to this coultrA among Hofimart: papers, which I thin.e he Seia wera at Heicenberg. B-W cumne to talk LU me HEDOUD the visit o1 Col.Einthoven. He wordeneu whether we shouu entertain him Jointly or Yot and whether we shoula pay his hotel experses said 1 thought we would give him a dinner an that we would show nim round although much ol our organisation had awinaled away. I was anxious however to get clear about his status. B-W says that he is heaa of alt Security anu is unuer the Ministry of Justice. Semer came to say gooabye.H is leaving tomorrow. August 3lst I talked to Burt about Kirby-Green. He said that he did not think that there woul( be any chance of the Commissioner making himself responsible for 10 years OI his pension if he transferred to us as this would probably be against statutory regulations He did however think that the police woula refund to Kirby-reen the 5% of his salary that has been put aside towards his ultimate pension. Cimperman came to tell me that Joe Lyuch is not returning, although his motherts health is corsideraply improvea. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Jue o(0 9210 (7) Tamroeer fay aun The HAIM 1rEUA nenThod ina uaUO JOI IO reuA TO aoum 2U nanutd Lruo QOU eora.tas Ja atnpeg aun seesano peneepoud seTuv a1n ueUt gnua (S) SETIR eun TO auoz uonm Atan SEM sourn e opum Fiaunoo sgun TUI seuonm IO run ano pepatiea see eotaues mpunoas eun Smnal 9 ISRT run UT 43ua e.ie ad pmnous aotaes aun que (7) penuesede eq 00 osTe quano uetenmnbe AT IO eotaes Eatumnbes eu uoTBUeseudad DRu SIS aneus 84 (I) :Veto epeut eq 0n Qq9no saTod 794q quanoun I gun LI.I2H TTOA I reotaes Mouunbes eua o uoTauam OU ATTOTORud ST eauL SIS JO SeTataor eoneTtTenut qeroas 09 queaxe auos 0n put SOIf 0 RTTeu seaereu 3I eouetrtenut TO anani eua anoqe TES TO sretuo aun on dn Rtmoo ST UoTUA Iadad T anoap am On paytia UeTIVAIIRE 016 8961 13 LOV S0H09H oman1d 3HI 3O (t)8 NOUOIS H3ONn INSWLYVdBON OBNIVIH INBWA9OO TVNIEIHO AdOorv SI SIHI 2L1 (14 CI organisations such as SIME and CICI relied upon the Security Service for advice and personneland fortwatching their interests in regard to information and organisation. This was due to the fact that Service Intelligences Braches could rarely give them any assistance ana had no real comprehension of their problems and difficulties. Harry 1S draiting suitable paras to be inserted on the above lines. September Ist Harry showed me a arait on delersive security which he had prepared at the reuesit o1 Sir Finalater stawart. I have made one or two smail auditions. It gives quite a goou General idea of what defence security meansy and how itis related to CE. I said goodbye to Milmo, as he goes on a fortnightts Leave and then returns to the oar. He will be available if required. September rd Martin,formerly of this office, rang u, to ask about his release category. I told him that we had recommended tothe WO that his case was a good ore,but we had no power of decision in these matters. I explained to him tha t the re were many other people here in the same boat. They had all our sympathy and we were doing anything we could to help them. BJuu THIS IS A COPY 175 ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION Gwyer arriivs OF epBere RECOROS suuok there pertsici 1950 OIiciat uemal4 for nio services WO. Cayzer came to tali to me about ar assistant DSO lor Rangoon. He has Ole O1 two people in mitu. He is soins to put ug the Case of Kiroy-Grean which ds still hanging Fire. Craulura came LO Lali to me apout his eparture. T tolu him that 1 choughe would be some time before Gernal sopiote through commercial firms gOU on ics feet aguir anu that Dy anu lange I thought he woulu be well auviseu to see tlle ICI Job if he could as it would not be possible offer him any ything here OI Et particuarly exalteu kind. It was necessary moreover to Let younger peopue have a chance. He seemed quite Satisilea. I lunched with Rornie Haytor. He is going to tace over when Dick Leaves IOF 6 months, with the option on either side to continue. Meanwhile he will pe training a suecessor. He tola me very confideutiall that the present DMI was going LO SIS an had beer tring to get LO go with him. Whether anything has materialised with regard to I do not know. I callIX imagine thet his presence il SIS wouua be very welcome as he has consistently and severely criticiseu that orgarisauio ever since he came into intetligeiice the Control Commission is gettil.e Ori its legs but Ronrie Sa/s there is not much policy Tor the Future. Nobouy nes Jetr considered what is to Become ucimately OI the malty people who have uaan arresteu 17b Von FELDMAM, the member o1 the GIS who rar HUOOPER, has been captureu in the British 2one. We are arranging for Hart to go out and interrogate him. There are a thousand crates of documents in Italy relating to SIM and OVRA. They are apparently catalogueu. As there are likely to be handed back to the Italian Govt. it seems uesirable that somebody shoulu 6o through the more important ones and collect whatever data is to be found about the Italian Intellisence system. I have suggested that Anthon who will be leaving in the course of a few days, should do this job, and combine it with a little archeo- logical research. C. has replied to the DGS letter about Roger Hollisis visit to America. C. is evidentiy rather piqued about the sugges- tion by the DG that his previous letter was not uralted by himself. He said that he did draft it,and that in any case the responsibility was his. fe then says that the agreement of S pt.27 th 1943 means that Stephensont agreement shoula be obtained before an visits were arranged,. but since the DG had now made it clear that he had not yet accepted Hooverls invitation,C.felt that rather than leave Hoover with any sense of grievance he Pelt bound to to a.ll that he coulu reason- ably ba ased to do to "put matters right (It is not Clear to me how matters ame wrong, since nothing has happeneu except that we have received ar invication From Hoover) He concluues his letter by saying that if the DG proposed to telegrapr Stephenson he woul like to know before he did SO ana he woula intori Stephenson 177 that he was prepareu tO waive the objectior that he would nornellly have made, de,proviued Stephenson with his knowledge ol the whole local position was preparou to concur. Septemper ath TAR brought Lemals to 3ed ma Louay. There has been ituie tTouulle petween ol.Verneuil ald Pecer Houe: Hope hau to collect the reresade COLE Irom the Frencn more, alta asred ernain,cou.ve Verneuiiig A.D.0. whether it would be all right tor him to employ BST. The BST to not ror- mally operate ir the Frerch zone which is Col.verneuills preserve. Germain said it would be ali right il they kept their heaas down. - Verneuil appears to have discovered this later on anu now reruses to collaborate with Hope. Lemans says it is really a matter of inter..il politics but that we ought not to Leave things as they are. He voLuteerea to endeavour to straighten the matter out. I sadd that Trevor Willson was going UO try and cto this but I thought that it might be a 860u thing ii they collaporateu. Lemans I believe is to remain behind here as the liaison cllicer TOr DSDOC. Niall MacDermott Lookeu i1. He is on Leave 1or a New qas aru with oe tunching wich ie tomorrow. AL the DGS meeting yuestici bipolicy with regard to theaumission OI aliens who hive colTaDoratee with the GI was uis- cussea. The cases of the LWO ppaliarus Were mentioneu, who ware conite to the conerance OIL civiiaviatlon and in spite 61 bur piotesus hau Deell acmicteu Dy the 1146 H.0. The DG suid he was uice prepared to tae the matter up. I eave the RSLOS a teLa about the poau- moncem or wurelves,als al.d sud, about what we thought of Une Iutune il Germany ala apout nussial poicy. I also meutioneu visas, policy For British subjects returning From uermali/, Cerson- ship, anu CICB Far Eas0. THISIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 JuLM I saw Thornton UI the LRC ELI L3LJ him that Brook--Booth Was prerareu LC Ua3 him at was orly waicinb Lor find salcuion. 179 September 5-6th Away with a cold. Two. B/WS from the Gseh. Iumed Aldis SCHWARZE ttllu Hermani DEMSKI, think that the WIT espionage syatrem ana the ability etc truinine of aserte in this country Left much to ue esireu. They Believe that we relied or quantity rather than quality. Their eriticisms are as ToLLOWS: (u) the frequency, day an time at which it is intended to re-oper communication should not be announced in clear or in a very simple Code at the end o1 a transmission but should be emboiad in the encyphered text of a message: (b) where fixed tines For comuni cation ane pre-arranged these Should not follow a regular attern such ES Ion example as always appearing at 0800 hours on a Monday. (c) Proceaune, choice OI call signs etc. should resemble as closely possibile thet mos t irequentiy use i the particular scene of operations. tor axampie the exclusively British custom o1 having calllsigns consisting of 5 letter SLOou ouD conspicuously in the Balkans aru Ibaly where German Army proceuure ar Locui alvilian anu iteer/ procedure ail aunitteu mixed cald Sis.s consiatin 01 ota heuter anu 2 tuguras or 2 ettari alu Figure. The practice DI British agemte in Frunce alg Belglum was sounder in this rreopeci, (u) no reuunuarit signs, greetings, cour tesies or sigroris shoulu De indunged In. (e) agents should Tot De reulred to appear 011 the air as a matter od routine. I1 an agent nas nothing to report he should remain silent. (1) in order to prevent Link- ing o1 certain agents with a particular station by intercept, the practice o1 uri- 189 lateral transmission py Doth parties is ussirawie. (B) Coystit sets shoua De avoideu, They biva a chaaactiscic Lone anu coniine the operator to a imiliteu number ol frequancies. (h Gur wit'alebs sets ate much boo Duly. (i) agents Shouu not carry more documents Than recessany. (J) tendency Ior sevenaal agerte LO usethe same stanuaru procedure capees. (i) all signs all freqheneies shouiu he changes mone often and Shaunu be better colcealey (I) agents waste too mueh time Dy Slow transmission which is of assintalce to DF. (m) agets should change their residelce more often, ara anouid live in large ferroconcrete appartmert DLOCAS preferable ir the vicinity o1 electric mains as this hampers DF. (n) closed wincow shuttert in a house where cahI other window shutters remain open have o1tan helpeu DO give the game away (o) agents ougnt to oa better warnea apout the possibility of DF. II major Friedrich BUSCH who Joined the Abwehr in, August 1939 atlci worheu in the all seccion operating against Gt.Britain, knows a con- Siderable amount albouc the agents which the Abwher were rurring to t.Britain and tha USA. He mentions inst a suuentenanuer who was traineu in Holland antu was woriing in Einz Wi.s He thought this man was ol poor quality anu il1-insumeted. He was dropped but nevar esteblisheu communi- catLon. Busch Learned tater Itom une British Press that he had bean picked up. inis may be Ter BRAAK. He followed the case ol TATE hirly elusely but believeu that he was cortrollea from soon after lanuing. The loulowing matters arousea his su-picion. (a) that TATE area 181 For morey ana was sent 020,000 through Tricete. BBuseh thought Tricycie was corr trolley because he sent reports or the effect o1 bombing which CoLLC ba outaineu a Lew days later From the rewopaperse Busch reasoned uha i0 Tricvcie was controlveu Tate was probubiy also control2u. His colleagues however were quite satisliea with both these aserts. (D) BuSCH was also rather suspicious about the lcicent when Tate reported that he hau Door it trouste with the poliee. Barlin oruLy got from Hamourg Tatet military reports purt on one occasion Busch marageu to get hot of nis lile. He was horriieu to tinu that Hamburg had giver Tate the names alsu addresses of Mutt and Jeii, who were young Norvegians alreaay sent LO the UK. Colorel von DAWITZ, the head o1 Lhe glisn section at the head uarters 01 the Lurtwalte, apparently agreed with busch that Tate was controlleu but despite that view youcheu Lor him or the principle that it was beteen LO have a workins-agert than.none at alie Speaki.ng 03 Snow, batch decided that he was controlled and when he wired that irien of his (namely Calery) was traveling to Lisbon anla shoulu pe mete Rantzau went LO Lisbon anu brought the man back to Hamoung in triumph. Busch was soysceptical that he gave him the coue name Hadesi. When Brade went to Hamolre to meat Hiaues, the latter fralily aumittad thet he was an agent 01 the British Irteligance Service but wanted to work Lor Germany. He was given money ara sertt back co the UK via Libon, DLEC no laws was ever eceived 1rom him. Ar interesting act is uha L Busch had an oret at the begiring OI 1941 to lorwaru au snowit weathar reports to the personal secretary O HESS. Ii HESS was speruing a 1c2 weekend with nis father, Busch hau to tele- phone to the Tatherte house. Thib contined till HESS flew to the UK in Ma 194i. In negara to Father, he says unal che exports beievea in him as ata ad June 1944. Apparently 10 WEES Duscnis firm bael that there ware no genuine Lult aseute in the UK anu that no W/T agents could remain controlled tor an length OI line. Through olLudwig Von Bphlen BuSCh learred o1 a network o1 4 agents. raaor equpped wao were sending information abuut the coming invasion, 1n 1944. The network had the cover tame OI Arabel. There were a Poui-h Oficer, a he Gaulist Ollicer, ar oflicerts batman culled Johnnie and a man whose name began with D. Busch studied their reports and round an astonishig similarity Detveen them and those of Kraemer im Stockhoim and Ostro in Lisbon. He told Bohlen that he consicered that they were controlled, but Bohlemtersely replieu taa if he informed Schellenberg O1 Buschig view the Latter would be shot as a dereatiat. There were no other agents producing int ormation of similar vallue and ne GIe Coul not admit that it han no geruine aberts it+ the UK. Ostro was knowra Lo Busen throug his case oflicer r.BECK. Ostro hau worked 1or a long time ior pirz Heer on DLas eastern front aghinsit Czechoslovasia. Hence his mame Ostro. He was in Dermatk il 959 wivere he Wa5 arrested Dy the Danes be was release Dy the Germans in 1940. Dr. Beck than COOK him over. He was sent TO Lisoor to work asalnst the UK. He hau formerly baal al Austriar olllcar. ustro Lise d DO send rerorts OL Britiah airerart lactories arc their prouketiun,e atine that he nau a Irienu in the Society OI Dritish 183 Aircraft instructors. Busch ondeturning from Stoarhom in 1944 wa's able to read the files covering the period prior to the invasion ana Iormea the impression onat Ustrols reports uovelaiweu with those of Kraemer. Thus Kraemer inventeu 5 ew alrporne uivisios which he moved about From the Wash to scotlanu,or to Ita, wad.lsit usuno gave news ol Ship movemlentb wiloh bote this ouDo Busen conelured tha U B-though OstrU hau been genuine previously he WES TOW wntuer cororol Kraemer in 1939 serveu with che Rlpuentrop Bureau in Lonuon. In recer morchs he had been travelling to StOCkhoLm once a month From Berliny re turning with information cor- cerning allied aincralt production fisuras. Kraemer was finally tationea,permanently in Stocihomm. Accoraing to nim nis sources oi information were Siegiriea A.or Apa, an offcial 01 the Sweaish Air Line in Lonuon who provided information on the eea 1or transport for ball bearings ana on the Britih ainerait industry. Ha also hau a network known as siegiried B. consisting o1 pillots from planes reporting oi whet they SEW in the UK. Kraemer use Germar an Greek mythological names in his reports but the basic sourcewaslalways the same. Josephi is a neutral diplomat in Londor. Busch viewed raemerts sources with grave suspicion,pa par- ticulamiy wher he obtained replies to ques- tionnaires allegedly From Lonuon in 40 hours, even on day's when weather was too put to permit rlving. Busoh came to the conclusion th tha Kraemer gou his inormatiou rocau. When reporting ol British air 1os3a5 during raids Kraemer,aceordi to But, mave use of the Sweuish press and also tot hccesa to che alficiul reports inom Berwinyirom whnici he compiled his or. The General Sualt velleved in Kraemer implicitiy. 1%u An interrogation of THOST shows that in the winter OI 1942 a conference took pace about setting up the apparatus to intercept raaio-telephore conversations in the USA and UK, alstt E lot o1 uselu.l intormatiof was obtained from conversations between miristars on a very wiue variety subjeeti. The voices vere vary cheu thotegh occasionai- ly iaaing. From a security point o view the worst ofentars were tha mnmater themsel esr The machinery weS wet up in a house about 6 icms south oi dincnover. The conversations were passeu through LL to gramopnone records anc ther teepirinved From binchoven to Berin. Interception of the USA erid was quite C.tealy but the Britith end was 1e5s clear as the waver had to 6o round the earth. The de-ecrampling O1 the conversations did not agpareutiy present much aifiicuity. The JIC have consiuered a report on the extent to which the Germans have been success. fulin breaking our cyphers. They say that the Germans claim (a) continuous success against lowgrade systems anu some success against high-grade service systems, the latter incluuing naval, army RAE anu inter departmental long-subtractors. (b) continya ous success against certain low-graue civil coes, (c) conclusivelly strone compara- tive interences that success achieveu O11 Services long-subtraetors woulu have been equally available on similar civil Sstems ii and when attacaeu. It seems clear that the German administrative strueture, Lack oi manpower and possible some reasons o1 high policy, save Some civil hishgraue sstems from penetration. certainly iu the eaniy jeans O1 the waTo (u) 210 conclusive evidence hus tan baar discovered O suocesses or 188 even consistent assaault oi Tpex though what went on and why in this field is largely obscure. (3) there is no eviuelce oi the degree of importance attached by the OIW to intelligece from mym sources. A considerable nuinber 01 documents relating to eryptographic mauuers wer apparently discovered by aneuging che schiiersee Lake near Munich.Ateregram from Disenhower uated 22 Aug. States that up to ate 10 65,000 personalitie. 01 CI interest have been arrested in. the Americar 2o1e since Merch 1945 ina uding over 5,000 associated with the GISI. The rate 01 arneeta shows o signs of decrease. A P/W name Erich MANSFELD CZRZIDCZIK mate a statement on Juuj >uth 945-about the death oi Hitler and Eva Braun. Mansieuu was a crimina assistant in the Su anu was in change of the guard at the purtrer occupied by Hitler in the Reichskanzelei on April 27th 1945. He saw a certain amount O1 commotion at the emergency exit at about 1600 hours on that date ana went over to see what was happening. He met Hitlerts personal adjutant,Gintsche, and immediately following him were 2 S.b.oficers carrying a bouy wrappeu in a Dlanket. Both legs were exposed almost to the knees as well as a portion of the right arm. The nest of tlle boay was cavereu by the blanket. Mans- Fela claims that he recognisea the bouy as that of Hitler and that a portion o the Black trousersswhich colour only Hicler wore there, was also visible. Imeuiatay Del -hinc the man carrying the allegau Dody o1 Hitler was al SS.olricer Jansen who was carrying in his arms the bouy o1 woman idertiiled by Manslela as that DL Eva Bnaum. It was clothed in a Dlac dresy the one which She was wearing between 2 ane 5 a-m 19 that same day when She Came to The tower.cbo ask for information aout the shelling: Mansfeld claims that he had seen Eva Braun on many occasions and that he was positive it wa.s body that Jansen was carrying. Following Jaser ware goebbelsyhenera Burguori, Bormann and binge,Hitemis adde. When he eturned 1o the tower Manslenu says hw Saw a huge column Dlack smoke coming from the direction Ol the omersor ait A rew minutes uLaLer When the smune hau partig cleareu ie COLL gae LWO Durning bouies about 2 metruis to the 01 the emergercy exit. He Casmis ne necugrisad the bouy 01 Eva breui and that he Tecugtis the older body as a Is the L on al man buL Could LIOT be certain that 10 Wis lurer. From time bo time somebouy pourau auniuiomal gasoline OI the burniis Douies. The Dauies were still purning at 1850 hours. At 2300 hours the bodies were sone and according to Mansfelu are ikeny to have been Durieu im a shelcrater in front OI the emergertcy exit door The rumour amongst the guuru was that both Hitler anu Eva 3reun were Shoe Dy Hitlerts personal doctor stumpiegger. By the 31st August 020 had awaiting disposal 22 neutralls and/or allies O1 assorted Tationalities and 22 enemy nationals, the majority of whom nad Deer brought over From Germany as military prisoners lor interro- getiony It was hope to et mou 01 them away during the raxt DWO waeis. According ta SAUR,head tha Technical Dagt. im the German MAP.y une Gernatip Were ueceiv -eu right up to the ast momerre ayOUL une target area in NAlmica in Juy 1942. He Baia that when huge allied convus ware reportau persains tnreish uhte suTeito Angt uT tret? AFTOEU aete ebaTd teyea sauptt ata 1919 amre.T ugeaJeD P Tenemott SBM euett SJRTTV a8 autpueT sa10I Ianneu 81a nessnosip STsnothaud nTu JRS WOUM UaTA MIO eun up eOIIo euo Auto nSFERTV OT Stypeat eueM pie uanos ane og esnoo newete peut SAOAtoo Dettte au ITt 2312 noatIe aun on SBM ode aug IRAeMOu sdtusdooun TO sRuTuTs TO met penoadxa atn TO presuI rqoded aunt pentiry SEM attameatoy 11012 UT suon TRaTup hurt gRua IEnE Ltouous pe me ual out Els 0015 7 TTRs ns fatoz aun nte on end SEM hOArop PueeT eur Re.IT ettwuemans eua TO afpe put epett Rata 6E asueguT auepeg guetentoxe DUR nRMUnOS FumuTauop aq O0 peurecde sfOAtoo Bu uoTAapE aus SB oueTTTanut ase1T aua pentepa mnated aun TIT SEM OLA soon TRUTHTV yoTeas yore OP DUR JaTAtH LTM Futaaaur ged enaT R UT TOTURI or wTTag WIOJ.T a TIT HUUTTenin aa ARTO auen ines DITE epds nUazTEUors eu1 auTuDeOIdde B-TaM uaga7an HFUA TTuo a1os aotalatn RTTOM sfOAo alp to $90111 toe SeCOETr EEgUSTI TO 8972.7 TTUOTIadO eTtT P UTTM ATTOTg DUR TH ueetTRO 7E133318003 eTeM seutipuans mtettTBT 3uu 1AQ- uat Line treated 9u9TI Te TIAS tupun SuTTedtinp Dte senor TERE aunt T2 7TOT Rtgtrtd Fneuatn feueue UTRTHE Die 9205 TTROTAIIY pIn 1IO sauoD TRaoT- Taapo.id ITTOM sAOATICO aua 9Rua ufoto omoF ate 6JFWE ITOSTErT uanosyoun TITE saDto.r rmmTe aun din TTO7 tretn Dt 15300 OTOET run oa uro.tua MHETO sceTden DIY ouoy ueamgas TLETT TThom BA 0213 9RM AaTA euecuy pouen eug yan6oun sueugo eouRit TO unnos Fur en DTOM STunT eua uinoua amos SRA aamgoalgo paTTrE arn 9B40 0n SE armantt SBM MNO au uoTamoads 1919 L8/ As late as 21 Aug. the Jap Ambassador in Nanking was talking O lines o1 esvapuishi.ng a close liaison wi th the Chinese. He tought that Japan mght assist Cninese development by sending Jap technical experts Lo China o1 targe scale. In fact Japan woud develop widely in China those branches OI inansbry which woula be prohibited in Jppun, as well as mining an agricutural techniques. This proposal is in Fact ver similar LU the accion bank by German allar the La war in establishing her war imuseries in Hussia. According to Kuebtrt, former head o Eini Heer, the Abweir FIEEL UTLI 4 important sources 01 miwitary inrormution OF the Uuk. 9 o1 these wene agelte ol D.LA although Kuebart 4oes TOt appear LO reulise een yet that his onganisation was being mfoleu. The 4th source Wus Ostro calid it is interest bing Lo alrnl that the onuer Os beutte imormation given D7 OSLTo WaS rabarueu py Frenue Here aS maini/ unusaple. Kubart coulirma that the Germans haa no prior knowueuse ol the date ana place o1 our Lanaing France. The only had a genera.l wurning that invasion might bake place anywhere from Norway to the feuiterranean. The one Set ol repor aeemeu by the Abwehr to emanate from ante. sources were those purporting to come From Portuguese consulates. We o1 course new thise reports From Mas and in our estimation they were local and not particularly intelii gent inventions in Lisbon. September 7th The Chinese have asked Lonaon to tare immediate steps to discover ard acquire information concerning the matarias uisea 659 in the making of atomic bompss, and to report in detail. It is difficult to see what action we can take. My suggestion is that as soon as we get a scientilic adviser we thoula ascertain who are in the KNOW in this country End then get them to colllaborate with us by inorming us immediately il they think that anyoody is becoming too inquisi- tive. THIS 1S A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 JuLy 90 I asked Cusser whether he couau >pare Patterson for DSO Gib. iu we sert Kiruy- Greer to the Caribuearl. He said he wouru like tothiru it over. Prestige ran up about Wilial JOICE II the case was throwr out On the grounus that JOYOE 135 originally ar American citizen anu had ommitteu no OIlence against the USA as they were not in the war until arter he had become a German citizen, JOYCE shoulu be detained under the Royal Prerogative. I said that that seemed sound but the.it he hau better spear to Cusser. ato The DG has draitau a reply to Cis lactar about Holis. In eflect he says that the agreement reached with Duif-Cooper implied that visits were to take place subject to certain onditions and that therefore e.shound auto- matically give nis permission in the absence of any strong reasons to the contrary. Septemper 8th Marsee came to see me about his JOD wit th PCO Paris. I tota him I thought he ought to aecept it and that n was sure ii in due course there was Jop orhim in this dept. we shoulu be able to oDuain his services. Gwer arrived Back from Italy. I have Liven him the task OL corcueting a popt-mortem OI MID. IT wil be his you to IOuLow up all cases Where tnete is a susoesuior tht an unigertirieu agent was either sert LO this courrtry or was operating here uuring the war. September 9th I saw Tellar ana Doublas Roberts ol SIME this afternoon, wher we aiscusseu SIAETS Future. We agree generally that SIME should become a commitment O1 MI5. Thiis Seemed logical and in fact only Suve de Jure recogr ni ition to what was de facto the position, T suggesited to Roperts that when he went to the JIC he should table a paper showing the origin of SIME anu explaining that it was really only an extension 01 the DSO system. The head of SIME was respousible to the local authorities for giving them advice and 91 informetion. If they diu not llixe his advice and intormation they would as ie the case of the overnor General and Commehider in Chief Gibreltar,complain to the DG. September loth I saw Findlater about the future of SIME ana the proposed discussion of the subject by the JIC He Said that this wab a matter hich was definitely on his plate at he was so informing the JIC. II necessar/ he would attend the meeting. Later in the day Roberts alter a preliminary aiscussiol. with the Junior JIC made it cear that he could not possibly function as a suu-sectlol 01 the JIB. It was necessary 1or him to report diract to the Comunder in Caiei anu indeed Gen.Paget hua iusistea that this practice should continue. His views were apparently accepcea ana he is to attend the meeting o1 the JIC tomorrow. I also had a taik about RSS. Pinulater has I think made up his mind that ic shoud De brigaueu with the GC & 05 with Er certain amount o1 inde erdance ana that whoever dealt with CI shoulu have 8 seat or the Sigint Poard. AS ragarus the policirg O the ether he thought that he would hve to consiuer this in conjunction with the Service binals Dept. He asked me to write him a letter OT the subject. THISI COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 JULy 2o10. 42 I attei.ded a D.Branch meeting to discuss whether aliens who had beer engaged on secret work in this country should be carded in order that if they went abroad ard came bac. the firms with which they had formerly been employed Should be warneu. Archer felt that such peopue might be dangerous as they wouna be readily accepted by all their Former colleagues whowould not unnaturally put them au fait with recent developments. Horrocks was apparen jibbing at what he called preventive cardine I said that I thought the difficulty could be got over oy having all these people li ted in one lile and circulating their rames to Passport control with it struetions that they should be signalled in aavance if they ap- pliea for a visa. It would be no good circulating their names to ports as we shomla not pe Lotiliea lor at least a fortr ight, as only b/ then woul their carus have got into the T-I. September lIth I spoke to Alley this morning about the arrivel of Col.Einthoven. He is making the recessary arrangements. I spent nearly the whole morning at the JIC. I was there principally to ueal with SIME. Roberts tabled his paper which generally speaking was accepted without much demur. I explained exactly what the position had been and where the analogy lay between ourselves and the forces here an'd SIME and the forces in Mid East. Other analogies were the situation in Mallta al.d Gib. C. who was present seemed to agree to our accepting responsibility for SIME. He did hovever raise the question of funds. II the sta11 wene to De paid o11 the Secret Service vote, 1973 the sum would be considerable,p probabily some- where in the neighbourhood of 0125,000 pa. whereas 1f the personnel was supplieu by the Services the officers could be paiu from the Services vote. I said that T appreciated this point but that payment partly on a Service and partly on a civilial Basis did raise most complicated administrative head- aches. Rushbrooke then raised the questiom 6f SEMEtS equivalent in the Far East. I out- lined to him our plans about the CTCB which T said nad been worked out in a very tenua- tive way by ourselves and SIS. They were how ever entirely im embryo, since CICB wa.s lor the time being at any rate a military commit- ment. We did however see that organisation eventually in Singapore, in Iiaison with Australian security ana DIB, ana being supplied with information from oun DSOS in Hong Kong,Rangoon,eeyior and pingapore ana Dy C. from sources ir Inao-China,china, ete. Nopouy seemed to think that the idea wa's a bad one and I was asked alter consul- tation with Sir Findlater Stewart to produce a paper noth on the uture 01 SIME anc CICB. It was decided that SIME and Security Intelligerce generally should in no way be subordinateuto the JIB. Previous papers therefore on this subject will be cancelted. There will be two recommenuationu, one O1 TIBS and the other on Security Intelligence organisations. I saw Findlater at 3 olclock. He explained that his enguiries had now reached a stage where he was in some diificulty. SIS were claiming that 9070 of the work done by Sections V and IX related to matters abroad ard naa no particular bearing on affairs in this courtry This was said I think with partic ular reference to Section IX. They argued for example that intelligenee activities by the Russians against the French would not be a matter of interest to us. It might be interesting to the FO-Or that the communist situation in Holland was a matter for the FO rather than ourselves. I said that espionage by the Russlans against the French was a matter o1 considerable imortance to us since we wanted to know about all manifestations of the Russian Secret Service, Il the same way we had to know about all manifestations of the GIS. Apart From this I thought that we were more Tkely toget information about Russian activities against the French by/ a lial liaison with the sunete and the 2eme Bureau than Dy the employment OI Secret agents. As regardscommunisu the activities OI the CP in Holl na were OE very great irteresu to us for the same reasons. We wante. La get the wider picture. Apart Iom this I thought that our experiences with communists art Russian activiities nare ware ona mmuch more solid foundation on which to build since our sources were to a large uegree 00 whereas SIS sources were based on agents whose reliapility it was always uiificult LO assess. I quite saw however that tha FO might be interested to be informed about communism in Holland in relation to the whole picture of Dutch politics. This woula mean that Section IX, who procure the information, would have to pass a copy to Section anu also one to oursevies. I felt however that the collation should be done by one body on the basis of one set of records ana that since the primary object at any rate of CI work was to protect British territory it must ultimately be AL responsibility ol the DG. If there was not total amalgamation there was bound to be a gap somewhere. I thought however it could be bridgad moe elrectively if we carried overt lliaisor and had some say in the direction of SIS agents abroad. Bhis coulld be one through our seconding a circulating seetion to SIS. Findlater said that he proposed to have a joint meeting on this subject with SIS ana oursevles next week. We later diseussed SIME,Roberts being present. rindlater agrees with all our recommendations and has asked as to prepare papers which he will consider on punday next. Alec Kellar and I saw Euude Fastings all got his agreement to giving us the services ol STALBO fon reading back Hebrew recorse He will be putting in D or 4 hours a week. PHLBI Kim came over with a seriess ol telegrams receivea from thewestern Hemisphere on the subject of Russian espionage. The gist of the story is that there has been For some considerable time a Russian espionage organ- isation working unuer a Mol.or venZUboniN the Soviet M.A. in ottawa. the Russialis have succeeded in planting agents in External Affairs, the High Commissioners ollice ana allso in the atomic Domb circles. This information has abolalslto light owing to one o1 Zubotin's suboranates bringing in whole heap ol documents to the RCMP. For some reason or other the intormant has been held with the documents,which disclose the presence ofat least L6 agents who have Deen identified. The principle agents corneetea with the atomie bomb is a Cambriage physicist seat out to Canada in 1942, name plan Nunr MAYi. We had great difficulty in identiling the man as his intialls were given as A.L. May and he did not appear to have Deen Vested especially for TuDe Allloys. the hocumentse in Ottawa indicate that MAY is to maKe otb contaat with some Doviet agent over here, very detadled instructions being giver as to now,when and where the mneeting is to be effected. The question arises now whether in view of the disappearance Ol the agent from Soviet circies in Ottawa, the meeting will in iacd Lane place, anu whether it woud be better to search and interrogate MAY aitar contronting him with the agent in Ottawa Or whether he should be thoroushiy searched and irightened on arrivau hereyor whether he Snouid De tet through on the ussumptior that the meeting wiil take place sooner or later a1I That we sa tnereby unearth asoviet network ir thicountrye The whole case has got OT CO a very high Level. The is a serious o1 telegraras ruring between Aobantson Eternal Altars ana Cadogan, another between macDonald anu lechtiy OI the 0.0. and anotherbetweengecurity Co-Oruination ana SIS. +irilly Jumnbo Wilson and Halifax have weighed in. AS usual with these high levels,it i xtreneuydifr frictult to get down to brass tacis, ana to get Eye night action taken. We here are in the unfortunate position of being in possession only of a number oi somewhat corrupt telegrams whereas if we were dn Ottawa knowing the Iuli cireumstance in which the asent anu come in plus the contents o1 the documents we should be in a ar betber position to Come to the right Onclusion. The whole thine o1 course is wrapped up in about 4 laers o1 cotton-wool as it corcernis the atomie DOrD. Most people have not realised quite that all atomic bomb has beer dropped in Japar an that the world now knows quite a lot aDouD it. I am going to cousider the matter art we will have a further meeting tomorrow (17 September 12th I saw the D.0. and tola him about the MHY case. I told him That wa wama having a further discussion anu I would let ruim now the result. T spent the wholle morning talking col. Einthovan ou general matters Hifecting our WOIKT He had tworeguests to mate (1) that we woua give about hai a dOZEr Ol his men a course in this countryar 2) shut when things settleu down we might have a pucen O111er im our reconus section. May reply was that regrettably It would Da ipossibila. at this moment to give a course Lo 6 o1 his OIicers, uut that as SODIT as we satthea down Into out peace-time onganisation w snoud De very pleased to SO. He said that nis difiiculty was GO keep these olliceps OE the hooks until something as finally settiea about his owLI organisation. He hau in mind that. they might be Kept buSy doing a course over here. I told him I diid not think we shoud be in a position to do this lor at least a month or two As reguras the officer in the records section, I tried tactfully Do tum this off on the the Duteh Liaison officer in this country by explaining that the FBI had an ol1icer here in the capacity of legal attache at the Embassy and that he was constantly in arld out discussing various probleins with us anu seexis imorma tion. If the Dubch wished to have someone here on similar terms we should be only too derighted to receive him. Albert nas beer ollerea a partnership by a solicitorts irI anti wishes to Leave Teta month. I said that I thought ha ouht to accept the older. 98 I have asked Sedater to get me OUD a note on the policing of our own signals in peace time. It seemed to me that there were the following considerations: (1) it was eleuriy desirable that wireless discipline should be maintained in peace time as war as possible otherwise we Should be laced with the same regrettable laxit/ in wans (2) It seemeu necessary to ascertuin how far leakage o information either through service or civil- war indiseretions constituted a serious problem in peace time. In this comtection it was impontart to bear im mid that bad procedure might Leaa to a cyphier break. (5) We should ascentaiin whether enservices would welcome the establishment OI some small bouy which wouLu take an independent CrOSS- seetion of their signals from time LO time, or whether they would regard such activity as an interterence in their internal atlaits. T poke to Miss Southam about Markee. Pass- port vontro would like to have him on the understanding that he might ultimatel return to LIS afterwarus if there was a Job for him. Itwas stipulated however that he would not be witharawn From passport Contrd for about a year and at any rate not until somebody had Deen suitably traineu to tane his place: came in to tell me that he was seeing Findlater about SIME. He will have a talk with Douslas Roberts tinste He would very much welcome a visit by Victor to Germany SO that he cou.nd ascertain what Germam sciertistswere likely to be OL interest to us in the Future. He could aso geta irsthand appreciation o1f how valuable scientists were whom 1t was proposed to send to this country. 111 We had a meeting with the DG today to niseuss ar rather petuient letter from Russall. DG was rather inclined to agree with Russel.ity view that Ceylon could ba written all as a DSO point in peacetime. E saica that I could not see how Ceyion aillered From other Lortre: areas such as Gib.and Malta. It had one of the biggest navall bases in the Empine there was moreover considerable amount ol unrest in the dislar. DU seemeil Lo thinthat 1t was not our Business to carTy out any investigation into such movemerts I made it clear that normally DsOs aid not LIO this but that the/ did Stimulate the Local police and on the intormatior they received could mave the necessary auustmente il security mneasure:. DG finally agree that if we were to be orlly concerned wibt the security o1 the rava base he saw na objeation to keeping an ADSO. He thought however tha L it was desdrabile to get Russell face for consultatior. I had a talis with Dici or the telephone. He seemed to be a little worrded about the future of the Findlatar Stewart enquiry. He had rather got the impression that SIS were building themselves up ana that things were etting rather off the radis. said that this was not my impression I thought that Findiater was sold on the idea O1 one res- porsibility for activities anu tor overt representation abroad. The orly point that was worrying him was the bringing 01 the gap between overt ana clandestine activities He had evidently had a volley from Viv.who had given him the impressiou that 9075 o1 the work done by Seetions V anu IX abroad was no Con- cern ot M.1.5. This however Was merely the out narrow corceptioi, that uess an asent ol a foreign power was coming to this country MI5 were not interested. It was proposed to 200 20 have a round table conference with SIS on this question with Findlater in the Chair. This will. not tare place until ct.8th. Brian Melland came in to talk about Columbine and Padgham. He wants to put Columbine into an official position in the police anld wi Let me know details as soon he gets back. As regards Paugham he thia 1os sbe any immediate prospect oi employinghim. I have since learned however that Paaghan is quite reaas to 80 into any civil auuinis- trative Job in the German ovt. anu is not alraid that his past will Bau mim into dillicuulties. I have written to Mellana in this Sonses We gave a direr to Einthoven who saams to be thoroughly satisfied with his Visit to Ls. September 13th I talked to cussen about the possibility oi MAY coming over here anu the prospects oi getting a case against nim. Ha agreed vith me that the air ficullties would be very considerable. AS REGARDS Patterson, he said he would be prepared Lo reease him but he was a Litui doubtful whether in lact he wanted LO ga. I also asked him apout the B.5 oliicers who wanted promotion owing to the last that they cons stantly came up against other MM. men who were of a lower graue in the police hiararchy but of higher grade in the military hierarchy. This led to considerable uliii culties. Cusserr alter consultation with Joe is putting up a, case to the D.6. 20 I have had a talk with Herbert who has returned from Germany after intervieving FELDMANN. FELDMANN confirms almose every- thing that Giskes Said about Hooper. Feldmann did not apparently altogether trust Hooper arce thought that although he had ostersibily been dismissed by SIS he was in fact continu- ing to work for them. I saw Kim and John Marriott about the Soviet case. Certain aadicionat partlctars nave come in although we are still in the dani on many points. We finally agreeu amongst ourselves-that MAY should be alloweu to come though we thoughe that the meeting might well he cancelleu. Mealwhile Hallax and Jumba Wilson thought MAY should not be allowed to Leave Canada. We uraited a telegram tor C.to send, the terms OI which he agreed to on the phone, and the provect was finally given a blessing by the D.G. although he took the view that liore might be gained Dy inociing MAY OII in Canada and corrronting him with the agent. Personaly I there there is much to be sadd for this course of action but Marriott and Philoy were So Keen about trying to aevelpp things at this end,where little progress has So war been made, that we felt on baance th t it was better for MAY to come. I pointed out however that the difficulties of ever getting a case against MAY would be very great since unless we actually caugnt him passing the documents to an unauthorised person no action would lie. Meanwhile MAY would be collecting further information From his various contacts i.n this country, and passing it on. Trevor Wilson looked in to tell me that the incident between Verneuii arc Hope haa beer satisfactorily settled. "t was fainly clear that a good real ot the Blame resteu wi th Vernauilts ADC Germain who had more or ess given authority to Hope Lo proceeu with a BST car to the French zone to arest the renegade Coue. the trouble had urisen from BST taking credit for the whoie action and cinculating areport on the matter to various oflices in France. "hen I saw C. the other may atthe JIC he tolu ie thet it had been aacicad that should xa be the co-oruinating authority between SISand SOE. This meant in elfecit that he would saverely. rationalise the SOE charter which nau recently peer hut up to the Chieis of State. ne wouur stit remain moTe or Less the active cortrotliig heat ol 51 SIS but would have incicir,d Late DNT, as his Deputy: Politicaly-h thought that this was a good aove as ne regarrueu Sinclair as a man who had the corliuece 01 military eireles.. Although Sinelainis a very pleasant honest chap and a foreerul charaeter there is no doubt that he has great real to learn about intelligence matters and he can hardly be regarded on present Showing as having more than an average brain+ September L4th I saw the DG apout the MAY case. Kim has pres: -ed SIS to let Roger 80 and Lake charge of the case and this has bean agreed. hoger is coming up touay from Leave. Cayzer brought Major Hughep 0O see me. He 18 going out a8 ADSO Rangoor. He struck me a being uite sutable.r 1. anious I. thir to Stuy witin us act the Wit'. 203 I had a talk with noger, John Marriott and Kim. I suggested that possipy Hervert might g0 out for a week or 10 days while Roger finished his holiday. We came to the conclus however that as we were committed to senuing an expert on Soviet espionage Roger ought to 8o. Movta-iaus I had a talk with Mets He said he presumed he would be leaving on his demobilisation n 2 or 3 weeks time. It looked to him as ii nis organisation would be broken up ana in any case he no longer wishea to stay with SIS. I asked him ii he would be prepared to accept a job with us if we were in a position to offer one. He said quite emphatically that he would. He was Looking round for other work but SO far had had no attractive offers. I told him that at the moment we were precluded from saing anything definite but that I felt fair conlident we should have a job for him to do. He seemed quite pleased at the idea. I had a talk with HarrJ Hunter and uiscussea the shadowing of MAY, who is aue to arrive on Monday. It was agree that Hunter should sene someone up to Prestwick. II MAY orOre is journey and went to Cambriage we would n otiication from Prestwick sena someone down to Cambriage to house him. It Seemed however likely that he would come o.Lonuon as he had booked a room at ar hotel. Einthoven came in to say goodbye. He seemd very pleusea with his visit. September 15th John Noble tells me that Columpine has been offered a job with PWE in Mid East but woud much prefer to go back to Germany ana take up some post with the police on the lines suggesbau by Brian Memanu. berbyshdir came to talot to me apout a Pouish Commnist Group with head uartare in Cranie. Guns. He wants to et ther or Check. I sala T thougne he saouu to 5o il he could line a suitable pretext. Scott came to tell me that he hau at offer to tae a post in the British vice-consul in Danzig. he salary however WESS ver Small, I told ndim that E COuca nob mave a uefinite ofter at the moment anu that I pose thought in Darzig thererore it he that could tre shroudd get the aeCeput salary the increased. I aiscussed with Cayzer anu Clayton tha memo that they had put un or CICB which is to be presented to the JIC after approval by Findlater Stewart and the D.G. It is pureny factual but in the last para reeomenus the CIOB should continue on its present ines and might utimadeny Become aTT orgamisation inlines analagous Lo SIME it the need existed. I discussed with Pouglas "obarts all Also the memo For the JIC om SIMEl, anu daspate -au a letter UO Finuater stewart with a 01 the memo for nis ap rovalo Later Saw Brooman White who informed me that SIS desired to some extent to pull out OI CLC. They want to hand over their SCI units to CICB and to buid up their long-term organ isation whil still maintaining close touch with CICB. We are redralting the memo for CICB accordingly. I Lunched with Chris Harmer and B-W. 1 told them as far as 1 could understand a sugges- wos T tion hau been madepresumabiy by/ Viv. to inuraterstewart, tnau 90,0 o the work one by Sections V anu IX aoroau haa nothing to ao wiitti the Security Service anu was con- cenned mainly with matters which alrected only the FO I was anxious to now how ar this was true as it aia not as war as I knew accord with the. facts. they both said that this statement could only be maae on theevery narrow basis that the Security Service were only concerned in cases were some action was directed against the U.K. In lact the old Cowgill complex. This view vas also confirmed by Klop whom I saw the other day. He said that the whole tendency in Lisbon was to keep information away from the local FO representative. r.LIERER has been picked up. We may at last be able to get the true story about MLrS. Krait as he suareu with her on one o1 his visits before the war. September 17th Fish came in to pay his respects. netold iie that BOAC were getting rid o1 Joninas. He had discovereu that Rorish pilots oi BUAC had been placed in charge of diplomatic Digs anu mat one was missing ana hau never peen recovered. I asked him to tell me the late on which this oag hrau Den aespatcheu as it might De that we hau letcars in it. I could not understand how it was that we ware not informed about this incident by the W.o. whose bag it was. I hau a talk with Joe bpeucer who iis taking over F.3B anu F.20. He has been intormea about the MAY case but John Marriout will continue with it at any rate for the present. THIS COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Juur 210 Bennett came in and I gave him the dope aDo the MAY case and as eu what the vetting situation was. hie said thest we had ory acciventally heard about the atomic DomO in 1945 and that it was only since the.. that systematic vetting hau gone on. He hau hau a list or all those concerned in the project ana they had ail Deen passed over the records Amolig these names Was that O1 oLaI NunI HAY anu he haa ascertiireu that wher He 5ot his exit permit there had Ueol no braca. wub- sequent enquiries had Shown that the same sitation existed today. I e.vlaireu to ham my alkiaty about MAI being 1o0os il this country with a recommendation prOm wUCKCTOIU to atomic bomb circres here. I youocel whethe we should ever set a Case asinst MAY ot that we shoud be able to prever.t nim heaing Like we ware Lueay enough LO ger evidelce sulliciet to put him behin. the bara. tlldo Seemed to beextremely problematical. I Said I was taring steps with C. to get Whoeverwas in authority acuuainteu with the position as we saw it. Desmonu Orr rang up to say that a oL.Cruutree who is an expert in tanis had been studying certain German documents which he hau obtainea from the field. These inuicateu tha there had been a serious leakage in connection with our talk production. He was anxious that some -body shoud have a look at the documeruts, o7 copies o1 which would be given to us ii we desired them. have arranged for Herbert to go down on thursuay next. MAY has turned up and has been housed by B.6. He flew from Prestwick with Bayfieid oflthe ROMP and a representative oi B.6. Bayfield has given me short note oi the case. The agent whose cover name is CORBY, was cypher cl clerk to the M A. A few months ago he care- Lessly left drafts of two confluential aespat- ches lying round where the were found a Cnarwoman and turned over to the Embassy officials, He was consequently recalled to MosCOW ana fearing that he might be liguidute decided to rat with as many document a he could lay his hanus on. he clims that ne was sickened by evidence of intrigue and espionage directed against Canada alter that country hau done SO muen to alid the Soviet Union in her sitrugsle against the Nazis. Be that as it may Corby decided that his salva- tier lay in publicity: At 9 ofclocio on the evening of Sept.5th he went Lo the "ottawa Tribunal ani there spoke to a woman: reponter. She thought the story too hot to handle and aavised him to 8o to the Justice Dept. Next day, accompanlad by his with and chito he went to the Justice Puiluing and Spoke to the private secretary LO tie Miniser. He aso Showed him documents-which he hau exbraebeu from the M.A.5 sale which he ana the attache alone had the combination Tor. The private secretary as ed Corby to wadt and Speak to the Under Secretary of state for Extertat Affairs. However rorby was Iinaliy turned away with veiled accusations that he was after all in possession o1 stolen documents. Again he tried the press this- time the Ottawa Citizen, and was referred to the RCMP. He musit have become somewhat Laterea by this time because the only thing that emenged aos clearly was that he wariteu to become a Canadian citizen. onseyuentis ne was sert to the Crown Attorney at the court House. He spoke to the lattertis secretary who again sensing the news value ang.e called up ie Droit a then the 11 Citizens, but luckily without success wearily vorby returned to his appartment anu guicily noticed that the place was being watched, soon after he got in there was a knoek the dpor. He did not answer but decided that it would De saler to ntove into a neighbourls apartinent and the neighoours in question phoned the municipal police. Meanwhile Tobertson o1 External Aflains hau got in touch with the ROMP. Towards mianight a raiding party led Dy the NKVD main Vitali Pavlav and including the Asst.M.A. FoJoy an LOW others broke into Corbyts apartment with a Jemmy anc Round no orre at home 5O hid ie the room The City Police duly arrived, found the men in hiding anu took their names. They were ad HAIst inclineu to take them all into custody but were preverteu LTom doing by the RCMP. The Hussians pLeadeu uipuona Lic privilege art wsaiu that they were in search 01 one o1 their employees who Hase tbscoruell with a SuI of money The met morning tha City Police brought Coroy LO the Justice Building where he was cursorily interro- gated. The importance of his inonmutior was immediately evident anc he was removed to a place o1 safety whare he nas beer re-interrogated severalcecasions at great length. The Soviet Emoassy nas presen- tea a note to the Dept OI Exterma Atlaits asking that a search be made for ome of their missing employ es. The police have said that he called severait days previously at the Dept.o Justice about his naturalisation but that they had not seen him since. They are keeping up the deception by putting a number 207 o1 guards in the vicinity Of Corbyts apart- mert. Meanwhine Corby himself is in a shack by a lake 110 miles from Ottawa and is being cons tantly moved round. September 18th Luke tells me that van der BERG, Friend of Koessler, is in trouble with the Belgian uthorities and wants Thornton and Fanto to gi ive evidenceon his pehai. Thomnton apparently does nut like the idea. Martin Forrest camn3 to see me abut the liquidation ol 020. I said that I eutirelly agree that we wouru not receive ary more jeeple from the Field for interrogation here alter the beginning of October, when we would proceea to close the camp down as soon as the interrogation of those who remained was conpleted. I-I.B. is to close down on 31.10.45 alter which we shall have to make other arrangement: for the receipt o1 censorship naterial direct from the theatres concemnea. In Germany for example we can rely on the control Commission. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 uev 2olo gi0 Further telegrais Keep coming ir from Canaua showing that mone poviet agents hae bsert identified. I have a letter O1 introuction toe Seret. Bayiield from commissioner Woou. From 110 tat o1 it alllt also Iroa what Bavlienu Jass, the ROMP would welcome aireot comunicatior with oursel es. Indeed this seems highly necessary sincetil sorts ol projeote ane being put 1orwal by Security "oordirapion such as the Ieeuirg Ol the ater.t in the High ommiissiclerit Ollice with ucepuion aterial, led is we LO riot nave the Carural coltrol Hlu she alt the telegrams cltee pat we shati undoubteuny get into u muuua. L ha area John LO prepIe a InemO giving the ireumstances oi the case au now it arose, pointing out that tne auchoities have sot HaJ here OL purpose LO see in we can aeveloy matters over here throush Che mal. who is goir to contact him o1l Uct.7tr but that in the absence OI any supporting evidence or uocu- menuary proof we Shall be very lucky if we can lind case against MAY. Meanwhile we have the anxiety o1 his muving in atomic bomb eircies and transmitcing irlormacior by for o1 mouth which will be impossioe CO control. e.might in he became alarmed attempt to 6O to Russia. It woula perhaps he possible to retuse him a passport but it would be a comparativey easy matter LOT him to Leave the country oy boviet DOat. The potential Vilue of his pouy to the russians would be Tar great thals anything e coutu transmit cy Contacts here or in Cuncaa. It seems however that we have to Uane a CIIcIIC on all this at any rave until Oct.7uh. Before that date howaver a uecisiol musit be reacheu between the British,Caieuials alu American governments a to Wha aetiar. tae: ale ulitima tely goinu to tarce ir. tilis case as 2 I1 a whole I we fin MAY passing uocumemts O1 Uct.7th we should normally feel bound to arrest him since it might be our orr. chance Ol getting, a Case alya so wreveltil.c him tor a a considerable time From yruceeuire to nussit, which he knows alu visiueu in y50. This means that imuitaneous action With have to 0e takair comeotion with some aents in Caraua anu America unueso the/are 5O he llowed LO ourn an ineriminatilly wocumeL.t chat thay may have. (Ald this is OI course on the assumption mhainey anu Move LOD uireuuy Daet wttncu by the soviae uathonicips, II E1rESLS are meue Coruy with uineu as 2 witiles alc it WLIE imgepeigue aver tnoun the Case could Da arcnfe ILI. camatL hete xe chie mLtar gut O1 Due Tretet Do We ut Uilenelore Wartl UO have a onowuowI with the Husials or nou? rersolaiy i thin id would pe very sautaty'. IT hud rourueu ay a gangof our peopie in Moscuti this Would wi Chout uesilor auge a huse mrosaulution or else uemanu their pouriu oi fLesh im some other Way. Sclater taweu to me irbout his memo or: siglzs security. He is soing to Show ic to the Signeis Brurches oi the Services. clau li1.a at ut their Paactions. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOGUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIO RECORDS ACT 1958 ucy Do(0 22 briscoe talced to me about a paper on certain of our expert chemist. going to apan ald other territories occupied by the Jaus in oruet LO uiscover all/thine we car about their secret writing. technique or other forms OI connurication. I Susuestau that he should communicate with Dixou at CICB. C.ad I Cillau o1 nicketts who is deputising lot wir Jonl Artderson IL the Lattsrta aosence Hogar Mikins WilO apertiy has something to IG with these Inbuats Or the diplomuci side Was also present we save them the scory of Copy ane expuuineu to them che uificutity ol having MAY il touch with amihert scien- tisite here alu in a politior commeicabe surthar inyormition to the soviet Hovt. Tt was decided tO cil in haers of tn3 Research council. He was cohu the SconV in outline and in a Centiil amount o1 uecail where it afractea MAY. ie was creuruy reply shockeu. He seiu that id he hac vaan as.-0a to raw up a list 01 those employe on atomic research in Canada on the pasis OI their integrity, he would have placed MAY at the top. MAY is ar extremely able Dhysicist. He has worked very hard allu is coneideneu extrenely goou in the lab. He has also earned praise for his handling olthe younger studel.ts. Cockcrof suggestion about MAY ane that he shoulu return to his job at Kings College, but in few weeks time tace up a part-time job on a smai committee which is to pe concerned with the setting up of a Reseurch Institution here which inl De pnoqucing acomic power i1 a smaIL experimental way. This institution woul only be a smatd repiica of one o1 those in 2 13 Canada and USA but it was of course to be Kept up to Hate D cousuarlt reports Lfom the vestorn Hemis -here to whieh MAY woutct nomat- ly have aceess. Arers hau not awen MAY Dut was expecti 2I5 to to SO some time this weeic. he woud Dell him that as the contract Tor this instullatlor had not yed bear placed there was Lo particu- lar point in the committee meeting anu that in any case he nac nctyet made up nis minct what was required. He thount that MAY might there ask whether ne corlu Sae any o1 the Montreal Reports 11 oPuer: that ne eouwu seep himself up to late AKERS said thet autnoush These reports cortalnled inform soon vaue to an enamy., no particular one wv&S hiely LO contain nything ikay Do be epoch--mening. the process OI ceveropmrert Tao aI uaIE Deer very evert and grauLEL: 1 suguaateu tharerore For his consicerution That we misnc matis Bsyuoeumens was bier 60 hat in Case was haueu over by hin aa photostuttdu. Cattdu. we avertuatly goe the photostat iin the possebe msdor ofthe of the agent we shou thauwwua are to Say that he mnust have recaiveo it From MAY. It was uecideu that 11 wouu uitimetely he necessary to exclude MAY as Larar was rumanly possiole to ao so Irom any atomic researehe Makins thought chat this was wasof considerable importance sinee the Amnenicelis thought that MAY was stii going to be in a position to atiniommution on atomile reseanci they might decide to cease collaboration witoe ourselves on the whole proueot. Makins also thought that every possible precaution should be taken to prevent MAY rom getting out of the country ana womse still going to Russia. I salu that it wasuillicut to have it bath ways. the mi had been brought back in order that we might develop Sovit cortactal in this country. He Was cueariy somewhat suspicious aru il we were going to follow him about closely from nOV urLil oct7th there aasonable Chance that he would discover that he was under observation. It waS important thet his suspicions would not oe roused therwise the somewhat sentter hope which now existed that we might ulDmater ly get him beninit bars would vamish into thin air. I then raised the uestion-ul.il future polic and the necessity for synchroisation I said we were putting up a memo oi this suuyect to Cacogan. september 19th I 5aw Avawsam this morning anu gaiva nim the LOw-UOWI on the MAY case: He suit that he wouud recona nothing due that wITer! he goL the warrant Sigred he WOLLE give the gist ol the btory UO the home beoretoli I spoke to Kim ana to u. aDOLU our navitis direct commuiction with Holice It Stemeu to me that thiswas the straight-torward way of handling the case an T nope utimate y We coud canalise everything through this Channel. C. aiu Lot aemur DUE I uouot wwnethar it wictl stop Stephersen seeing hime long telegrams or high-level communicandons between the High ommission, One D.0. alt T.O The post-hostilities playing stalI or the Chieis of Stali commit pubithea on the 29th June 1945 a memo on the security o1 che Britash Empire. The obJeets of the report are to establish the stratesi conseherrees oi foreign poicy and to provide a baeground against which our long-term plans 1or Imperial beence car be formulatea. The 21> review has Deerr prouecteu to the years 1955- 1960. The interests O1 the Britisa Epire are consiuered as a whole. Imperial security is described as being in its essence a problem of preventing other powers from impoa ing their will upon use This required both political action and military strength. Under mifitany commitments it is SUatau that our strategical policy must take account oi a) the possibility o1 war with the USSR, (b) the nead to ensure agidnst. the resursance of Germany anu Japan, (c) the possibility 01 armeu confllou with minot powers, (d) the loaintenance ol internal Security, (e) the obligation to Dhace armeu orces at the uiS- posal o1 the world organisation: The worth organisatlor is in no wa/ to be a substitute tor the burden maintaining our own armad Forces. onclusions OL the comittos ate bilad our over-riding daralice coumitm3t.t is to sua- uaruthe Empire aguinat the possibility a hostile USSH. oup primary obeative must pe to avoiu & elash buD it is Iec that the stronger we ape knowE 6o pe the more hicely we are to achieve this oDect. The >mopire could not secure 165 wOrL-wilue interasta asaii -St soviet agereasion without the help ot powerful allies. In this respect the support in war of the USA is vital. We shoud pro- ote close association Detweer the British Empire anu a stronger France. In order that a world organisation Shat deveop on Tires which will provide the maximum contribution to Imperiad security, we shouu induce the USA to undentae detinite mititiy try responsibilitie in those areas in winich our common interests hie The relative importance wich Should be eceordei in peace to areas Which might be seriously threataned by the USSR is as ohlows: (a) first priority must De given Lo the delence oi the UK whicn is the haart O1 the 21L Empires an essential operational buse ana contains Or main sources of whdite man-pover and industry, and also DO the protectlor oi the vital sea communications alu ar routes of the Atlantic. (b) the eierce o1 the IndLan Uceall area ralKS secorIu oniyy in importance to that o1 the UK. ID TOrus a vital link in the Chain o1 Imperial communi- cations. India is of great potential value as a base and as a source of man-power and industry. (c) the Miude East would in war be subjeet to an immediate threat and the oil-fields in Iraq ana Persia wriich constitute our most important strategic anxiaty in the area would be indelensible. The sea and air communications rom the middle east are less important thtit those through the Indian Ocean and might in any casel be invaliuated as a result of operations in Europe. Derence requrements in the Minute must not therefore be maae at the expense o1 requiremerits in TEDE a he Imlan Oceans (by the defence the Pacific area should De graued tower priority irom that 01 Western supope, the ITuLan ocaar area or che Middle 928L2 sinca a threat in the Pacific Word be compata cively remote. Laen the paper Sates that the provis1o ol highly eficiert Inteliiseuce bervice is the Tunuamental prooem allecting the prepareuress or the Empine for war whi peuires immediate consideration. This document was lauer conSidereu Dy the JTC who have laid down that information Oil the USSR, its armaments ete. is category A. 0at.b is those countries withiti the soviet sphere of ifluence. Cat.e is Germany ar Japan. Thereaiter lol1ow the aLLes and neutrals. Mills is back from Canada, this time Tor good 217 I saw Cadogun at his request. He 1s worried about the possibility 01 MAY getting awa LO Russia. I explained LO him ouD uidemma II we cannot get a cana against MANV nre remmains a permanent menace amu ultimatel it will propa-ly De impossible to prevent him From going LO Russia. II we FO110W hiln about Before vet.7th his suspicions may be roused and he may be inclined to eirain From making ary contact with the uasiians here. I said the we wouun do what we could to 1ook albar the aerourome where the hoviet planes came in alnaI aso Loor into The stuestion oi ships. This has in fact Deer dore. While we CarI exercise some reasonable control over the aircraft the shipping position is almost impossible since s0o stafis have been disbanued ara the ships appear to come in at almost evany Dort. I1 we circulateu MAiT photograph to I.0.5. the garr would undoubteally be DLOWIL. Oussen has Just returnea bm the JOVCE trial. JOYOE is apparenty conremedt to death, as tar as T Can Soe almost eltirely on a Joint OI Law. The Juuge muled That JJOYCE by vdrtue o1 the fact that he held a valid British assport, hau real domicileu in this courutry (D euc-eto. owe altegianee LO HL.M. anIU that lis allegiance wuS NOL affected his going overseas ar in Fact Lasteu as Lor6 a5 the passport was vatiu. ALI Ute jury hau LO decide Was whether JOYOE he achenad LO the kingis enemies which On avinence that had diftieuty in one une Ceae Wici probabuy 6o UO the House OI loose Sepuemuer 20th anu ZIS.C Away For two uays with a cold. 21% I have read a Long report by SCHDLLNNBERG on the thing Wilich au up Lo Die surreraer. I shoua imagine that tae account is ainly accurate, except thad SCHELLENBELTG'S desire to buitu himseit up as as a rarseedte Stuesma ald a party LO all that 15 good ali Nothing Luat 15 bad stertuy amerses throughout the narrative have reau Ntopie excremey interesting report OII HILEr. Higerwa: Gelrs Embassy in Moscow continuously from 1920 until the break WL El RuSSa an 1941. nlop happened to Know him as he was partly instra- mental in getting him aro Nauia out OL Ruesia at the time OI the revoutior. ITT talking with Klop I hed sadu to him how interesting it would De to anOW peecisely whut was behind the Russo-German pact 01 1939. Klop Imeuia- tely said that HILGER should be able ta five the answers We then YToui that Hiiger was in the American zone., but that nououy nau thaht of interrogating nim. AS So011 aS we tried to get him to the British zone however we were told that he was aue Lo be lLown to america in the course Ol a tew uays. We managed howeve to get Hilger-u 6O Bad Oyerhausen tor 5 days where KLop hau Long talk wiba him. The hnst signs ol the possibilit oi a ueeraase of Germarsovist ueusion arpeareu in Dac.198 whrert tave BC4IATIE FO was authorsed LO prolong For a further year the existing agreement Tor the exchange 01 coous with the bovisUnion. The Sovet presa pipe DGWVII an atalin in Hlarch 1939 declureu at meeting OT the Party in Moscow that Lera were Dabw Germany anu the woviet Dudion 116G insupmountaes wilrerences an only dark orces Wnlo Wolu Line 209 to 1ish in Droubled waters have aI interest in agsravating them. Hitlep was intereatec it this statement in whien a gert axiateu Ul an idea to buy o1f Dovlet Russia in the even o1 bermanly attacking Polana. The bovlet uovt. was disappointed by true unsetistaetory poor gress of the negotiations between Britai.l ad Frarce regarairg tre conclusion 21 militumy agreement. russda wished EO itda hrselr from the threat, imirent dertian aggression oreover the prospeot ol Furopean war watch calin had predicted for yeuns unu which he expected to creute a situation tavuurate Lo the interest. O1 the oviec Unlor Doth from the point OI view OI their political aspire- tions aLnICI their hopes resaruing the rauease OT revoutionary movemellts in1 the counumLes inguestion, Was operreu 12p. Stain herd OI course haa nOE reckoned with Powand ueing valyuished wiunin 16 Ha hud nowever Daliaved, uccoruing Lo-ibel, in sons-urewa mout trencn warlare in hruuce. Apart L1om these diIlereuces 23 ovlel UOVE. Woldls bet a Dreethinga ace Lo-necover ramtho-oliecto OL the 1937-38 period when about 00, Du the higi poviet ommane hae bean elimnatea she would &Lso have a iree hand ir the naltic states arta would obtain without fining 2 shot what Peter the ureat ha loughe Tor Io 21 ears. There WEe also a prespeet OI cettang Bessarabia. Ribbentpop by siging tmis pact opened again for Russia the wimuow to the well. IL is not surprising therefore that when in the early days ol August 1959 Count Schulenberg, the Gerrion Ambasacor, pub orwerd proposals lot a nor-aggressior. paco the uiseuselon ory lastau 23 minutes, and Hipbentrop wal.s brouglit to Moscow 10 putil nis sigmeture to what Wica already E That accompli. Whe:, ne save btain 120 OI August 2ra Riboeutrop souteu that all Germany exxpected 1ro1 Russia was thad sha should keep quiet. Lermany did Not Tided and would not accapt any miitany aid. the would however like to conclude an economic ugreement. Rbbentrop was orly in MOsCovi Jor a may Dut returned Lstinon-the 2oth beptr Wrrert E Frontier Frienuship Treaty was concluued. There was a slight change in the uefinitior of mutual spheres 01 interest, aus2a 1131.5 ing or the irchusion of Lithutiaywmiul Germary wast have LUDLan n exchange. T. RDssialis adha insisleu or having oVahtatin declaring that the Urrainizls would Never tolen -ate ite 10S8, BUTI che Line wasmane mane co Tan EO ES LO incluue the od-lelds o1 Drghovytch anu Berysloy. Relations grauuala? eterlorate a oontrioutory Sector Deia Russiait aroi occupation O1 the Buknovine, NOV.940 WI whan Moatov visited Berilie Ie Wars whene Or 2 from t 12th DO the fie hau a Tathar atickJ interview wiith Hither W2IO was IinI U1 mis comueRTS macine it uite Clear that he nEeatueu a. derea090 nation. He trdeu LO parstluue wootOV that thu ttteresi tire >ovia. ought DO bd direetod in the lirot lnstalce LO Creating tor henseli an btt to the want open sBa suan EIL outLaD exeted out Via Than to the Fersial Gulf. Neither une Maui orranean Tor LIE Battle uTereu suc a prospect. Hitler thought the povietunion shotla go easy wndie Germany should indemhily henslet the west. Mootov diu not Ehirns that the moment lor such dar-reaching Agreements had ret arrivea. He thought that clariricauion OL Goret-bovietralatious wasrmone Was, mome impontart. On this he coulviget no very sacisiaetory answer. After Molotove visit thiare accurreu an appreciaole cooling-off in GeraTovET reletiers. 221 Or 13.4.41 albet the sighatune Lhie sviat agrament. with Japan, Stalin appeared ol the railwal SbatLon in order il wus atiegou 1o take heave ol Matsuoka. Probably however in order to tell the uerman Ambissaaor a10 bae Asistalt M.A. who wene both there that Germany anu the Soviet Union were lrienus Eil must remain friends. To Schulenberg Sualin remark- eu further that he (Schurenberg) ought CO see LO it that Germansovet Irieraship WaS maintailhed. Stalinis abthtude Was proDabily comected with tte Germar military succeses in the Balkalse. He was ooviousily irs EL very renvous mood thereaitel uld ever thing to meet German demends, As late Nay Le Soviet uoyt. cause Tasss to pubuisn a SEate- ment in which the rumours about German Warlike prapanations were raueult with. The.ra umouns ware denameedas endeavour's LO poison Die aumosghee atween SoViat Ruseia 2u uerman It Wa auueu that Germany WaS ALU Lipent. concentrate her uroOPS wnare che pLBasBU. IT Was orly on 21.0.91 im the evening Lht L MoLotov asheu te dermals Ambuesldor to culi OI him, pointing out repeatac cafiu SMe tolatic Fombler-y Froublerviotkbiont-r votkbiots wetmt: cirercit on the lolowing day scnueuuerg CeLILEU U1 Morotov in orueT To scale uerat the uermari Gout. consderau the Goviet crop concentrae ions near the German eastern. lrortier ine armssabile and decided To taire counter measures. Mollotov ropulied that he inter- pretea this tatenent as at declaration o1 wur in viiew of the faet the trrermal arorei t hau allreauy since 1s hours bombeu russian areas such as Ouessa Kiev and Minsi. A JIC paper on the future O1 BOE assigns to them the oowing cases: (a 0O colate, examine and assass intormatiorbearing on 909 lltuce clandestine operations and Lo study anu develop the ard of underground wariace, (b) to train persons UO cunry OUT UT.I forms of elandestine activity brcovart propasanca numours, iniluencing puolic persons and miinorities and to study objectives lor sabotage; (c) Do study, ueviise anu maintain small reserves o1 all toaterial reuirea Lor sabotage and clanuestine operatonsci a typ tapes including commicu tions; (u) in such cases as the appropriate deptror bhle Chieis O1 Start may think fit ane supjeet to the express approval ot the FO, to seave the clandestine operational requfrementi af H.M.G. abroad by giving covert vertsupport Lo bnitash national interest. where they ane threatenec e-6r Dy inriueucing prominent inuiviauais disbursing suosiuies, countarine osuile propaganda anu py puru-miitary accivities as appropriate; (e) with the concurrenee o the FO to undertae any clarueblalte IInulcicl tranbactidips euireu by the Treasury, old () to maintailz all Onsetiia bir which is capable of quicr all elrtouve expansion in bame O1 ware the orbenise Lion 13 apparertr I to De CA separate ore L2om sIs UuL eo cruinated Dy someone who will have Jurisuic tol over poth BIS anu SOE. AS this person is Lo ba C. himse.lr LE is likely that 308 will be reduced to uiry Small proportions anu itis moreover pretui certain that the E0 whose approval has LO pe sought will not likely ountenarice suoversive activities in loreiga countries. According to the La test reports coudiions in Berlin do not seem tO be 1oo good, altouh there is some improvement in the 1oou situzr- tion. Two urenus of public opirtor 11 Hb countered, are considecea potentiuly dalger- ous. One 1s tendency lor the popuktion 223 to compare the goou oE cays or the Nasi regime, wiiitn the Present eenrable conuiulons. People say that user the NaiS ever in wat' time ration cars ware horoureuywreretis FLOW even the restricted ration scale is not met. The second theme is the emergence O1 the inevitable irreuentism. Expressiors of amazement and grie that the puresit German soil Should be hamed over 1o the barbarous Poles. The German soeal Democrats ane quite prepared to face the present Situatio are to write about lt but imr order to TUD things im their proper perspeetive they must admit that conditions are Dau and are not likely to Improve 1or some time. Whenever they attempt to do this their articles are cersored Dy the Hussiais OF the LroLnds that the/ are sowing pessimism among the population. Sclater iearns from AamiTaty bieTrs Lit evidence 1s 101 availlaule UO SUW that theft SOOH coue was broker! by the Germana. The enemy ere-abte te brciah this alter tlre inspection of 8,000 groups, which is a very much lower igure then iu was imasineu would be recessarye The iavy had DO banot ulre whoe report as DO the posicicn OI enemy SUD- maimes this cypher oving LU che 1arbe astribution necessary anaapparexliy The ermans were ablla to break this continuously but whet whet-the they Could 1ot ancersbanict was now we mace these reports So accurate. They thought that it was owing to some technical device 01 which they were not aware. The Germale did not think for one momerit that il was due to the insecurity O their cyphers. Kremer has now aamittea that his main source of information was Count Toggerberg who had a number of special sourcase is reports were passed on unden the cover name of 224 Josephine Tram 1942 until tne spring 01 1994. Thence cill Nov.1944 under oI1e cuvar Treliapte &genti. Onauena, the Jap MA nau an abent know as Bergmanu who owas-the WES the met Mhe ol Ethonia in stockholm. Bergmann outainedr imormation From une French MA stockhou, ColGarnien. Kremer lad no contact with Garnier ana notuing to sugest that Garuier was a conseious agent although requests were frequently made lor inform tion to be obtained from Garnien. September 22nu I. had talk wiith Burit, rt,cussen ana Mapriott Wher we discusseu the CORBY casa. I ouDine the wnole position LO burto Alter examinan tion or the evidence our position here they agreed that 1IO case cadewolndm would it. Itwas therelora o che greatest poasiue importulice Lo obtain a case aguinse MAY. 1i we Saw him passing te aocumott. on Oct. th we ought DO tare chance anu carry out ana arreut aver 14. we nigne YOL he cerluia that the aoeumeno passecwouud constibule satisaetony ovigewee. I thought however three tnane might be reasonable grourrs it rtiriiig the it yOuLU i1 we Coca pharit through areas ome O1 the documents ITO ldontedi, sLeouF marsec Cunstlr inougat that i1 tniis ocu- ment were nanueu to MAY a day or two Delore tue meeting we might possibly dscaven were he Werkeeping- it in the mealltme anu alcar ne let his billet on Uct,7 ascertai. wheth the document was stiii there. I it-hausa emoveut there wouiu he a rreasoreuwe chalea thur ne had it OI him ana was intending DO hana it Lo the asant. the audlcuity apout this scheme was that it would mean Daiig Tone people, either the Univ ersity or else where, into our comtidehee. 140 asreeu Last 225 i1 was nacesssiy tu telesligh GU srbine th ucuao S0U0H b/nchruiyea and asking that they anou suvite LD wi.th >ighac 0./ CORLY unJ other documerey eviance wnicn mibll DE uabuvl il. rormuuvinS E case by. O THISIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED INDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 ruly 2Olo: september 24ch hive toe.i sell memo OT the COr CLaa LL Ceuogan With coverirg LOLDRES alobesting DAEE he shauo at the asreamer-I Eaberlcd HIains ald the butue -et. ElcL Shuel aychrouiseu Chiat Were preperec Lu cake coyu rap, wnldthiat cuion Waie niuialeu y1am8, in Caliel. IL we ULA AC Ants treat I al.w onuLnaruoluilor onuLa wOllole, Murals protier. He is eacilce pfzatotidi, LtrbeuJ I blyet tanoued imecu tm. ic is a llice chrap old Voly inpreuvive. na knows aDou bighats procedure anu particularly what wireless Cain do but is in To sense a technician. I aam not quite sure Whether he would be suitate or HOL out I couLu only sive him the Llai answer Gw/er oullineu to mhe hia prapesans 1O corueuing po.st-mortem O1. MI sld he eviuent invenu LO uU it in niz usuullcomprahensive told thorough lushion. Craulund has prouuced yor a memo O11 various iluatuds Tom wnich we Souuu like il possible LO exclude ahielb. The uilicu ties are immense SLLL ic I Lhina question able whether wa CaIt ever hope Lo achieve anything all etive. Herert wet uonl to tiia ecnoo.l Ol Tark Tech- ho1Qsy 0ll Saturday to inspect a number o1 Gemman uocumenta which the/ hat receiveu from IAT. Ine document containeu various rerer- ercas to intopmation which the Geranshad received on our tank proauctior. Certain o1 them referred to reports from Ivan 1 and IVErI II (the Tric.cue group). - great many oi them wene completely ilaccurlite ana may well have come from Ostro Sources but a lew need further investigution, in particular a report, all uiagral ol one o1 our tals oains maud L Vickers Armstrong which wis receiveu 07 the Gemaib erl! i1 1959. Heruert ntu Cussen incerviewall Hoopar touay ard cold him that EAE Du hau ueciueu to dismiss him. IE W2LAS pointed out LO him that the evidence 01 wiclesaas hncu UBn caresulll slut ter alid that uael targel/ corroporated each 001ao. It bate to be perrecciy clear thad he Hau uelioeratel] mnisteu SI6 il impuilg that ha haa HUE cLoe Colitact wich the UIS berora 1959, Card caat-n ne hard Datiaye( 7 Dr. Krueger, ELlI SIS agents to tha bermans, thet tie atter hau comitoe suiclue in pirison, art tal he had received sure of mnonay from che Gaflnitiib ilibwe VO 1e htau h0 isclosau. Hoo er continued Lu any tha aesations ouad salu Lhatthe W700 be witing 1A1 memo in rapid. He IL ivel LLLE muuthits Bulary and wuS LOLL never 0O comundouteallhe with SIS Or oTaIVS ENO LE Yemnaoa crat untot he was strietiy DourO D. the uRLcit sucrets ACte WVEta made to hin the won nutie slveri heecminateuot Dy sluner abte T J2LW Joe Shepnensoue Ha thedns 1 possible WETOI Spoower whyulu U mae mayors alcnough rom te of theis for he resurus this as umseesiry he rea- ises 01 COLttse that he aLu Burt wold lave to Gemhte LtCole Fnaid that I argreeu WitIT nim as I thousnt it important that Suamuon ald Spooger who maU wOTeu BO well ghourd FOt ba placed at any disaavantist vis a vs teelr sub-ordinates at the Yani. There wus 1O souDL bnab this sortofthing counsel Lor a great daal in the police. I luncheu with wril Miils today anU he agreed that he should go DELCIS to civil lite urtar is holiday on cu.2th. He have had a demand From the Bat Bact 1o: nome Does. They wait 2 2 610218, a G803, 10 shorthilac Dpiat bucretabisaatuo 5 high-graue registry LIuined womert. There is some iuea the we alI SIS are su1o UU supply thea Doales Tad Wasot however wht I had arranged with Be I UhuE it wouI be OTODIUL wnethety W suppat ar mome oLceRA DuR Lhd B41 time we wishau GO nave ay in theli seleutigi ITOI tdeservicear 22% Toumy Harris came in to tall me HLUOLE GAREOT: recurre He had quite lt ausing time. He foloved orooviously twu ruther fate Looking Jermans LO Caluus where We anew that Fedarico anc Ku Were sulng. In this way he notionaiiy cilscovereu their wlereaout. He found bedenco in a dejacteu Due oi mnu wang vary nervous OI Gerbot: saebe he said he was coutiruoupld watche clad ne woul nol be seer spealciug Lo item. fid bDEu nil to iohowaned owuntdd the paacneu wod white a 1ong couversaton place apout GarDots various wurTiad EvOLT being deported to Germany and said that it ever got to the point he intended to go on the run. Garbo warned him against going into exile. He said that he had very bitter experiences of this course of action himself during the last years Federico little knew what it was to be a hunted man. It would probably be better for him to face up to the situation and comply with whatever instruction: were given to him by the authorities Feaer- ico led Garbo to Kuhlenthal who threw his arms round his neck. Pathetic enquiries were made about Garbot: various agents and how they were going to hive in the futures Garbo reassured them on these points. Kuhlenthal particularly wanted to know whether agent No.3 was annoyed at the repeated uestionsabout the possibility of an attack on the south OI France. We had in Fact expressed a certain mild irritation in our messages. Kunlenthal hoped he had not given ofrence but pleaaed that he hau to send or the messages which he received from Berlin. Confidence in Garbo seems to be absolute and methods of communi- cation in the future have been worked out. At the moment there does not seem to be any attempt whatever to reconstitute the G.I.S. in the Peninsular. Garbo said that hewould 229 be going into hiding again and leaving the country for S.America, as he uid not think that at the moment Spain was ally place tor him. He bade his former collaborators a fond Iarer wel.l. The above is I think a periect epidogue to the whole Barbo saga. Alley came to aSK me about funds for the Polish Cal. I said I diu not think that we ught to make any grant for the C.I. ol the Polish forces abroad. We shall confine ourselves solely to the forces in this country. I saw Akers again in Rickettis room. Roger Maki was also present. Aners Said that he had not yet got into touch with MAY. He had ascertuin- ed th t he had left his hotel on Friday and that he was not returning there. He hud rung up Kings College three times yesterday but on each occasion the line was out 01 order. He will suggest to lay that he Should come along and see him He thought he could mane some arrangemnent to pass him a suitable docu- ment from Montreal He wouuld have it type with certain errors in punctuation that it would De positively identifiable as the one he had passed LO May, whether it was copied or photographed. He asked permissi to tae Perrin, his assistant, into his confidence over the Whole alfaire Perrin sits in the same room and is thorough, trustworthy and disereet. This was agreed LO. When handing the document to May Arers could quite naturally ask him whether he had adequate means for locking it up. IN that way he nay be able to discover whether May proposed to deep it in his lodgings or in his room at Kings College. This might just coneeivably give s an opporturity of ains a look into. the cupboard or desk after May leaves UO attend the meeting on oct.7th. I explained to 730 to Rickett and Manins exactly what the aiificulties were in preventing May leaving the country ii he made a really ueterminea effort to do soy and I toa them the measures we had taken. Aer's said that the Russians would undoubtedly be in production of the atom bomb within 5 years, ii they wene very ueay they might ao it in 52 or 4. This took into account that they might have already received a good deal of information and that the/ may well get a good deal more. Even if they get everything we give them they would not be able to set up the plant in less than 22 to years. Unfortunately the Americans are ublishing a 150--page document on atomic research which,contrary to our wishes, dis- closes the 2 method of approach out of 6 whiich are proritaple. This has undouptedily given the Russians quite a good lead. A Aers himself want to America in Nov.1942 and by December it had been decided to set up a pilot plant. When the contracting firm saiu that they could censtruct this plant, they were immediate y told to construct a full size plant and to take a charce of its being Successful. The plans were submitteu to ICI who pointed out no less than a aozer ueieets which would have made the whole project abortive. Cussen and E saw the DG on the uestion o1 the promotion of Skaruon and Sponner. It was agreed that not only their promotion butthat o1 Joe Stephenson and Burt,should go forward. September 25th I attended the JIC this morning when our papers on SIME and CICB were disousseds De Guingand, the new DMI was present for the irst time. He said that he thought there was a slight discrepaney between the opening para. 231 ard a later para which indicated that the responsidlity was with the commanders-in- Chief. ACSI thought that Mdaule East being a zone o1 latent operations respor- sipility Shoud lie with the Commanders-in- Chief. I said that the plain meaning oi the paper was that SIME should have a status similar to that o1 DSO Gib. It would be sjonsible to the Commanaers in Chief for supplying them with auvice and iniorma- tion but the direction ana administration would if the memo was agree become the responsibility of the DG OI the Security Service, to whom complaints would be made if the organisation was not considered satisfactory. The general feeling of the meeting was that they could not quite Com- mit themselves to the paper without referring it to the Defence Committee Midule East. As regards CICB it was more or Less agreed that its status should be similar to that of SIME, whatever was ultimately decided aboutthat organisation. The Service people generally seemed reluetant to hand over control of a body ich they regarded as importantto themselves to a civilian organs isation like the Security Service. They did not realise of course that de facto they did this 6 years ago and that they have been almost entirely dependent upon us for the build-up that they have got in the Midale Easto I they had got complete control of the organisation and we reline quished all interest in it, they woud very soon discover that they ware handling something which they aid not unuerstand and which they wera totaliy il-qquipped to improve.. It is the old iuea that C.I. is a Job into which you can throw any Olf1cer on the retired fist and expeed to get results. It is of course really a highly 237 technical supjeet involving a lot o1 know- ledge and long experience which nobouy in the Army has ever had on is like to get. I discusseawith Harker and Charles the case of Kirby-Geen. It seems that the Yard would pe quite prepared to lend him to LS for another 6 months or a year until we could mae him a firm Older. I said I uid not see really why we coula not mae him a firm offer now. Chartes said that the Treasury rules made this extremely difilcult it he was to get the benefit o1 his 14 yeans service with the police. Harker said he thought this was really a matter which should be taken up on a higher level anu that it was absurd there should pe ro opportunity for our recruiting from time to time an experienced police ofrbcer or indeed a Govt.servant from another dept. without it being necessary for that person to lose ir the transaction. Some attempt wili be made I think to get the Treasury to relax its rules. capt.Lewis, an FSO in 30 Corps,area, in Germany, came to see me in order to get advice on the kind ol organisation that he should set up to deall with any kind o1 subversive movementinrthe British Zone. I said that I found it somewhat diificult to advise him without knowing a good real about Local conditions I could however envisage myself aumped down in the area and faced with the Same problem and what shoud do in the incumstances. Primarily should try and get under my control a set o1 basic records showing the identityphoto- graph, description, late oi birth etc. 01 the population. I Shoulu unuoubteuly need These in any enquiry that might have to 233 conduct. I should carefully sift the information of all informants and try to assess its reliability by any cross-checks that I could put into force. I should work up a network oi informalts in circles which I thought were likely to be of any impor- tance. I shoula also make any use I could of various Forms of censorship. bastly I should have to rely to a considerable extent on local police authorities. It would therefore be necessary to ascertain who in the Kripo could be trusted and try him out by various means. Capt.uewis said that he was aiming at getting two people into each dienstelle of the Kripo and that at the moment he was using their basic records. He had a few informants and others were being run by C.C.U. but SO Iar without any very positive results. Frontier control was difficult and people could move about freely from one area of Germany to another. The strongest co:trol was on the Dutch Frontier and or the border between our zone and the Russial. zone. Censorship at the moment was purely on ay catch as catch can basis. Certain mail bags were selected from time to time and examined. If however a letter looked suspicious there was no means. of getting hold of any further letters to the same address There is no telephone cesnorship at all. As regaras personnel, he was extremely shorthanded and very few had any experience at all in CI matters. In eact FSP seetion there were not more than two who could speak German. He seemed quite pleased with the discussion, which he said had given him a number of ideas. any thing I else tola he him wanted that if to know there or was il we could be of any further help he should let me know. JuLy THISIS A COPY 207 b ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENTUN UNDER SECTION Dick rang up to ask THE me ayBut REfeORpS meeting the result 1 Wlesenohe seemed to think was on the whole fairly satisfactory. I told him that the meeting wich SIS was fixed for Oct.8th uut might possibig be postponed a day or two. Drew rang up about the leakage oi iniormution through Reuters on the Govt.s proposals on the Future govt.in Palestine. an article had apparently appeared in the Ooserver of last Sunday which was I gather extremely rear the knuckle. Drew walrted to now whether we could discover the source of the leaage through anyone in Reuters. I said unfortun- ately the only two people we had with a line on Reuters were away at the moment and in any case it would be an extremely air Iicurt thing to discover. There are of course many people in Cabinet circles o1 Sewish origin who must be aware 01 the Govt's proposals and it is conceivaole that there may have ben talk on a high level. It is characteristic that our proposals can appear in the Observer when we who are vitally concenned in the future of ralestine have never been given a sight of them. I had a talk with Marriott anu Later on Marriott brought over a iile of telegrams some of which were uatea the 22nd Sept. and on which action was required. This is a typical example o1 ineificiency and the kind of thing that results when two offices are handling the same suject. I Said that I did not wish to upset Seephenson, or make Roger Hollists task more difficulty but that quite franily I could see no possible reason why the Securit vo-Ordina- tion should be having a finger in the pie at all. The matter was purely one between 238 ourselves,RCM and the FBI. II we wanted guidance on matters of higher policy we could get it ourselves from the h.0. In fact we had already one 30. Stephenson is apparently kicking up at the idea of our communicating direct with the ROMP anu cites the British High Commissioner as supporting his View. This of course is typical of Stephenson. He came into the case through xternal affairs ana having set himself up IS the Great Panjanarumn does not How wish to be knocked off his perch. Everythin that he does Or does not do is a matter of personal prestige and the organisation has to sufie accordingly. September 26th I had a talk with Areas or the phone. He said he had dined with May last night. May's whole demeanour was perreetuly normal and he showed no particular eagerness to continue with atomic research although he was quite ready to do the WOrK ii the University would allow it. Actually he said that Kings College took the view that ifhwishea to give a thra of his time to the Committee that it was proposed to Form, that time coula not be taken out of his lecturing period but woula have to come out of his research periou. Asked about documents, May expresseu no par- ticurar eagerness to receive copies of everything coming from Montreal. He did say however that it might be useful to him to See certain reports if he was going to serve on the Committee. Akcers aseu him what means he had for locking these reports up. He replied that he had a strong woouen cupboard with a good lock at the University but that if necessary O1 course he could get hold of a steel filing cabinet. Asiced if he had papers coming over, he sald that there rst were a certain number, including his notebooks Akers explained that it would Ol course De the normal custom for DSIR to open all such packages and enquired whether he hau anything of a particularly personal nature, which o1 course DSIR would not wish to open. He said that he had nothing of the kind and raised no sort of objection to the papers being examineu on arrival. Normally EliS, Scientific Adviser to the 0,would be his professor at the University. If however does not return May anaware at the moment what arrangements will be made. May mentioned that he would be staying at a friends flat but that he could always be got at the University. Akers will be seeing him later i the week. Meanwhile he is going to look out some suitable reports. The package addressed to errin,DSIR,l arrived this morning and was opened. It consisted of an attache case roughly 15 X 10 X 42 with a lead seal but urllocked, wrapped in brown paper on which was stencilled Perrints name. The contents will be care- fully examined but there is nothing to suggest that any of them were intended for May. Akers is anxious to know whether the parcel corresponds to the description of the parcel handeu in by Burcham oi whether Durcham's papers were put into the attache case and wrapped up as described oy the High Commissioners office. I have told Akers that we Can wire out anu Let him know. May has made contact with a party member who is arranging for his accommodation We have also identifieu from the reeords two urder- ground party members with whom he has estabr lished contact since his return. As Akers seems to be a little sceptical after his 237 interview with May I have wireu to Canada suggesting that we should put him wholly in the picture. He will then I think cooperate more thoroughly. THISIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Juuus DDi Lennox came to tali to me about a conference which he wasit attend on the question o1 aerial photographs. I said that it was entirely a Service matter but that i1 they decided that any particular area should not be photographed we should like to know what the area was and the reason lor keeping it secret. Lennox then threw out a hint that it was very necessary to have someone who mov about in fairly high cincies ala was kept informed on matters of this aina. I said "Quite", Dick rang up to say that the DG hud arriveu quite safaly anu that he was spending the day 39 with tonnie Haylor and would be going to Hamburg tomorrow. I told him that the DG was quite sold on the question of our taking over SIME if this was agreed by the Defence Committee. Dick then asked me about his views oh representation abroad. I said that as far as I knew he thought the plan was a good one and that he would not be averse to seeing us having at least a footing in Passport Control. I am very anxious to get a proper Russian section going as early as possible. It is difficult to see how this can be done satis- factorily until we can reorganise the shape of the office. I have arranged or Klop to see r.Fritz HESSE. Finzell came in to say goodbge. He is going backto Australia via Washington where he will be seeing the FBI. He is a little doubtful about the future of his organisation although he understands that his particular branch which deals with subversive movements is likely to continue. There is evidently a tendency in Australia pack up on security and Evatt the Minister of External Affairs does not seem to appreciate the necessity of having an efficie organisation. I told Finzell that we should be waiting to establish contact with Aus- tralian Security from Singapore as soon as we got settled in. WEBER-DROHI who was one of the first spies to land in Eire, wrote Or 17th June a full confession to a priest. Dan has never sent us a copy of this but we have now received one from the DoCe It is Quite one of the 239 most human documents that I have seen W-D is a somewhat disreputable character nearer 60 than 50 who at one time used to put an a music-hall aet with what were ueserlbed as two sparsely-clad females. He is said to have illegitimate chilaren in various parts of the blobe. Apart from this he has a married daughter in America and a son in Eire. Ostensibiy he came to visit his son having stowea away Or a crawler at Antwerp.. ctually he came ir a German submarine which but him ol1 in a smaii boat which capsized before it reached the shore. The following are some extracts from his account: when I asked how I will be booght to Ireland, the man Said that he does not know yet, but that it will be told to me pefore I would leave Bremen. A few days Later, we then went to Bremen again to the last meeting, and after the meeting another man escortea me to my hotel to my room, ana there I was then told that I will be transported to Ireland wi th a U--boat, but the ice is holding the departure up. I wi.ll have to remain yet a few days in Bremen, and during that time he will give me my full and final intructions,an all I need to know. He asked me to count Y dollars in his presence, and so I did, 1d then he told me that I should pack up 6,000 and some odd dollars in equal packages, and put gumt paper round it to hola it tight together, and stitch those packages then in the underloduer in my overcoast, across the back so no one can notice it That evening then after ne had left I packed up my dollars and stitcheu 16,000 in the back of my overcoat and the rest O1 the dollars I put in pac ages too into my hanu- cofler (small suitcase) anu when the man came to me the following day I then showed him how I had uone the Job,and he sailu wel-uone. Now if ever anything should happen, that I get somehow or another in trouble, or be arrested and questioned about things, how I have come to Ireland, shall I tall then, that I landed from a U-boat? For heaven seak no the man said; never tell by all means and no matter what may happen, that you were sent on this mssion, or anything about being landed from a U-boat, LO anyone An hour later the U-boat left for Helgollanu,where it had stopped two days, from where I wrote my Last letter home, and then it departed to destination, under water. Somewhere near sligo, I was after the long under Water Jourre landed ina little boat from the U-boat by an officer. On the wayto Irelanu rom Helgola the U-boat anu its crew went without a doubt through lots of dangers. Iwioesomewhere near Norway the boat and to submerge in auch a hurry to save itseif from bomb,t that it stood on its nose.. nce,bombs cracied all round it, and the electric light went out for a long tim and we had to lay still the whole day,until things had been repaired again. On its way through, it fired a good many torpeoes,and everyone it seemed to me has been a hit, because the "after-explosion" was heara every time. I prayed all the way from Helogland to Eire and I was more than glad, whe I was told to get ready to be landed in Eire. The little row-boatyin which I was brought or rowed to the shore, was overtaken Byom be- hind where I sat,by a poweriu high wave, and it turneu a mback-somerset with myself and the man who rowed it in it, anu as I cannot swim, I sank to the tocean-bottomn with my little satchel,where I had my own money init, ana which I held in my hand, very quick. when I touched groundy felt that E want able to hola my breath any longe ano that I wiil have to drown,ano I started then with all the 241 might I had in me, to kick with my feet and move my arms, and all certain by some kind of movements of my armsy T started to go upward again,an I felt then my head bumped against the overturned boat to which T hing on then with one arm, and was then able to get my had abuve water. The officer soa me then and he said, hang on to the boat, hang on, I touch ground He had the boat by a ope in front, pulling it with me hanging or t JO it vomiting sadt-water,towards the shore, when another big wave fell over us, pitching boat and the two of us,on the "sacred soil o1 Eiretalive. The officer ald I; stood there shivering, I sitill holding the handle of my lost and drawea satchel in the hand, and he told me then alter we had put the boat into the water again, that I should disappear now as quick as I can, and he rowed then out again, towaras the U-boat, and started for inland in the dark, as quick as I could, but the stones were very slippery as if they were soaped, and I fell very near every few steps to the ground into the stones, and after I had gone about 40 or 50 yards, I fell again, and dislocated and knocked out my left knee but as T had realised right away what was wrong, I managed in the exiting state I was n, to force and set my dislocated fknee- Joint" back in its proper place, and I tighea several Handezerchieis round it, and after I had layed there for about an hour wet and in the cold wind, I fiaally managed to rise, and drag myself into the nearby fields in the dark I stayed the whole day and night, and the following morning in twilight, I started to limp over wet fields, toward a "Church-toweri, visible from beyond a hili, When I came nearer to the Church,| reached a main road and as I was limping along it, I met a man on a bicyele, whom I asseu, what van time the boss would ass by, and he said it must come now any minute, and just the time I had spoken to him, the boss came round the bent. I signalled to stop,W top,which which he aid, and with it I went on to Sligo. Instayed then in the boss, and arrived in Dublin towards evening, yet wet to the skin and cold.This was on Feruary the 8th. Right after my arriva I went to a store, ard bought clothes and underwear, and new shoes ana things, as the knees of my pans were all torr, and after T had changed my pans I went to Dr Cuniha on Westland row, who was very surprised al my arrival from Germany Ihave lost now since 2.1.45 my home at Nurnberg people H have no place to sleep; they have to put up in an "AiI-helder" since, and to add to all of that T didnt only lose ever, thing I possessed at home, but lOs0 every dollar ha and I dislocated my knee, and now since I am interned I have beoome practically a helpless subject, not even abe to dress my self alone, and can only walk very little and a few minutes in the morning: and evenings,w wi the support of crutches, and on Easter Monday I fell down those stone steps in front of the building with myerutches,broke one ib,smashed up my Ear, and hurted my "rump-bone", that I wasnt able to sit for weeks, without pain in the rectum, and i all that isnt an unberable Torture, and enough to make any crazy and fell so down heared, that he rather prefers death then to live a suffering life, such as I have had since I put food on the soild o1 Eire, then I do ot know what the real meaning of Humanity is and "Christian-loven and charity After his arrival, it will be seen, he delivered 16,000 dollars to an agent at an address apparently in Dublin passed and to Stephen this money Carol was HELD. 243 Before his departure he had been in touch with GOERTZ who was to follow him a fortnight later. He says in his confession however that the man interned in Ireland as GOERTZ is not the man he knew as GOERTZ in Germany. September 27th Houseman rang up to ask whether we were repared to draft a telegram for JIC Cairo ased on the minutes of the JIC meeting on Tuesday where th future of SIME and CICB was discussed. I agreed that we would do this and submit it to the JIC Secretariat. Telegrams keep pouring in Irom Security Co-Ordination about the Corby-case Corby says that the Russians are constantly talking about worla war 3,and that they regard the SanFrancisco Conference with complete scep- ticism, that the declaration made by the Ukrainian Govt. that they were independant and the fact that they took a contrary view on some minor point to the Soviet Govt. was all a put up job. Tt is of course difficult to say how far this somewhat warlike attitude of Soviet officials is due to fear that they themselves will be attacied. idogan has wired toExternal Affairs in Canada asking them whether theyare prepared for a show-down with the Russians and if So whether they would agree to take simul taneous action with us. a1 similar approach has been made to the .S.Govt. A report from the field by an Abwehr charac- ter who was acquaintedwith the Zigzag case is interesting. He says two things of importance (1) that the sabotage carniedlout by Zigzag was the only really successful operation of the kinu that Abt.2 carried out Jues yuu THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED ir this country and SBOTION from 1943 onwards the German Govt. decided not to embark upon any Further acte of sabotage in this country as they held the vi that industry was SO dispersed in England that no effective results would be achieved. Moreover they Telt that it would be easy to effect repairs in a very short time. September 28th I had a tall with AlecKellar,Harry and Charles about the arift telegram Which JIC are sending to Mid East. We added a para. indicating that the question of finance and other details would be worked out in London. All therefore that the Devence Committee have to decide is a question of principle. The question of finance will O1 course be a difficult one. Charles apparertiiy has no objection to officers being paid oy the W.O. provided the pay is not delivered to them through our channels. II ali the pay and allowances for the stall OI SIME were to be on the Secret Service vote we should undoubtedly have a lot o1 trouble. It seems therefore almost inevitable that we must allow the Services to pay at any rate a certain wumbar of staff although in princip I should feel it was much better if they did not. The trouble is that he who pays the piper calls the tune and unless the officers are our officers body and soul they are always lia le to interierence. However 1 can see that we may have to put up with this. Akers came to see me at my request. I wanted to put him more fully into the picture. I told him the whole story of the May case I think he appreciated 24 being told everything and that he will in consequence collaborate more wholeheartealy. I had the feeling th t after his interview with May he haa begun to be somewhat sceptical Akers told me that Cockcroft would be returning early next week and that in view of the telegram received advising the inspection of all documents coming in the High Commissioner' bag the DSIR he would ike to consult with him before a final ecision was made and a plausible excuse were found for planting on May documents received from Montreal. I haa a word wit Giles Isham who is just going out as DSO Palestine. He is a pleasant person and has had a certain amount o1 experience in the Midate East. He uoes not however impress one as being a man withvery great drive. E.brought Hester to see me. Hester is taking over from him in 10 days time, but will only be staying till the enid of the year. There is no doubt that both Hester anu M.E. see eye to ( ee with us in our views about the future of RSS. I suggested that as soon as ME Left RSS I should make arrangements for him have a rank talk with Findlater Stewart He was unable to do SO where .S.visited Barnet as G.P. and Maltoy never drew breath. B-W came to see me. He had just returned from Paris. He was a little worried about Peter Hope beingaaskea to take on jobs which were perhapsdarl little outside his sphere. He said that Hope himself was worried. I told B-W that as far as I knew everything going to him was bottle-neci.e through Cussen who was extremely careful about watching this. I suggested therefore to B-W that he should talk to Cussen wul September 29th THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEL IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORD ACT 1958 o1 King-Salter aang up about the telegram to JIC Cairo. He proposed to circulate it for comments but not to say that it was drafted by us as this might cause comment. He would mane a note on the JIC file of my amendments to the minutes, but would not give them any circulation. Wren came to talk to me about Lt.J.MCNAUGHTON Wren had known Mr's. MCNAUGHTON when she was employed at Security Co-Ordinut tion. She had been evacuated from Singapore before the invasion and her husband had been taken prisoner,but had just returned to this country. He told Wren that he had something which he wished to disclose to the authoritie Briefly it was that for 14 months he had broadcast from Tokyo on a beam to America. He had been drawn into this by threats but had only acegruing to his ow account giver the names fprisoners in captivity and ta taken part in certain sketches with other Britisherb. An Australian named Major cousin had later joined the party and according to McNaughton had used the broadcasts as a means of putting over information. I told Wren tha if he would give me McNaughton's address we would send someone down to interview him. It looked to me like a mild case of collaboration. 247 October ist I had a meeting with Axers,Cockcroit,Hollis, Marriott and Rothschild, when we discussed the May case. In spite of the nstruetions which Cockcroft had given that all documents returning from Canada were to be subject to inspection by DSIR, it was thought that it could be arranged that something should be passed to May which he might transmit to the Russian agent on Oct7th. During this dis- cussion it emerged that in the documents whiich were on their way to this country in the High Commissioners bag there were 3 copies of a diagram relating to development in America which May was certainly not entitled to keep. They should have peen handed in at Montreall. First OI aI it was difficult to understand why he should want 3 copies and secondly there was the rather Sinister fact that these particular documents were not in the list submitted by May to Cockeroft before his departure We then considered the general project of high-level deception. Both Axers anu Cock- crof't thought that this proposition was not feasible particularly if the Soviet had Access to people of the type of May who would very quickly see that the documenus were being planted. In the list o1 facts about the British War Effort Lord Keynes is reported to have shown: 1. total British casualties were two and three quarters as great as those of the USA forces, aXNixxpx with losses in killed and missing 32 times as great;2. Members of the British forces contributed twice as much in man-years as did the U.S.forces,and this does not taae into account the services of 49 the Home Guard and Civil Defence; 3. 55/ Of British total labour foce was mobiliseu into the forces or into wan production by June 1944 compared with 48) o1 the U.B.; 4. The U.K. suffered from 2 to 5 times heavier deteriora- tion of capital plant and equipment in 1on- war industrie: than did the US; 5. The U.K. suffered the lost of external investments 35 times as heavy as those of the U.S.; 6. Civil ian consumption in the U.S.increased 16% during the war years while K.consump- tion imultaneously decreased 16,; 7.The British public paid 53.30 o1 their cost OI the war in taxation compared with 47.7% of the American peoplle; 8. Total British war expenditure was 50% greater than that of the US. 9. The national debt of the U.K.. grew to a total 607 greater than that of the US; and 10. British Commonwealth merchant shipping was reduced from about 40,000,000 dead-weight tons to 19,500,000 while U.S.shipping simul- taneously increased over 4 times,to 50,000 000 Lord Keynes also demonstrated to Americans facts about the British loss in housing due to the war, and proveu oy specific statistics that British national wealth as a whole had suffered a 205 decline during the ware Tommy Harris has shown me the telegrams and intelligence reports found in the archives of Gruppe West which relate to the invasion period. They contain whole chunis of Garbo and are being caretullyy examined by JOnL Gwyer. Cazer came to talk to me about the question a1 personnel lor the Far East. lie is doing what he cart about the reeruitment oi female staff. Meaxwhine he has in mind one Tiuton formerly of the Shanghai poice whom am going to see. It is possible that we might 249 send Walker although I do not know whether he would be willing to go. What we really want is someone to take Courtney's place. we shall probably be formed to abandor the DEO position in Ceylon owing I think to some extent to the machinacions of Russell. The Governor has apparenty expressed strong views that he things a security officer woulld be an embarrassment, particurariy in the evert of Ceyion getting dominior status. Cussen,Hoiig, Mariiiott and I discusseu the arrangements for the party on oct.7th. We agreed that inless very exceptional cireum- Stanees arose no action should be tarcen, We should merely observe proceedings. We dis- cussed all the contingercies thut might arise. At the moment no deeision has been reached on a high Level as to whether the three Governments with lace up to the con sequences of arrests here and in Canada. Robertson and Machenzie King areon their way over anu will talk the matter over with Bevin and Truman does not wish to comit himself till he has Seen Byrng who will be returning from the conference here at the end of the week. October 2nd Harry Allan told me that the W.0. were jibbint at our draft telegram for the Delence Committ- ee Middle East on the future 01 SIME. They have got some complex about the auministra- tion of military personnel coming under MI5. This ol course nas 1o substance anu we are going to toy alu write them oII. T hau a tal with lanRoger who is leaving in the course of che next two days for Hong Kong. He should ao well anu seems very keen. 750 Hollis showed me a dralt telegram which he wishes the F.0. to send to Halilax an Mac- Donald dispelling eentain douots which seem to exist in the minds at any rate of the Canadians that a show--down with the Russians is likely to cause seriou aamnage to political relations. I 2 sune that this is a mistaken notion antu that laiuure to strike and to strike hara car only cause a loss of prestige in Russian eyes and eau to iurthg excesses and misunderstandings. Rothschild came to tal about hisiuture. He is going to Paris and possibly also to Germany to clear up a lew matters, LO Sell his cars, after which he will complete the B.1C historyand fix up the museum. He will then be available to go into scien- tific matters generally. He wowu like however to get his position in this respeet reorganised. I had a talk with Tilton who is a prospective candidate in the far East. He started in the Portsmouth Police and joined the Shanghai police a good many years before the war. He served with them unti just before the Jap invasiion when he bft for India. He has since been working as an Air Force officer on A Hir Force Security matters. He is not yet demobilised but should be out in a new weeks time. He would be quite pleaseu to take a job for us but would lie to feel that there was some security of tenure. He is tough but quite likeable. He has obviously had very valuaplle experience. I should. say that he was more a man o1 action, a5 an ADSO in a place like Rangoon, than a person suitable for static worIO in CICB. 2I Marriott showed me an intercept saying that Engelbert Broder, an atomic physicist in Cambridge who is known to be a Party member, is in touch with MAY whom he is anxious to dee. I spoke to Howe and told him that as there seemed practically no prospect of any action on Oct.7ti it was really not worth my while coming down to see him. He told me that he had said nothing to Canning and would not do So in themeantime. I assured him that as soon as things boiled up I would come down and give him the whoe story and he seem ed quite satisfiea wiith this arrangement. October 5ra Vesey showed me certain Germar documents which had been sent over by NID for our inspection. They relate to an pinz Marine network set up Before the war which will obviously be worth careful study. Cussen talked to me about the case Of Skardon and Spooner. Hill as put forward a variety of reasons indicating that the proposal would not be acceptable to the W.0. attended the meeting called by Sir William Palmer of BOT to discuss the extention of the scheme for bringing German scientists and technicians to this country which wiilll involve the bringing to this country of a further batch O1 Germans. The idea is to put them into industry which wilt not neces- sarily be armament industry. It was stabed for example that the Germans had a hew pro cess for making tissue paper and the services of several technicians would be of value to to British industry. Newsam and I both gave our customary orations on this subject which has come up so often before that we know it almost by heart. I told the meeting exactly what had happened before the war both as regards machine tools and people o1 the type of LACHMANN. We were anxious thereforeto prevent a repetition and to avoid being laced in a position where we could ao no but look on at a form of legalised espionase against which we were powerless to aet. I said that I was HOL worried apout the next two or three years and if thererorewe could get the benefit O1 the brains ol these people and then get rid of them I show be perrectly satisfied. Newsam however made it clear to the meeting that ii Germans were brought nere, married British suojeets and had British born children, an did not in any way misbehave themselves,it woulabe virtually impossible for the Home Secretary to turn them out. Some people at the meeting talkea rather aerially about there being no war for the next 25 years. I said I thought this was a very bold assumption and that in so far as Germany was concerned, I should not be surprised to seerher virtually in control of her own country within 2-3 years or at proprotion of it still within the Russian orbit. There would be nothing to prevent Germans from going back to their homes, whethe they were in the British,French,American ar Russian zones. The meeting was left in the air and we were asised once more to supmnit a memo on the security aspects. The D.6. has collected various books which he found at the Gestapo headquarters in Berlin. One refers to the British Secret service and is based on interrogations of Stevens and Best 1s3 I am honoured by being mentioned as a co-worki in MI5 and Curry is referred to as dealing with NSDAP matters. Cookie is also of course in the limelight. I only saw Stevers once, just before the war. Generally speaking German knowledge about our intelligence ser- vices at the date of publication, some time in 1940, or 1941 is extremely sketchy. Opinion seems to be divided as to whether 755 is under Scotland Yard or the W.0. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENTRETAINED DOCUMENT INDERARTMENT INDER SECTION 3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. Jusly 2010 october 4th. Alley came to tallk to me about the allocation of funds for Polish security.. t is T think haraly in our interests to support the exist ing organisation which looks after the secur ity of Polish Forces here and to some extent those abroad. White it is true that nothing we have seen from this organisation is uikel, to have an anti-Lublin bias, it neverthiless has a certain value if checked against other records. II there is no Polish security here and no responsible boay to which we can go we shall obviously be at a consideraole disadvantage. The Treasury have frozen Poli funds and are not prepared to release them without FO approval. It seen tOW that we shall probably have to go to orme-Sargent. Hunter and Burt came to te 1 me that they have got a room at the pub which overlooks the rendezvous. The matter has beer arrange on a convenient pretext. THIS I COPY ORIGINAL RIGINALDOCUMENTRETA RETAINED IDEPARTMENT UNDER DER SECTION 3(4 OF TTHE RECORDS ACT 1958. Jul Q010 I talked to Clayton and Ryae,Cayzer and Noble about S-Africa. There is a new Commissione of Police neaned Palmer who a ears to be a satisfactory person. Baston has retired and Coetzee has died. The S.0 I. through whom we sent our cypher communications is pacicing up and it seems desirablle that il the police have now been purged and the Commiss- ioner is a reliable person thut we shoulu be in arrect cypher communication with him in the future. As regards the results ol the interrogation of Germans concerned with bouth African affairs, these should 60 through the High Commissioner to Smuts. It seemed eminer -ly desirable to us all that Michael Ryde should pay a visit to S-Africa, taiing this z38 information with him. He could hand it over to Forsy th or to Smuts himself and then discuss with them what our future relations should be. ayde is quite prepared to go, provided the DG will give his sanctiol. came to see me on the introduc- tion of C. He is apparently in charge oi the security of Most Secret sources and is scertaining on CIs behalf how the material handed in the various offices. I told him more or less how it was hanuied here and introauced him to Nople,Kellar etc. In order that he could get further details. He came in to see me before Leaving and expressed himself as highly satisfied that ade quate security precautions were maintained. October 5th The case oi the renegade WOLKOFF in the Soviet Emnbassy in Istanbul has broken down. In accordance with instructions he was telephoned to at the Soviet consulate. The telephone was answered by the Russian Consul General on the first occasion and on the second by a man speaking English claiming O be WOLKOFF but clearly was not. Finallly ontact was maae with the Russian telephone operator who said that WOLKOFF had lei t for Moscow. Subsequent erquiries showed that he and his wife left by plane lor Russia on Sept.26th. WOLKOFF hau ovvered to give a very consideraole amount OI information but much O1 itappeared to be in Moscow. WOLKOFF estimated that there were 9 agents in London 0 one of whom was said to be the "head O1 a seetion of the Britisn counter-espionage service. WOLIOFF said he could also produce a list of the known regular NKGB agents of the military and civil intelligence anu of the sub-agents they employed. In the list are y5 noted about 250 known Or less weld knovn agents of the above-mentioneu services wich details. so..available were copies of correspondence between Lonuon and General His. of SOE in MoscOW. WOLKOFF maintained that the Soviet authorities hau been able to read all cypher messages between our F.O. anu Embassy in Moscow and in audition to Hillis messages The Russians haa accor ing to WOLKOFF two agents inside the F.0. and 7 inside the British Intelligence Service Interrogation of Pretorius is interesting as he joined knew the quite Abwher a Lot in about Hamourg our as D.A.S. eary He as 1935 Hementioneu a young German stuuent called ALLNOCH who sometime between 1938 and the outbrea of war supplied re orto on inaus- tries in Englanu while atteruing the London Polytechnic. He wrote to a cover aauress in Hamburg. Since the war ALLNOCH has been in the German Army. In talking ol UNLAND and his attempts to 6et money Pretorius said he was the only Ole who thought that payments could easily be arralseu via a third country. In ctual lact accoruing to Pretorius this was hard, and Hamburg hau no such facilities or connections in: the USA. THISIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Fly 2010 Speaking of TATE he said that the Germans did con- sider giving him a higher award than the EKJ and 2 but whereas Hamburg maintained that he deserved it i only that he had performed his task So ong,Berlin hela that his reports were not of sufficient value to 2877 warrantit. The genuineness of the traffic was often doubted and it was suspected that the Englisn Abwehr had taken it over but the answers to personal questions made it quite clear that it was stil.l with whom the Germans were dealing. Pretorius says that the outbreak of war in Sept.1939 found I Ast Hamourg very badly supplied With agents abroad. They had no W/T or b/W SO that censorship alone put a stop to their report: /W was not used until late in 1940. In July 1940 a conference was called in Kiel at which Canaris and other leaaing Abwehr personalities were present incluuing Pieckan brock, Wichmann, Rantzau @ Ritter, ana Sensbueg. Canaris gave the order at this conference that all possible efforts were to be made to recruit and train agents to bet dropped by parachute on England and that such missions would be known as Unternehming So far as Pretorius remembers some 6-8 agent were despatched including TATE who proved a great success as a W/T operator as communi- catio with him was maintained right up to 1945. Paul Richter who was sent hare early in 1942 was a German Czech who wishea to gai] fuul German natio ality by unuertaking a mission. He was first to come by boat from Holland and "land in the Wash. The scheme as subsequently rejected by Berlin and he was droppeu by parachute with oi course the resultswhich we know. October 6th We had a further conference, Marriot,Burt Hunter ana I, on the staging OI the operatio) for tomorrow. One man was to see MAY in at the Totteham Court Hoad end, Hunter and Burt established in the pub with one watcher, and a car with one watcher would be stationed down Montagu St. near a call-box with which which we arranged communication. Tommy Harris would drive through the area ir a car a few minutes before 7 and a few minutes before 8 in order to cover the possibility that the meeting had been arranged according to Summer Time. At Burt's request I went down to see Howe. I explained to him the whole of the proposed operation. Before my arrival he had rather been suggesting to Bur't that S. ought to be called in. Having heard my account however he quite spontareously said that he did not think that the police should play any part at this stage. THISISACOPY THIS COPY ORIGINAL DOOLIMENT RETAINE Dick returned late this eyeningr BTMENT NDER SECTIO OF THE PUBLIC RECORD October Zth ZthcT 1958 Juuu 010 At 4.15 MAY dialled TIM and synchronised his watch. We thought this was rather suS- picious. In fact however nothing at all happened ana as far as we could possibly ascertain there was no attempt on the part of the Russians to cover the meeting. We called the result to Canada. October 8th I attended a meeting at the D 0. in Sir John Stephensonts room. Neville Buter, Bromley, Hollis,Clutterbuck and Norman Hobertson of Canadian External Affairs were present. We explained what had happened on Sunday and said that in order to make further plans we really wanted to have a high-level decision as to what action shoud be taken. MeKenzie King had had a short tallk with Attlee but no conclusion had been reached. Norman Hobertson thought that the whole matter was somewhat 231 bound up with the policy ol ourseives,Canaat and hmerica in regard to questiorsot sharing atomic research with the Russians. It would made it a political dificulty to do this both in the USA and Canada il there ware 11O publicity given to the fact that the Russians had been operating such an extensive spy net-work. If it were decided not to give the information to the Russians I think that bpye and large our viewpoint was accepted that it could only be regarded as a sign of weakness if we failed to act. Norman Robertso wondered whether the information about the atomic bomb could be given to the Russians on some sort of understand that there should be greuter freedomfor British subjects to move about Russia and in the Russian zone.. In other words that light and air should be let into the country. I said tha t while I thought the Russians might agree to these conditions they would never carry them out in practice. I was almost lunaamental to the continued existence of the USSR in its present form that light and air should not get into the country. Ii the people realised that they had been hoaxed about conditions in western Europe in the last 28 years they might see fit to overthrow their present ulers, who were aoubtless very conscious this Fact. What we were realy up against was the one-party state, which doulu never alforu to tell its own people the truth and thereby constituted one of the greatest meanaces to world security. It was agreed that the FO should put up a note to the Foreign Secretary embouying Norman Robertson' views and attempt to get a ecision from Mckenzie King and also from Truman. We stressed the urgency of the atter as other- wise we felt the case would simply go cold. y6o seemed to think that things were working on the right lines but pointed out the urgency of getting more personnel For CICB. Owing to the sudden cessation of hostilities in the Far East it had been necessary to send out officers to various areas which had been occupied by. the Japs. This meant that headquarters were very short. handed. It seems that the Army are rather looking to us to supply bodies and to pay for them. This would be all right if we had the commitment and the moneys At present we have neither. It may moreover be desirable to have the officers paid by the Services in order to keep down the S.S. vote. ick,Tereaa,Victor,Michtell and I discussed the Jack case We all agree that it should go on if possible and a new approach to the matter of pay is to be made. October th THISISACOPY ORIGINAL 3(4) IN DEPARTMENT OF THE DOCUMENT PUBLIC UINDER RETAINEQ. RECORDS SECTIG ACT 1958 uuu 20l0 I had a further talk with Cayzer about per- sonnel for the Far East. I think he has per- suaded Tilton to take up the job. I subse- quently talked about thewhole question with Charles and Horrocks. Horrocks now says that he has no female staff at all available, having previously said he had a long list. Charles naturally wants to know who is going to pay. I think I shall have to go and see 271 Brig.Way and try to get something settled. Meanwhile we are to have a meeting on the whole question on Fridas with the DG. Malcolm Cumming came to talk to me about the censorship of telegrams sent by cable com panies and wonuered how far this was Covered. I saia that we haa previously covered it He then asked me about the housir ou B.6. He thought it undesirable that they should be in a government building. IT would be preferaole if they were alongside a firi of solicitors. I agreed that it would be unfortunate ifit could be established that our watchers were connected with the Govt. Sclater came to tell me about a conference with the Wireless Telegraphy Board which was discussing the possibility of giving private firms facilities for comunication o1 wire- Less within this country. We have been ased to uut up a paper on the security aspects Ol the subject. Jugoslays are still running a transmitter which has been taken over by the Embassy. This IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED INDEPARIMEN UNDER SECTION (4 OF THE PUBLIC.RECORDS ACT 1958 Julu 2o1o O THE ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DERARTMENT UNDER SEOTION 3(41 OF THE PUSI IC FECOROS ACT 1958. July 2oo 263 THE ORIGINAL DOOUMENI RETAINED IT DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1968. July 2010 26 THIS IS A COPY ORIGINALDOOUMENTR RETAINED IN DEPAFTNIENT UNDER SECTION FTHE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. July 2010 October LIth We have arranged for a li. of unuesirable diplomats to be circulated to Passport Con- trol. Embassies abroad will be instructed not to grant diplomatic visas ithout prior relererce to PCO. I had a talk with Veeey and Cussen about renegades from the Far East. We deciaeu to put forward a suggestion that slips should be issued to all returning British subjects telling them that it they wished to give any information relating to British renegades they should communicate with Room 05. Eyres Monsell who is ir. charge of IB in Ita came to see me. He spore in glowing terms of Ffoulkes who was the lynchpin of his organisation. I ased him about the documents of SIMand OVRA. He said he was conscious of the importance or these documents ana would be only too ready to assist us in any way he possibly could in having them examined. Jnfortunately he had no personnel that he ould spare, but he understood that the re were certain people examinig documents for other lepts. such as PID who might be OI some use. 243 Alley came to talk to me about che Poles ana the paymert O1 their Security section. The D.G. has Seen Warner who has agreed to put forward a recommendation to the Treasury that a grant should be made until the end of the ear. We may thereaiter keep on two or three of the Poles on an agency basis. October s 12th IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED INDEPARTMENT UNDERS SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Jmuu 9O(. Miss Glass would be prepared to go to Italy provided this does rot interrare with a Job which she has been offered by Stoplord. The DG held a meeting about the Far East ard the supply O1 staff. It was deciueu to take the matter up with Genera Penney. The DG. felt that the WO oughe to pay at any rateduring the military period. Albert came in to say goodbye. He has mona or less completed his task i.. BID/UK although there are still Far Eastern renegades coming hrough and a certain rumber From Germany. I saw Swann for a moment He had a talk with a number of personalities in Ast Hambure. The was no doubt that they were running a racket. The operators had coue to the conclusion that some of the agents were contro-e on purely technical grounds. They reported this fact but were told to keep quiet, otherwise they would get the whole party sert to the Russian front. bL Hollis came to talk about the Russian section. I said that I thought tha t Soviet citizens irrespective O1 whether they were employed in the Embassy or not shoula beuealt with by one section. He is going to have a talk with Joe Spencer. Melland came to talk about his future. He is going down lor about 6 weeks to fix up a liaiison with the French as the Contro Commission think that the French zone is likely to be enlarged in the near future at the expense of the Americans. He will then be more on less free ir there was a job going for him. I told him that we would let him know as soon as we could. Caroe said that that his job in the renegade section would shortly be coming to an ena. He would be quite pleased to do anything For the office For the following year or 18 months but did not want a permanent job. Craufurd spore to me about the case of KUHNEMANN. Efforts are being made to get this man back to this country and someone in the HO seams to be an int erested party. I told Craulurd to find out about this man from the ControiCommissio anu to put me up a note on the case From our liles. I would ther tali to Newsam. I saw Joh. Gwyer. I told him that Rantzau would have to De interrogated in the first instance in Germany alter which we might get him over here for aweek. As regards the documents from the School of Tank Technology he thought that the Swiss inform- ant was probably mythical and that the talk plan from Arnstrongs was prooably of a tpe which they had advertised abroad. There 17 are apparentiy a number of documents which concern the Americans. John things that Cimp erman perhaps could 6O down ana Look at these I told him to speak to TAR,and if he saw no objection to go ahead. Kellar is very worried about Ispa and Istria the handling of which has now been given to Hastings who knows nothing about the back- round. I said I woulu go with him and dis- cuss the ma'tter with C. Dick and I went to see Findater this aiter- noon at his request as he seemed to think tha we were not altogether satisiied with yesterday's meeting. I told Finalater that we had been somewhat handicapped by the unreality of the situation. Were the management and personnel thoroughly efficient from top to bottom there might be some mean- ing in Vivian's words. This however in our view was not the case. Things were far from satisfactory and we did not see any very marked indication that they were likely to improve. On the other hand we fully realised that that side of the question aid not come within his terms of reference anu that he was prely there allocate responsioilitie mand functions as between one office anu the other. We said tha what worrieu us most was the prospect of a huge Section V and IX being built up O1 an extended charter to cover British interests as distinct From the security o1 British terriroty and the enormous wastage OI personnel anu Caruing tha would be bound to ensue. This quite apart from the fact that if the same suouect was dealt with in two places on the basis OI a territorial division we shoula,ir spite of the excellent personal relations that existed, eventually get back to a state of We THISISACOPY THIS COPY DO(c 249 ORIGINAL DOUUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION affairs which migh wellHbe WorseEtaans our experiences FAthpowgill regime. We finally 8ot round to the suggestion by Dick that the extended charger to cover British interests abroaa should mone logically come within the terms of relerence ol Section I o1 SIS. We gathered that somewhat similar views had in fact been expressed by in his conversations with Finalater. Unfortun- ately bur conversation haa to be interrupted owing to another visitor and the matter wa left at that. Dick however seened relieveu at having got a good aeal off his chest ana I tltink that Finulater was impresseuby the arguments. T dined with B-W. I asked him what he was doing and whether he would agree to return to the fold. I had in mind tha C he might perhaps do something towards getting Soviet counter-espionage on its feet. He said that while this would interest hin very much he was rather anxious for the remainder of his service to go abroad. He did not want to go to the Far East and he thought it would probably be bad for his health. He would however be quite prepared to go to SIME if there was a suitable job for him. His view of SIS functions is that they should drop all the small stuff anu concentrate on arefully-prepared operations oi the kind praetigsed on ourselves by the Russians in the King case. Other material was largely uncheckable arc therefore worthless. October 13th Harry and I werit to see Perney who is here from SEAC on business. We uiscussed the position of CICB and the provision. of staff. Penney said that he had aiter some hesitation sanctioned the establishment and that the 249 2 9 Army would pay. He thought however that we ought to get our Oil people in since arter the military period was over they woulu gou over to quasicivilian status. Things ware moving more rapidly in that direction than we might imagire. O THIS 9 COPY ORIGINAL DUCUMENI RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 JuL DOO Scott came to talk to me about a reduction in his pay on his demobilisation. I said I would have a talk with Charles Butler,but there were many difficulties with which he had to contend owing to some people receiving pay from civilian Sources and others from military. Kellar and I went to sea C. about the alitim culties with Hastings wao is nOW the ithority on ISOATS. Some difficulty arose over the Admiralty whose representative in the Mid East haud CO be initiated. C. clearly appreciated the position and will speak to Hastings. Octoper 15th There is a question down in the House lor Thursday using thatthe name cionulity and sentence OI alt convicteu sples should be given. The only one that presents any aifficuity is the case of MENEZES. On 210 looking the matter up in this diary I find that the reasons for ithholding the information at the time are no longer valid. I had a long discussion with Curry about the difliculties tha t we have had with SIS and Finulater. He seems to think mysolution is possible, namely that the caraing and collation shoulu be cone by us and that Sectid V and IX shoula sit in close proximity to ourseives ana work on the basis OI our files for the purpose oi stimulating their own agencies abroad For this purpose they would remain responsible to C. The DG asked me down to speak to the new DMI,d Guingand. He had the office explained to him in oriaf but I am going over to have a talk with him at his request. I saw Sir John Stephenson about Ryde going to S.Africa to hand over the van RENSBUR g docu- ments and to fix up our liaison with the S.African Pollice. Baston has retired, Coetzee is dead and the new commissioner, Palmer, is sad to be a good fellow. Stephenson agreed in principle but asked us to draft him a wire for the High Commissioner in order that we might get his comments. Briscoe is worried about the circulation by DIB of some of our manuals on secret ink eto. They have apparently roneo'd oneol these and circulite it all over Inuia. I tola him LO peepare me a hetter lor Dixon who might get Finney to made some quiet enquiries. The matter is aso being Daten up quletly by IPI. 271 Cyril Mills came in to sa gooubye. Holiis brought me in a telegram From Canaua which seems to imply that at least one of the aveats involved in the case over there nas had something in the nature of a warning. Kie Kelar has seen Paget about initiating ntaval representatives in Mid East into ISOATS. He took the opportunity o1 telling Raget about the telegram about the Future on. SIME thae nad been aduresseu Dy the JIU LO the Detence Committee. Paget said that ne had always understood that SIME was under MIS. When told that this was not the case,he said- would certainly support any sugsestior that it should in future De controued by us. October 16th We received from Findlater a copy ol his basic recommendations which he wishes to discuss with C. ald the DG before putting in his final report. These are as follows: 1. MI5 exists for the purpose of the deience of the real anu for no other. 2. The Miristel responsible for it as a service should be the Ministeroi Deterce or i1 there is 1o Minister oi Defence,the P M. as Chairman OI the CID. Only major questions would go to him ard go through the chanrells O1 the Chleis of State with the permarent heaas Of such civil ollices as are concemnea. The Teuuiremente delence mae it essential LO maintain a registry in MI5 of the present range ana character subject Lo periodical weeding o1 obsolete matter ana a constant policy O1 excluding the trivial. (This exChuues any question of returning the index on its sub- versive side to Scotland Yard) 4. MI5 should not De amalgamatea with SIS either wholly or ir part. 5. MI5 is responsible r1 for the collation and appreciatdor 1or the purposes of Govt. O1 inteliig ertce bearing upon espionage or subversive movements aimed at the Empire. Similar attempt aimed euse- where which have a bearing or our foreign policy or aefence plans are the concern of SIS. It should be an obligation upon each dept. to pass on without delay to the other whatever intellig ence comes its way bearing upon the others responsibility. Even ut the stage when intelligence amounts to no more than suspicion, the information should be passed on at a level that will be determined by the circustances to the res- peetive dept.s Each side should give access to any accredited officers from the other to records relevant to the information passed. 6. Each dept. should keep the other informed by periodical summaries or oral contacts of the general trend in its own part of the field but there should be no duplication of general reports ert. on the communist movement. In view of the greater importance of ius possible impact on the Empire than its effect elsewhere,t the primary responsibkaity for such a study should be on MI5 but in effect it should be a composite production,each side being responsible for the facts and the inrerences drawm from them in its ow part OI the bieli. 7. M.I. 5 should continue to pe responsioie For obtaining Counter-Intelligence in the Empine by the mears useu in the pas.t. Acquisition ol intelligerce including C.I. by Seeret means elsewhere mese Remain a matuer for SIS. 8. Nevertheless it shoud be open to MI5 subject to the agreement of the F.O.ato maintain overt contact in special eases eg. allied Govts.like Belgium,w with the Security Services of foreign countries.9. MI5 to be reresented on Sigint to ensure that the 273 essential needs oi the lept.receive due consideration, I feel that there is a slight uiscrepancy between paras.s and 6. 5 Seems to indicate that all the collation and appreciation should be done by ourselves ana 6 that it should be a joint compilation,each dept.being responsible for its own lielu. had a talk with Horrocks about the prospect of carrying all the caruing lor Sections V and IX and B. and F.Divisions and having one set of reconds. He seemed to think that this was periectly possible. I Saw Burt and told him that we seemed to have reached an impasse about the promotion of his officers but that I was still trying to think OI a way out. I had a talk with Clayton who is getting out a charter for DSO Burma. I said that the strength of DSO Burma as an aaviser to the Got -ernment lay in the fact that he would have the resources of CICB at his back. I told Clayton to get Banford's views on the charter as he had beer. acting as liaison between urselves and the Burmaoificeya and would be able to express a view as to how our proposal would be receiveu. I gather that the Burma Office have little views On their own but would accept those of the Governor probably without demur. I saw Turnell-Barratt who is going to Trini dad and Maconald who is going as ADSO Jamaic: I gave them as much information as I could about the FBI and other American nteligence organisations with which they might come into contact. DUL THIS ISA COPY Doo 2 7+ ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS Charles has got outAaniestablishment lor B.6 giving them 12 watcners a beuver Takes Of pa, and with certain pension rights. Harry Hunter seemed pieasea. I have sugsestea that we should ser these conditions out to the ontrol Commission om oruer that we might get an option on any like FSP who might be Betting demobilised. Chariles asked me if I could fit in Nigel Watson who is returning to the lola. I fina this rather difiicut, anu have sugseste that Alley might perhaps have something For him to do. I haa a tali with He is by and large in agreement withoour views about the carding and coll tion of recoras. He tel me that there may be certain opposition to our carrying overt liaison abroad, not in principle, but conditional on our represen- tative coming loosely under the local representative of SIS. I doubt whether this will be satisfactory. october 17th A German namea Horst KOPKOW who worked For Section 3 of the Gestapo, had an extremely varied career investigating sabotage ana running D.A.S. He was actuuilly emplojea Oil the enquiry alter the bomb oucrage in July 1944. His report shows that the running of D.A.s on the eastern front was a very considerable affair and that Russian pene- tration in Germany ana the Low countries was widespread, anu on a high level. KOPKOW had a lot to do with the foterappelle which penetrated a large number of departments including the EEKW. KOPKOW said there was hardly any government Office without some 270 employee ready to copperate ana give informa- tion. About 100 arrests were made almost exclusively in Berlin. The depth oi Soviet Intelligence Service iniiltration could be seen in the case of an administrative inspec- tor of the Air Ministry who gave away to an intermediary tue most secret documents of which only a New copies existed concerning he strengt th of the uftwaffe and the rising production output figures. Ever in the OKW and the OKM there were Officers to be found who were ready to cooperate out of iuealistic motives. KOPKOW also had a lot to say about the case of ROHDE-SCHVIARZ. RHODE was apparent -ly genuine but his communications were intercepted anu the Germans took over the transmitter. This case was known to us as Phoney I, and we were thoroughly aware that it was phoney. A JIC report daued 13th October deals with the maintenance of Russian troops in Central Furope. Certain recent telegrams seem to indicate that Russian troops are to be moved From one country to another not for reasons of security or derence but in order to ease the problems of supplying these troops. It S known that the Russian military supply system is very rudimentary and that ever since they occupied central Eupope their armies have been living on the occupied countries. As these countriesrare gradually being reduced to famine conditions the Soviet Govti may ultimately be forced to witharaw their troops, uness they wish to see their discipline break down to a dangerous extent. If the Soviet Govt. are really faced with the prospect of this dilemma, it might explain their present truculent attitude on political matters. They would feel that time was working against them anu that they 7 must therefore urye to extract here anlu now as many politica.l Denelits as possiple Irom their military occupation O1 central Europe, whille they are stidl at the peak OT their strength and before they get involved in the troubles oi une coming willter. October 17th I saw Jo Archer ana Kellar. The Air Force are sending out some .B.Security stali to the Mid East ald want them to have some sort of training here. Archer is keen that they should know as much about this office as possible and realise the resources on which they can raw. Kellar is a little app. -hensive, as SIME have had a certain amount Ol trouble with the separatist telcencies O1 the Air Force. These however apply mainl, to the Provost Marshalts staii, whereas Archerts men ane going out from the security division o1 the Air Ministry. Kellar thinks that they ought to spenu a bit time with SIME or ac least see We (o not want to set the impression that we are building up a kina of opposition force. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Jury 2o 277 THAS 16 A COPY ORIGINAL DOCLAMET RETAINED IIN DEPARTMENT UNDDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE ROBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 pot B-W came in to talk to me about HOWs. In any case a member O1 the CP communicating to some OP headquarter: abroad is a matter For F Division. Equay inward correspondence would be an .matter. I explained that we were responsible to the Home Secretary for HOWS and that in peace time there had to be very strong reasons fo! imposing them. We wererallowed to put on fishing HOWS f'or inteiligence purposes. He said that he woula have lt the namas and adaresses Care-uly vetteu ana let us know te full reasons in each case. He you. then discuss the matter with me again. B-W is apparently operi to a1- oilenb ala I have suggesteu to him that he might possibi, like to go as DSO Syria. He woura T think like tU to this provided it uiu not impiy any drop in rank. This may OI course be difficult October 18th I saw the Dg with Roger about the Corby casi It seemed to us that things were rot gettim on, and that we were hung up for a high-lev 7%6 decision. The D.G. uiu not wish to see the PM himsei but suggested that we shoua talk the matter over with C. with a view tohis going to the PM. a laterdagreeus DO see. hin Briuges and the PM. He will take Rorer along. He talked to me about our representation or Sigint. He aoubteu whether we should get much out of it. I said that I did not really know what matters were discussed there out that our real requirements were to know what services were being monitored,what were broken and whetherthey contained any- thing of interest to us. He said that this could be met by our appointing a liaison officer with GC &c CS. This wouldcertainly be aesirable but whether we should also be represented on Sigint I am not quite sure. What we want to ensure is that we should get naterial from central sources as a matter of right and not by courtesy. Martin Forrest came to teil me there had been a bit of bother about the deportation of 020 characters to S.America including Helmuth. We had notified the F.o. but they had forgotten to inform the Ambassauor who was extremely annoyed to Iinu these people were already on the high seas. Section V also compiained that they had not been informed. In lact they had been told in our usual weekly circular which they hau received and initialled. It was in lact suggested that these characters should be picked off the boat and dumped. I said that unless they were going to be sent back here I did not think the H.0. would be concerned. We should however be concerned il they were to be dumped in Trinidad, and as far as I could see there would be no powers to hold them. F.o.will I think have to get out Ol their own mess. 2791 Waring came to talk to me about visits of aliens to factories. The present procedure is that names have to be submitted to us through the Ministry O1 supply lor vetting. NID were apparently concerned about visits from Russians. I said that I thought that it would probably be difficult to resist at any rate for very long the right of factories carrying out Secret contracts to receive visitors without getting Govt.permission. I did think however that arrangements could be made through D.Branch officers by which we could be informed direct by the factory when a visitor was expected. It would be of particular interest to us to know first of all what official requests haa been made by Govts. for information in cases where this information had been refused. The D.Branches could then warn factory managers ana let us know if anyboay was making enquiries or dis- playing knowledge to which theywere not Officially entitled. It would also be of value to us to know what Russian visitors wer particularly interested in, whether they had information about the existence OI cer- tain types OI armament which were still on the secret list. It might ever be possible on occasions for D.Branch ollicers to accompany them roud the lactories. I have always been anxious that Brauich work should go further than ordinary routine matters, and be of mome assistance than they were in pre-war years to B.Branch. Dick,Hollis,Curry and I studied Finaaters 9 points. It became increasingly apparent to us how eificult it was to disentangle the functions of ourselves ana SIS ithout causing endless duplication. Curry is going to make an attempt at a paper which we will table before the DG Findlater and C at their nso meeting next Tuesuas: I had an houris talk wich the DMI which was very frienaly and Satisactory. I gave him as wide a picture as E could OI what we had beer doing during the war on alll fronts. He was quite interested. october 19th I saw Tennyson of SIS with Briscoe. The former is going out to the Far East in an attempt to obtain any informatior that may be available relating to secret ink eto. or other devices used py the Japs. I dis- suaded him from going via Washingt as I thought he was more likely to get out Lo Japan through CICB anu that i1 he could make contact on his own Level wit other enthusiasts there would De more Chance ol his getting what he wanted. I am giving him a letter to Dixon. I lunched with Kim who expressed regret that at the first meeting ith EIS. our charter had been confined to the British Empire and that a discussion of any wider charter was therefore ruled out. I askea him Pre cisely what he meant by this. He said total amalgamation, He evidentiy aid no envisage the possibility O1 our taking over Sections V and IX. I said that in my view the worst feature was that no single body was responsible for Cr and subversive move- ments and that the more one examined the problem the more difficult did it become to devise any scheme which would avoid uupli cation. Under the present arrangements it seemed to me tha't SIS did their on planning and that we did oursy and that as a result of this we both had to file and eard. If we 2&( could only get a common set of files and caras a great deal would have been achieved, provided we were housed in the same building. He agreed with this and thought that a comon set of files was a feasible propo- sition and should be handed over to an expert like Horrocks to work out the necessar machinery. He Said that he would try and see if anything could be done in this irection. I talked to Hunter about his new establish- ment. He seemed quite satisliea with the terms I tola him that I thought he might well have to increase the number ol his watchers and that I would see what we could ao about getting suitable personnel From the Army. Hughes came in to tell me apout Your Jugoslav who came overhere with the Jugoslav deregatio to the Foreign Miristers Conference,ane remained here in order to run transmitters whichare operating in the Jugoslav Legation. I asked Hughes to find out whether this was authorised and whether any attempt was being made to monitor and break the communications. got M.E. to come in and aisauss with me the desirability OI our having representa- tion on Sigint. C. in conversation on the previous day had suggested that represen- tation on that level was not necessary and that our requirements would be better met by having a liaison Officer with G.C.&c C.S. I felt that we should undoubtedly have a SH n the management and allocation of Y.sources. therwise our interests might not be covered. M.E. entirely agreed that this was necessary. 16v Col.Gore of the W.0. came over to see me at the request of M.M.I. D.M.I. hau hau a visit from Gen.Seibert,USFET. Seibert wanted someone to go out anu discuss Russian problems in the American 2one. DMI thought that possibly someone From our dept. should accompany the I.Ollicer. I said that I thought that seibert would get more help in tais matter from the British zone than From elsewhere but the ii DMI specially wanted someone tO go we could perhaps arrangeit. It qepenueu on exactly what Seibertis problem was. We are rot very keen to go too aeeply into Russian affairs with G.2. On the other hand we should like to obtain as much informatior as possible about what the Russians are doing in the American 2one if this is rot already reaching usthrough the British zone. october 22nd I saw the Du and showed him oururaft reply to Findlater': 9 points. He is senuing them over today. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) ACT 1958 OF THE JuLu PUBLIC RECORDS 010 783 THISIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 JMuu Qo1o Burt is just back from Brussels having brought over Bailiie-Stewart. He menuioneu the case of some Arabs who have been languish -ing in a Belgian jail lor some time and Ware beginning to feel the cold. They are thin mainly Syrians who ware operating In conjunction wich the G.I.S. Kellar has been trying for some time to bet the C.0. to make a uecision to send them to the Seychelles,possibly with the Muilti, if the French can be persuauea to Let him 60. At the 12 ofclock meeting touay John Gwyer mentioned that he haa two cases o1 some interest which he had not yet clearea up. One related to an agent krown as WELLINGTON who is said to have been operating on behalf of Einz Vi.Bremen from 1941-44. This information was of a very indifferent kind. The other is ALLNOCH whom he thins to be identical with LLANLOCH. Hughes said that the Jugoslav transmitter had been authorised by the F.O. T have sed Hughes to find out ifthey are being monitored. Howara of RSS rang up to say that he thought it was desirable to revive the RSIC. Various problems were coming up which could be suitably airea before that committee. I Said that we had been thinking on rather similar lines but that I would oe glad to have a rote from him giving the various matters which hau given rise to his sugses- tiOn. I have aStea Hughes Lo linu out From the BB( what broadcasts ware made From the 31st May to 6th June 1944 since it appears From a PAW report by one REILE that the late oi th The invasion Germans was hau given capturau away Dy agents a broadcast. some months previously which inuicated that thare would be three phases before the general attack. The signa.l tor the final attaek WaS giver on the 5th June at 21 hours. warning issue to the miitary commanuer in the 1. to the 7th Army ana to the 15th Army. The 7 th Army did nothing aru the other ors apparent aid very little. h special court of enyuiry matters. was held by It the was Germans lucky that to Look the warning into the Wasp treated SO lighthearteuly. We had of course been given a assurance by SOE and SIS that at a special meeting callleu before Overlord by Findtater Stewart, that no such inuica- tions would be given to the field and that vouched all messages for by sent the out appropriate by the BBC depts. woulu We be had taken the line that we could not be responsible For messages the contents of which we did tot understand. A C.I.B. report ending 2nd October state that reports continue to be raceived showing that aisrespect for the British authorities is increasing in Germany. This growth of over-confidelce is accounted lor partly by a lack OI understanuixg 0l our methods. Toierunce Tor exumple is conluseu wit weakness, anu partiy by hunger and other privations which particularly in Berlir ane stimulating criticism o1 the British aaminis cration. In Hanover a critic oi thethe former Gauleiter was threataeu with violence without interrerence from bystanuers 288 and Jew-baiting is reported from Osnabruck. Also in Osnaoruck the 2590 of the population are said to approve of Leaflets exposing Germans who collaborate with the occupying troops. The interrogation OI ut.Col.REILE of Leit- stelle 3 West contains some interesting items. He saysthat valuable resuts were oltan obtained py funk Abwehr. puring the vinter of 1943-44 the Fur Uber Wachungs- uiense succeedeu in brearing Coues used by one of the most important trarsmitters of the Polish intellig ence service in France. For months thereafter W/T reports from Polisa agents to England were interception and understood. The same applied to orders they received from England. The Germans also learned tha't important military plans were known to the allies and a considerable number of names and cover names of members of the Polish Inteligence Service were discovered. The above is interesting in view of the assurance that we had from SIS in the autumn of 1943 that Polish cyphers were perfectly secure. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT NDER SEOTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 JLy 2O1O. 7% Wood came to tell me tha D the Chief o1 Police at Antwerp,Celis, was very arxious to have a liaison vith ourselves. He was getting quite a lot of information about Trotsyist activities in Antwerp and had arrestea a number of people OI that party who were caysing trouble in the docis. Dedo the war 5.B. haa hau a representative in Antwerp. Woou wondered whether they couu send someboay out. I said that at the moment while future Chartars were rather in the melting pot I thought it woua not be possible. In the meantime however it 287 seemed to me that Brook-Booth might estab- lish a link. He said that he had called on B-D but that he haa bean away I am going to write a line to D--D about this. I had a meeting with Harker arker,Bromley,ussen Bromley and Hinchiey Gooke about MENELES. There is a question down in the House asking for publication oi the names and Hationalities C all people convietea of' espiorage during the Wal. MENEZES! rame was excluded as we did not wish to give any publicity Do his reprieve and wisheu the Germars LO think that it was possible or their agents to aisappear without any puoic armicuncemet. Both thes reasons are 1O longer valid. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Jy 200 I dined with David Boyie who told me that he had re-openea hisbusiness in arother plac but intended to go very slowly For the present. October 23rd Luke was asking me about his release. He wondered whether he could be sent on indefin ite leave. I said that as Tar as I new that would be quite impossible. He would oe qui te prepared if he has to stay to go to the Par East for 6 months. Curry came to tell me that Drew had asked hi to look through his report on MT5 which is apparently to be incorporated in Findlateris report. Curry evidently did not think much of it. He was asked only to correct it in SO far as the facts were concerned. He made a number ofumarginal notes which he hopes to discuss with Drew. Geerally speaking he thinks that the report does not give the work nything of this like dept.during an adequate the account war. I of told him that I thought he should see Drew an say that after an immense amount or stuy he had himself compiled a, 8,000 word report which was -ot yet quite complete and that this gave as accurate a picture as it was possible to obtain. If the DG saw no objec- tion he would be quite prepared to let him have a copy for adaptation tO his own purposes. C. rang up to tell me that he had Learned through a private source that Dr TOLIPHANT ore of the big shots in atomic research had gone of the deep end about not giving away the experiment to the Russians or to the control Council and that he had spilt the whole beans to al M.P called Blackbunn who is of a somewhat Lei't Wing t/pe. Black- burn the House proposed of Commons to use debate. the information The worst in feature was that in addition to giving the information about the experiment Oliphant had given Blackburn details of the agreement between outselves and the Americans on the someject of atomic research. II this got out it would make a most frightful mischief C. had accordingly Seen the PM. The PM said that curiously enough DIackburn had alreaay sporen to him and told him that he had received a great deal of information from Oliphant.He did not ho ever mention the Anglo-American agreement. Oliphant is taking 28 the line that he does not care what the authorities do to him as he feels unuer strong moral obligation to disclose the facts THIS I A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS A0T1958 fly DOLO John Marriott and I went over for a conferene with Pir John Stephenson at which Weville Butler,Bromley present. We had and to NormanRobertson discuss a draft were telegram to Canada emboaying the decision by the PM and MeKenzie King that all those in Yovt. service who were implicated in the CORBY case should he interrogated anu il they were ling,searcheu, provided that no publicity resulted. Simitar action would be taken here in regaru to MAY. Action against the Soviet uipiomats WOllu be difiered until after the interrogations. We made it clear that it would be quite impossible to interro- gate 14 or 15 people without the matter leaki -ing out and that ii simultaneous action were desired it would at least be necessary to detain the parties until the job had been completed. Detention would inevitalbky lead to publicity. It seemed to us moreover that i1 we were going to face up to the question Of publicity it would be as well to take in Sam Carr and Rose the M.P who to a very large extent were controlling the agents on behalf of the Soviet Govt. Anybody who was not taken in on the first sweep would destroy his documents. II the risk of publicity could Hot be aced we saw 1O point in dealing simply with the vew ovt.servants in the High ommissionertg ollice ana in External AIlains. It was in our view better to wait lor another 2-3 weeks until a dediso had been reachea about hanuing over the atomic bomb to the Russians. A memo has been prepared by the FO on these lines ana the question will be submitted to Attlee and McKenzie King. I saw the DG after his meeting with C. and Findlater to discuss the latter 9 points He said that there was a free anu Trank discussion lor more than 2 hours. Finalater had sometimes agreed wi th him ana sometimes wiith 0. and that the whole atmosphere was extremely Irieridly. The 9 points werd 6oing to be re-drattea and we Should ultimately have a copy. I asreu the DG what view C. took of our represertution on Sisirt. C.had said that we could always auuena the meetire O1 the board if we had any complaint to make I rather got the impression thitithe Du naa agreed to this. I Said I diu not think this was satisfactory since I dia not see how we 291 could have a complaint against the Bourd unless we knew what it was doing. C.also offered to give us a liaison Olricer with Travis and argued that through that channel we should always now what was going on. I doubt it. I also asked the DG about our representation abroad. He told me that C. had raised a numper of points but that he hau saia that he was OI an open mind and I thini prepared to give the matter a trial. October 24th I saw Brig Way ana Max Percival about the establishment OI CICB. They are going to put it forward in accoruance wi th the SEAC telegram as lar as the male stall are concerned. They doubt however whether they now have authorityibo appoint ATS. T said that AT grauing was not very Suitable for the tpe 01 girl we shoula wish to send out, that having to live in barracics was a severe handicap. Way taliea to me about the Fussian wives of British of ficers who were coming back from Russia. Some OI them he thought were particularly undesiraole. I said that it he could let me know their names I should be grateful. He then spoke to me about his oil wile, a Russian who he. married in Tashkent and is still in Soviet territory. He hopes to get her out. He said that possibly where she did arrive he might be grateiul if we could keep some sort of eye on her in order to ensure that she was not got hold of anu persecuted by the Russians.. He thought that il she were black-mailed she might not be willing to tell him. THIS THISISACOP COPyY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIO RECORDS ACT1958 Jury 2ar THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT ACT 1958 1958 JuLy 2O10. Hilgarth came to Lali to me about Whittaer I toLa him anouu tne constitutional uifiiculty. He saiu chat he hau spoken to -C. an that the Later hau expresaeu grave aouots about the possibility 0l MI5 having all Owlicer it. N.E.I. I told Hilgarth the this is precisely what I nad expeeteu. Hilgarth will suggest UO Pemney that Whittaker should be appoinceu to SEAC. Joan Marriott showed me a new wire Which ha come in from the other side indicating. that the Corby. case is breaking. Wariinys have obviously been given to a number of people. There is also a further tellegram about the agent Known as ELLI Was is aulege to hold some high position in British Intellligerce. References are made to U.E. but as Corbyts theories are only basea on seraps of information piced up here and there there is not very much to Work on IL is possible that in mentioning the Iiguri 5 he is referring to the Iive peuple who formerly sigred JIO report. It equally does not follow that because information is high-graue it comes from a hishij-placeu officer. It may mean merely that an exurta copy of JIC reports is comins 011 the roneo and being passeu py a Clerk. In this connection the KING Case is TT00 a baa illustration. Hooper always pererreu to Vansictart as the source ol the information anu we found afterwarus the t his name was oryJ useu to cover up the high-graue reports received from cypher communications which KING was nanuing out UO the Russians. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED 293 IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION Dotdogr 25tH th PUBLIC RECORDS AU 1950 buy 201 Alec Kellar brought a mar called Steward to see me. He has just been demobilisea. He dit a Certain amount 01 intelligence work here and atteraed a course Delore going out to N.Atrica where he served in the FSP as an officer- He was then sert to Syria where he did well. He is very Tone of ligence words and very anxious if possibl o continue in M.I.5. Before the war he was engaged in the wool export trade and travel- led a lot on the continent. He makes a goou impression. Cayzer and Owen came to see me about Tilton. They are thnying to sort out his case as he Seems to De the victim oi Slanderous reports from the Far East. the probability is that being chargea with I.B. duties which nobouy in the Air Force understood he in curned the enemicy oi a number O1 people through his persistence. At the staff meeting we iscusseu the personnel raquired py CICB. A letter had Come in from Dixon saying thad there were certain SOE lemaie staii who woula be availe ble it we court ta.-e them on ald pay for Them. It was finally agree that we should do this I raiseathe point apout secretaries who are put on to war establishment losing their connection with this office. There did not seer to be any very complete answer. It seemed to me that they could perfectly wel be told that if and when the permanent staff were considered here their names would be taken into account in addition to those employed in London. I had a word with Clirtord Norton anu asked him to speak to the appropriate Swiss olfici about Lemon. He was to Say the he had heard that the Ambassador was leaving and al a rumour about Lemon. He would emphasise that it would be a great pity for Anglo-owis relations both of them wera removed as they had a very good understanding o1 the Bribisa point o1 view. I haa a word with Connie BENCKENDORF at tis Travellers. I had heard through Guy Burgess that he was frequently CO be louna at the nouse o1 the Baroness BUDBERG,WhoS true colour has always Den a matter OL some speculation in this office. BENCKEN- DORF raully Waniteu to talk to me apout a Frenchwoman. whom he wished to get ver here. I told him that he could mention my rame. He also tolu me that he was editing a new Penguin publication iTovrl as the Russilll Raviaw O1 which he Leit me a copy. October 26th Stopford came to Sae me about Miss Glass. He is prepared to wait for her for 2 months, during which time she could go to taly anue finally make up her mind whether she wis] -as to remain with us or Go into the city. I gather that she prelers the WOTr in our office if it is likely to give her any pros- pects. Gisela rang up about a Russian named OLKHOV- SKY wit whom Balloon is in touch. He is a member of the Soviet Mission who are purchas ing bycicles Irom the Raleigh Cycue o. He has however expreasad a good uea.l OI interes in and a certain amount of knowupube oi a new tani, the Centurion, anu has asked ass Balloon to get him the particulars. Balloon has been tola to sta On this ald to UTy to uiscover any other things in which OLKHOV SIY is interested. October 27th THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENIT BETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Juuu DO1O I had a talk with John. Gwyer and also with Harry Allen about the writing up OI C.I. in the War OfIice. There has already peen a joint pamphlet on security and another on military security. Meanwhile someone is supposed to be aealing with civil security. It Seems desirable that we should see the documents alreauy writen and probably write the one on civil security ourselves. John pointed out that it was very important that something should go on recond about having a proper recoruing system on a uniform basis. Experience had show that all the various corps had their owl systems. Another point I thought ought to be emphas- ised was the necessity OI providing officers in the field with secretarial assistance. It had been our experience that the use- fulness of officers hau been reduced by about 750 when they had to interrogate and then write out their reports in long hand. ab Hanry is taiine: cile matter up with the W.O. October 29th I saw yet another Hughes couay,wi is oue lor discharge From V20. He wants to go back anu live in the Pyrerees as soon as things settle clowrl in France. Im the maar time he would be prepared to take a Job for 6 months or a year. He was for- merly employed in the French section Of SOE, welt overseas during the Battle of Normandy, and joined 020 in Jaruary this year. He Seems a sensible kind 01 Below and I gather that his WOrk Ior 020 ha's bee good. I told him that as far as we were concerned there were on.ly 3 possipie Jobs open to him, either in the Far East the German ontrol Commission or the Austrian C.C. He said he would be prepared to sign on for 6 months ot a year with the Austrian Commission. I undertook to make enquiries. He has a good knowleuge Of German and Freuch. I took the opportunity o1 assing Hushes about SOE'S pre-Dat.day p.lans in France anu I read him out che extracts From Che interrogation report on REILE ir. which the Greer,R Red anu Back plans were mel- tionea. He Knew OL thee plans and he new that the various phases were ouiliea to the Field by BBC transmlissions. SOE had at that time beer integretea-with the F.F.I. ana placed uner en.koerig but the French were not supposed to know the actua.l time an uace oi the operation, He said thai the whole operation hau beer woreu out in 3 phases by the Pamning Section. By this he meanit the planning section of the intesrateu organisatiol. 297 He said too that as Lar as ne new the whole busiiness had the blessing o1 SHAIF He was somewhat norrilieu to heard thet it ha hau all beer know LO the Germars who hau warnec their units in the iiela at 9 pm on the 5th June. I have now gok copies of the actual messages sent rom the BBO. The originals were amarentily Lemovad by some Briguuiar oi SUE. The copies which I have are not initialled as the originais presumably were. I had a talk with Newsam apout the case of Rudoii BAUDISCH, who wants to get his mother and sister over nere From Czecho- slovakia. Newsam said that it presented certain iifticulties from the Home Office angle as it might create an awewand prece- dent. People like Eleanor RATHBONE wanlteu to bring all Furopean refugees LO this country and the H.0. were doing their ut- most to resist her onslaught. Ii however I would write to him he would put the matter up as a special case; I also talked to him about KRYMER, one OI the Polish interrogators at the LRC whom wanted to get discharged from the Polish Army. I explained to Nevsam that he was only staing orT with Us for a few months anu tha he would then De Launched on the labour mariet. Newsam saiu he thought it would be possiole O treat thiis a1so as a special case. What is believed Lo be another Polish tans mitter has come up Somewnere in Northampton. Commurication is appareritly witn the Britich sone in Germany. E taked to Stone about the case o1 FABISOH ac in which Herbert o1 Censorship is interested He will find out From the Control Comlasior the precise grounas on which they turned the application down. TAR asked me apout nis future. I town him it was difllicult to express a view a0 the moment. He would rather like to do soviec espionage. E suggested that possibly as al alternative he might care DO tare Anthonis section,whici which would be engaged in running agerts into Embussias plus wiretess p.lus M/S. For the purposes o1 the wireless section he would need to have a highly qualified. technicials TAR said that ne aila not really mind much what he did wi ithiin limits but that he did not wish on any account to go abroad. A telegram from the British M.A. Moscow states that in the course O1 investigating the security o1 offices occupied by the Service attachesand formerly by the Military Mission a systen of microphones had bean discovered in the buildings. Moving coil nicrophonesypresumably ver sersitive, are litted behina ventalators grias. There are UWO in what IT rormeniy the Miitany Mission map room where conferences were held. Elaborate wiring under tha floors indicates that the wiring system was probably installed Derore the occupation O1 the building. Investigation are pro- ceeuing but it has MOU yet beer possible to discover the place the cables leave the building. A specimer microphone is being sent home by bag.. Our Change Allaires in Moscow is not in favour 01 anly action being taaen beyond discomnecton o1 the instruments. 291 In the report on the internogation o1 Colone. REILE it is stated that Leitstelle III West had 5O much materia availapue about allied intelligence services that they were nearly alvayswell-iniormed about the develop: ment oi resistance movements in France, Holland and Belgium. They could follow almost exactly the work one by the Armee Secrete, the FranceTireurs, ana partisans etc. It was observeu how strong the resis- tance movements grew in 1945 and 1944 and how they gradually became more dangerous DO the Germans, particularly alter their uni- fication under the F.F.I. and alter they had obtained a considerable quantity o1 weapons and sabotage equipment by air. In 1943 anu 1944 certain document fell into the hands of the SIPO. They gave the important tasks whiich the active resistance moveents were to carry out OI D.uay and days immediately after it. The STPO nad discovered the existence of Plan Rouge,Plan Vert ana Plan Noirew It aso aseertained that resistance groups were to bergiven come woras and that sentences were to be transmitted at certain times by the BEC with the warning to the resistance groups to be ready to carry out theirinvasion tasks and to startron them in case of invasion. FAK 3 West was immediately given orders to carry out active penetrution anu in a Timber of cases was suecessful. About 25 BBC announcements on the Ist June and 5th Jure were recognised- for what they were and the beginning o the invasion could approximately De worked out. on the evening OI the 5th June at approx,2 hours Leit. West notilied O.B.West,M.B.Frankreich, Leitstelles and 2 West and FAK 5 that the invasion was due to pegin that same night or at the latest within the Haxt 36 hourse REILE heard that an enuuiry was subsequerrtiy hee 39 -y the Wehrmacht Fuhrungstab and that the findings of the court o1 enuiry were that insuficient Importance had been attach- ea to the report from Leite 5 West. when REILE intormea .B.West he was not entirely believed. Nevertheless ub.West passeu on the information to the 7th and 15th Armies. REILE heard that the 7 th Army anu B.Frank- reich toak no action while the 15th Army one ordered its units to be ready 10n immeu- late action. REILE was asaeu what ne H. ew o1 Rudoll LEMOINE whose Teal name is KOENIU. He said that this man was o1 German origin but before the Wot he worea for conmiuer- able period for the 2eme Bureau against Germany He is over 70 years auld. He was arrested in Fnance in the winter of 1943- 1944 and was subjected to detailed interro- gation about his anti-German activities. He talked freely. After his interrogation he was taken to Germany by the SIPO aru as 1ar as REILE knows the Aowehr had no moTe dealings with him. I think I am right in Saying that this man played uite a part in the lamous Mr.A. case:. There may thererord as we thought at the time have been some political motive behind the scarual created. Swarn has interrogated a Col. MEBIIG on the question of Germun D.Fing: He said that the German F.suelous were very eileetive against alliea agerts at first but that the position rapidly det rionately due to increased signals security on the part of the agents. Snortly before the invasion 12 radio links were working to Englard from France. These were controlled set. The Germans plareu to reveal in the course OI transmissions that 6 o1 these ware controled 301 with the objeet o1 conrusing the British Secret Service. METTIG aso stated that Titots radio trallic could be decyphered, in part, but that Minailovic was entirely penetrated. Tito constantly warnec Mihaib- ovic that the Germans hau lull unuerstanaing of hs cypher system through traitOnss I1 true thiis is rather a remarrable statement. SOE are publishing an account o1 their activities which nas been compiled by bone Hale. I lookeu eareiully to sbe what had been said about Holland. The para. Resistance opens with in HolLand the following had been F8rigptelyy knitfrom 1941-44. The work of special forces air not surmount the difficulties unit 1944 when ranewea attempts On the LSaal patterr were maue.t since the whole of SOE was wipeu up from Sept.194 LO 4943 it would Saem to have been moTe a case 01 uropping stitches than Loose knitting. KOPKOW conlirma the information river Dy REILE apout euriyg snoweuge 01 the time of the invusior, optaineu through BBO arnource- ments. He uifrers ony in the viming o1 the message received on the bth June,w! he says was 1900 hours. The Germans hEcno knoweuge O1 the target. NOPROW mentions the case o KOINIG, an SOE agent about whom Field-Rooinson hau discussions with me aD the time. We could never believe it possipie that this man could sueceed in carrying one histask in Germany and get back to this country via the Peninsula within 1O days KOPKOW says that in a hotel in Hanover objects were found belonging LO a Luntwalte NCO who had been there several days, This was sometime in the autumn o1 1943. Arter examination the conclusion was reached that the owher of these objects was NOENIG @ 307 BROECKEN who had iong peen a ueserter, anu whose uniform had Deer round in a woou on the French-spanish border. Many months alter the report was received that a Germen soldibr had been arrested lor having been dropped from an EIglish long-distance bomber in South Baden. This utimately proved to be -LOENIG who was Or his third mission into Germany On the two previous occasions he had returned to England via France and Ppain. An attempt was made to use his transmitter but this never succeeded. He was sent before at Court Martial but KOPKOW does not know his fate. SOE understand that he was shot. KOPKOW gives a long account o1 the Russian orgarisation or the continent. It began by the rounding up on the Wenzel group in Belgium in 1942. this led to the arnest of the Petit Cher ol the Belgian organisation imnown as KENT. KENT was from beningraa art hed been trained lor lorthe the Soviet Intelligence Servoc,sinc chilthoou. He hela the rark or LE. His closest collaboracor was the Soviet student JERFHIMOW who wase Living ir Brussels as Finnish supject with Finnish papers. KONT ran an import anc erport business in Brussels calleu STMEXCO which did business on a lange scale with the TO orgaisation are Wehrmeeht establishments KENT al.so haa relation with the parent company IMEX in Paris wilich was under the control OI the Grana Chel. AENT had papers in the name oi Vincent SIERRA which alleged him to be a Uruguayan supjeat. The purpose oi SIMEXCO was to avoid diliicuilt transfer o1 currency From Russia to Begium and to have the money necessaryto finance the Intelligence people on the spot. It also facilitated the travel ana relations with the O-1. anu the Wehrmacht. KENT on 303 being ordered to mae touch with Germany visited Schultze-Boysen in Berlin at the German Air Ministry anu gave him a new coue and aocumerits- KENT was pllayeu Daer LG the Russians with the result that the grand Mher in Faris was arresteu. He turned out to be the soviet Russian TREPPER @ Jean GILBERT THEPPER Came from Galicia and nelo the ran of Captir the Rea Army. TREPPER was allowed py the Gerans LO escape in the summer of 1945. Full use wase made o1 KENT however who got orders to set up transmitter in Marseilles and Paris. By this means "Soljart a Fussiar agent who had ived many yeans in Paris was diselosed- He was a Latvian Col. who had played a leading part in an the International Brigade in the Ppanish civil War. the Grana Chel racelved extensive information From a ror.basil MAXTMOVITCH and his sister The Former was at the time at the Sorbonne in Paris and the latter was a lay doctor also in Paris. A certain Herry FOBERTSON (real name) was responsible for the Granu Cheife Conneotior in France with the oviet Inte ligerce ir Switzerland He travellea continuaniy- From HFTange LO Switsarlana direct or via Germany. ROBERUINSON was arresteu. october soth At the D.G. S meetingit was amgounceu that SC0s wera to be rinauy withurawn in the course of the next few weeiy. Tmigration ale by no means reauy to a e aver ard I do notthink that we are liseiy to gat much service out 0I them For some time. 0n nau 8U1 To BpIS Jauno eun to Lpoaot up 1uop STeg aun to BrTDunis 4atn IT and TtuEC sn ampa SutmuTEAT a1ou are UTSI OTHDETTT argegaD 3 nonoeT HOIO gou0 mITup 02 nemaes aH To HIOTSTATOO IOII S8oLro IO TOHouteae eue umno.un T1q neAoduT eAnu sattua Janamai wemne Su and eu aptig Aauaunoo DTIP TOTO 0n ATTEOTO -onId Teona SM ATaSAT 901D IO1nu 1nua pre tETaTI aun ino TuES mean Due ofene By peutetdixe H 1H310 nome SMATA STU exes eu HoTuM AUTTll on D8nd stuuea Aa a0TM enat n ar Demous ru au eas 9n auto M-H Lresseoau suaas stun uaUm put ST BOosTIG UATM 1033400 eseu put Mtttqrsuodse aun eno ATTRe.I pmnous LONOTA geua sutua 0n eUTout WIR I anq ueTd poor R ea sdeuued STHL petueotrop aram seorep TeToads euno Due M/S S TRT os UT Tag HUTDem 22 pTou 0n panutauop au IE Hutug poor 3 aa quatu AT "rOS DuR SIS UATM UOSPTT Raogopisiaes B uons Dausitaease pey an seutt UMO STU TT TTBpoads yons SEM AOOsTUH 1810 uanoun UITODTRIE 6181031 esaua TO afeuo even 0n 301 ouano al estape oTTTQuOTOS eq on Butod LOnOTA II weunena SutreTtom SEM I urTOOEI DTOA I unLou said OMA aeu-ut ad nuRIm Bu au Angegoad ptnoM STHLL aer-eun ena Mtordro Aroseaitadns P.UT euta e0ad UIT 3OF 00 anutnnoo nIoM eopstugunua SM amemeue.e uesaad QUA neun DTRS GH AODsTagT anege Sutmno uTooTen 0n pesen I neuot TO FeM ato Atattiep Les 0n TIOTTEOd IT ad on qu9no am she run TO Tue Ag ana ad 8eta pedou T TTU TTTON I Suyoe gor E SEM IT Un TM LIO uTEMaI oa axTT pinom Bn 2 ay4 on yore RttOR SeM au aunetm suauou C axeu ITuTMoutu stu din EsEUI 0n aneu PTNOA au Dres H see aas on UIT OmBo naeuqam retoe nor 303 to whom they can erve Dall. He mearst that the JIS and other subversive organisa- tions were in such a state of disarray that it was difficult to Know what to aim at until things begar. to take shape. I showed B-W ourtne/'s letter soth aDOuE Wiroi ad about Ioniaes. I said L iet that it wus a great pity that the show Out there was LOE being run as a jointconcern, that ull our resources Were not pooleu. The only reason, which to me was not a reason,I For ISLD stand- ing outside was that they wane keeping special records O1 their OWII on Ultra material. I thought tha t Ultra material ought to be incorproaiteu in the CICB record just as it was in our recorus,wit any sare- guaras that might be necessary. I had a wond with Blauchley,wh has just returned I'rom Trininad. He was the person responsible for uetecting ZUHLSDORF, a German S.D. man who was trying to make a get away to .America. After all the examination o1 some 700 passengers had Deen completed Blatchley recognised ZUHLSDURF from a photograph and alter a lair suruggle managed to oreak him dowIr. He was travel- ling Or false Dpal.ish or D.American papers. Noble came in to talk about COLUMBINE, who warts to marry a Sweuish sir who nunseu him in Stockholm before nis arrival here. Noule suggested that it might De better Lor him to wait unti he got seutiea in Germany Dut as he insisteuyd said thlute count De 0 NIO objection from ourpoint o1 view,proviued the H.0. were prepared to let her come. Marriott Showed me the memo pure Up oy Bevin tothe PM and Mackenzie King. It is not a particularly good one but emphasises the necessity of early Action 11 anything is to pe got out OT the CORBY cuse. We have sert a telegran to Foger suggesting that i1 Canada does aet, 1O useful purpose would pe serveu at this moment by our interroga- ting MAY. We nave asaeu him to get the reaction o1 the Canauials. Kellar tatus me that ort is appureuty seriously ill and has been oruereu home. It looks as i1 hewould not be going back to Palestine, and that his succesor will be appointed. It is a great blow as we were co-operating very closely with Gort an many highly confduential matters. October 5lst Burt tells me that there is a case of sabot- age down at Portsmouth and wanted to know whether he shoulddeal with it. I said that this woulld be the normal practice in peace time and I should be glad ii he would send an officer dov,particulariy as this had been requested by NID. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 JMLy D.oio 307 circums tances in Which the information had been given. Meanwhile it appears that we ouLy maue one smaL.L payment to Sarah who wer back to StoCrholm in epril 1945. On 14th June 1945 however SIS posted him 500 rt. ir Stockholm. T think we mnust press une Sweues to State the Same of the individual concerned. we may ther offer to Clear up the position ana teli them that we hau oruy been concerned about Germal abenus eutering this country. I said goodbye to Doch Blum O1 the Wal room aid Martin romnest. ne latter is tawine up E, JO0 at Eton aH a master. I SaW Back ayoue the case OL Grace AOLIN. He is going to Wire out to Bere try a get the position Clariiieu. I will then speak to the H.0. THIS IS A COOPY ORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC BECORDS ACT 1958 Jveu 2o1o 3o" THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUL RETAINED IN DEPARTMENI RSECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 Juu Dou November ist Marriott tells me that Street of the H.0. is being moved to the Ministry OI Town and Country Planning. Street is a .P.member and is an embarrassment to us as he sits in the same room as Hill and Bromley. Burt came to say that 2 officers had gone down to Portsmouth as apparently more than one act of sabotage had been committed on a destroyer which was proceeding to the Far East. This is presumably an act committed by ratings who are anxious to delay the shiple departure. TAR has returned to the fold. I had a tallk to him about the future arganisation. He is going to put aowrl some of his ideas on paper. Bromley rang to say that Bevin was taking a very strong line about Capt.BLACKBURNS disclosures in the House o1 Commons on nthe the subject o1 the atomic bomb. BLACABURN had stated amongst other things that we had art agreemnt with the US. about the develop- ML THIS IS A COPY >ol ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED 309 IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION ment of atomig o(eeapchRUBHe RTROState that the u1ACad958 of the atomic bomb were knowrt to our soremtists. we KTTew of course that all this information had been given to Blackburr by OLIPHANT. Bevin I gather has reduced BLACKBURN to something of a jelly ana is arxious that proceeuings should be taken il possible against both OLIPHANT ana BLACKBURN under the UfIicial ecrets Act. He wanus us.to exp.lore the posit ion. Newsam rang up to say that H.O. hau decided to expel KUCHENMEISTER but to allow LACHMANN to remain in thiscountry on the grounds that he had helped us auring the war and that he could not therefore be expellea ii German scientists and technicians tho had be beer. womning against us were to be brought here to settle down with their families. He wanted to obtain our agreement to this course of action. I said that I should have to refer the matter to the DG and to Joe Archer but that I would let him INOW as soon as possible. We should of course ae- precate the action but we Fully realised the difficulty. dined at 020 last night. They have just got rid of alli their prisoners ana will be closing down themselves within the next month. I saw a Capt.T.P.Bagge who I gather is an efficient Ol1fcer and would be quite prepared to go to the Far East on a 6 months contract after which he would probably wish to return to civil lire. I nad a calK with Cayzer and uola him o1 the latest developments about CICB. He is teegraphing to Dixon about Bagse. 31 Harry Allen Came to talk LO me about certain cables going on between the JIC here anu in Washingtor OM the subject of deceptionw tiom. Washington pointed out tau oricers returning to civil life will propaol/ tallis about their experiences a that there is ne means of stopping them. We are pointing out once more the desirabitit, 01 getting the Americans to cope with this situation tion. The matter was felt with Briuges some time ago but I gather that nothite nas been sone. The diliicuey is of course that the Americalis have ItO Officials secreus Act and would have immerse diiricutt, in geucing anything of the in passed through Congres: We also discussed the telegram received Iror the Delence Comnituse Cairo agreeing to the proposal that we should De resporsipie for the administration and policy 01 SIME. This will be discusseu Dy the JIC next Tuesday. Harry appeans to be dilriderit about our accepting this as a firm commit- ment. His onny reason as far as I car see was that it might get the office into difficulties if things did not Tur well. This seemed to me to be just lunking the issue. We were all agreed that M.I.5 was the only body in Lonon which could 1oo: after SIME properly and that i we had O fficial responsibility it would be difficult for. us to intervene OII cheir behalf. Harry saw this point but thought ana L think rightly that we shouulu insist on the fuld co-operation of the services in proviaing us with useluspouies anu not ix moving them about as soon as thay Began to know their Jop. came to se9 me about the SWeuish case of SARAH. Suuject EO anthing 3U) stoproru says I have recomenueu that the Press Attache in Stocithoim should return to the charge with ROSEN and asa him the mants name. We would then explain that we had a great responsibility here during the war in keeping an eye on the fast routas petween here and Stockholm anu indeed not without reason,bu that We hope that that period was over and that SARAHIS services would therefore be no longer required. We also discussed the proposed visit of two ollicers o1 Darish Military Intelrigence and 4 police Officers. The are arriving in about 10 days time. THIS OOPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN IDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 ACT 1958 JUL 2o10 I saw Macheill and told hitt that I could not really justify his retention in B.Divisiom. We had a number of LRC oflicers whom we could not get rid o1 until their demobilisa- tion and they could really carry the interro -gation of British subjects as well as aliens. He quite saw the point ana said that he would make arrangements accordingly Harker discussed security in connection with atomic research with myseui,harry and Victor. Victor felt that it was very important that we shouiu get a grip on this matter There was a great aeail going on and a considerable amourt of publicity but at the momerit we had nO very clear iuea 0I what the field of knowleuge was in this country. I said that I had already written, to Aers and that he had telephoned to me apologising that he had not sent a reply. He had been extremely busy in connection wiith Chadwickis visit from America. AS Soc as he had got this out ofthe way he woua be very please to discuss the whoe thing with Victor. I had a talk with Cussen about the positior o1 OLIPHANT anu BLACKBURN vis a vis the Official Secrets Act. He said that ON the evidence available OLIPHANT was clearly liaole ald tha according LO the Sanuys report BLACIBURN would a1so be liabl if it could be shown that he hau in any way solicited information From OLIPHANT. Technically at least he should have stoppeu OLTPHANT from talking as S001 as he realised that niormation ol a hishiy secre nature was peing communicate to hiimseli who was not a authorisea pepsor to raceive it. II ae had gone further than this alu asseu questions or irueeu hau asca OLIPHAN to come and see him DO discuss atomic research intany but its broadest aspects he would clearly be liaote. He would of course be priveliged in anything that he had said in the House of Commons. The repor of the select committee Ol the Sandys casa makes it very clear that MPs should understand that their position as members in no way entitled them to solicit intorma- tion OI a top secret character from any person who is uirectiy on inairectiy ir the service of the Crown. OLIPHANT has clearly been in the service OI the Crown an nas in fact signed the O1licial Secrets Acte Even if he haa not signed the act he would he bound by its terms. We are at present awaiting a letter from the F.0.OI 1rom Dowaing St. stating whether or not we ane to investigate the case alld put the matter 313 forward to the D.P.P. There is at the moment no evidence whatever but there would be grounds for an interrogation o1 OLIPHANT which might we.li produce the required results. November 2nd I told Dick that we should want him 0O go to the Far East and got the D.G.S approval Archer tells me that aitar consul cation wit the Air Ministry they view with grave concei the possibility of LACHMANN returring to the aircrait industry They wounu bike to know waat restrictions can be puaceu on his employment. Wibroe came in to say goodb/e. He is Leaving at Last For Coperhagen tomorrow. I hau a talk with Anthony. fitche anu Guy Burgess about the future UI orange. It has been uecied that Mitcneil siaT run him ir Tucure in conjunction with Burgess,si Since a g00.u real O1 his iniormatior relates to Fascist activities abroad,an Mitchell is the &ind of person who is likely to get On with Burgess. Herbert of Censorship came in to talk to me about the case Of FABISCH. I expllained to him that FABISCH had been turned down by the Control Commission (a) because he was a German and (D) because his wife was the daughter of a Germar General. - The Comnissi tane a very strong line on both these point As regards the letter that we hau written, it was grossly improper for the Eatablish- ment Officer of the Commission to quote it 3uu and particularly to quote it wrongly, which he had clearly done. The only fact in the letter which appeared to be inaccurate was the reference to FABISCH having been posted as Cheeaed a deserter. this up T in tolu the Herbert .O.files that and J dis- had covered that there was 1O trace of it and that FABISCHTS conduct had been described as good. I tolu Herpert that the Letter as it scooU would Y40C ir any way bar FABISOH From any Other suitape emproyme lor which Vetuine Iisht be required. I woua also recoru Ol the Iile that cercain o1 the sugsestione maure in Uile Icuuer uiu not reaniy reuounu LO FABISCHS aisereuit, in view ot the explanations that Herpent hau giver. Atrica do not want Michael Ryae to go there;owing to the rather triciy political Situation they would prefer that ary documents relating Lo van RENZBERG should be Sent out through our Commissioner. Later or they would welcome someboay to discuss our Future liaison. November 3rd THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED VDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Jusuy Dio 313 THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC BECORDS ACT 1958 duly 00 Bromley rang up about the possible: prospects ot proceeding against OLIPHANT and BLACKBURN I told him what the Legal position was and that I did not see any point in our doing anything until Downing St.mace up their mind that a prosecution was uesirable, if the necessary evidence were Iorthcoming. 31 Novemper Sth I had a talk with Stoprora about the case O SARAH. He agreeu with the course 01 acbior I had Suggetieu LO cate to se me about the Daness 4 policeraer and 2 security Ollicers who ate arriving ton.oirow. HS usual there aas been a muudle. The viaiit has been On the tapia for a Lors time put no one has ever Earert the trouDLe LO write to the DG apout it. B-W is alxious that tie policemeu sh0ulu bee Wall Loortul anuer even though the,y Wild Ut coricemreu amost eniteeiy with mabuet's atiecting Uthe lara. He thuugnt it would he pity i1 they were rlot eutertaiueu &. Was a the ecurioy oluicerse 11e hau maud Certaii lwuitie. out count IUE ascertain. .Y. new anything aDsUE tham. I ha4 Da- with burt nacer ari as.u nim uu nave a wor's wit! tha Yaru. I had 2 tai with Machell ald LOLa nim that I had mae elquinries as wnetaer thene Was other WOPK JOT nim out without sucedas. He readily agree hat his presence here was redundan.t anu it was agreeu that ne should eave at the etc o the month. I have a talk to Flt/Lt. Denny 01 the hir Ministry on geeral security mnatcers anu the work of the oflice He is employeu utiser Merer. He askeu whether we could give him any cocunents which he could use in eccures given to his Foree Securit,/ Oiiicers, explaining to them something O.f une security Service. 347 Marriott showed me some recent telegrams on the subject ol ELLI. CORBY has been re-interrogated and relers to alt incident wna. the Soviet MA. it Lonuon Peresree DO intormuti tion that he hau received from ELLI relating to a Britiah agent HuSSia. As the only organisacions that can possibly have bear running a Blritish sent in ndssid are SIS,SGF or the British hiititary Msson, it Seems unlikely that ELLI Coula have any comneetton with ourselves. Nobouy ir laet knows any Ching wuout aly agent in Hussia. I shounu douut very muen whether there was one. The above does 1ou necessariti trow aty donuts on the Data fldes Ou CORBY who may have got the Story wrong Rornie Haylor came in Lo age ma. He tolu me that Irceltisence I.A. I.b. were TOW be unilieu itt ore Inceriserce bureau. A number o1 axcraneous organisations haa been aosorban anu woulul probably De srad- baliy iguidated. The eleet or hla ha been to make the or'genisatlon somewhat top- heavy. The T.G.I-Lethoriuoe 1s at the head ol it with Brig. Ford on the IA siue,ino is crearuy reauruant, Lnu also Biti Williams who tor tie moment will ue jputise sor the MGI in his auseree. Rounie seame to think that everything is going fairly weil. 114 CIB. He aso feels that the some is oroauy spering Being well ru MilGov. have apparentlyaone quite a good Job, very much contrary to his expectations. A propos 01 this, there 1S an interesting Chinese B.J. A representa tive the Chinese Military Mission who has recently returned from Germany compares OUI administration very favouraplyya against that O1 the American, Russian EnC ottUT netertn Fultan IT toTnSTITuPR Item "TOTORTTeBJ To Fartod Bumidope aam Pure Tetno run 1tO toeunt eur TO1OO HSTTa HOLTh natistans auam atoumzalnte IUIOTID cuTRuLLaD aptenhestoo tIT per goadsa.t Mane LTmnope SBM aaeut tauedod TO Netrour 20axa on esnou Suumtemp anraTud e Venue on ettos UnTATIg IOT ab Aaupneeoxa STM 11 etianl tfeae+ on mau au Batto aBtm may auofane nTI ando oTTand DTIE SUOTROTLNIOO aogsa on asom0n uTern On feuq uAoao ya0e1 Ltsae DuT LoRe-IOI aTTTaTSuOdsaI Ren 0n STERPTATPUT puOT DUP STOTOTnSa Tue SABT pesramnuoid eaue yora qu6u LTRAOITEDOT dngespay USTITIg aun uoTdnoso aun TO seen Me e 1ITUTM ssereuntenen 10111S SeM T.O0IOS atoz USTTIg aun TI OAEI DTOTM sDothau mTeoTaUy D.IF SaI 4ou DIp suetnten sun '0oo9 Ttaatamad SeM uoTENO T POOT run Imnuatt aaM Satptos Homau uanouT. ratdoed BTseIe UT ou JTeu nuads BoTeuv aun ETTUM aTETOTSuodSEI 83Ro 03 But On SRA aeun aua faniosin EThueIedde SBM HOARNATS eu shanSBaII ATBedIuT Jetao Dte STOTITOTIIIOD TO TIOTOHonSa au JIOI TTTOTSTOdse een 0n fatreuieog DOT STTORASE on ASIT Mnresepau etra TO aeMe OT aren feut OTRRTS aua GTouRu EHE dawt ueag annu $1OT2UIT aua 92ITA uoTssaadup aua STOT eu seoor ayao WOI sRuten Un TA utmhaD JOI saunseam aATesaTdaT nun Usnu red 1c01 Hutfotdue Eye inoan ataac STT AL.Ino 01 META TA PISTEAOTOOUOEZO DTIE DTIRTOd areoor Taun MEITUNTA faua TTIM To ueue Tue repo SJBAFH aun neamoag 8naz pegerndod-ep enre.Io 03 peuti anan 5U 11105 BeTAog out furgu DTO1 suRaD au OTUM 0n atTnaoDov 11 USTOTATUO etro 01 aOASTATRTT ST T nat ATT To fg Tnbax IOT saenmeueng Ou ate aauI peuente AT auen STIOD Putea at stoThTRet Dir SMET 810Z eTdnopo-IPTAog aun In shes OH 1010z you C 3 way From their acministrution adminis S trutlon cheis colorial territories. French troops Live on a better scale. Germans only sOt a monthly ration Of 200 ar. ol mecu, 100 T. 01 rats anu 4 his. 01 beau. Apart Irom al smail number ou oilicers OI E comae tively good tupe, Freuch ollicers anu men comoru/ erstar German homes TO axcont moey alve sopu. THIS IS ACOPY ORIGINAL. DOCUNENIT RETAINED NDEPARTMENT AER SECTION 34) OF THE PUB1IC RECORDS ACT 1958 uLe Q Novenber och I attended the J.1.0. whlen the teuegrum Lrol the Detence Committed Mid Easit was dsCuSeU regaruiny the l'uuune or SIAE. ELLmhirst expressed certain misgivings anu seemed to impl.y that the Air Hiristry hau patner Deal rushea The Chairtall howevan pointeu Odt that the matter inau gone forwuna from the JIC in the orm O1 d proposal UO MIU gast 37 tor their approv.ill. This approval nau NOW beer giver, ELninst was unezerore proposin that the policy shown he reverse. ID was moreover pointea Out to him that the A.0.C. Miaule East was presumadly satisfied as ne woulu have hau a opporturity O1 voicing his opinions onthe Derence Committae having made it clear that there was no sugce.tion that the interrcl securicy OT the AirForce Shounu be in aly way intertereu wich, and DMI Saiu that he Saw ho dirii- culty id the pruposaul which he Felt was sound all Losical. IT now oruLy remains lor us to work out theuetails OI auminis- tration ard finance. I SLW Olulielu OI SIME. I asuea him to have a talk wiiun roDerus a out the poasi- bility O1 masing use Ol B-W. AS reswius his owI position he Will have UO SoaJ 01 with BIME uuLit June a1ter Which he would Line tU De considered jol merent npro/ment with ounseuvese I said thuD at De momlene we could Iftne no promise but Wa ousht 0O De able him NOW soe time cattiy art ear. Newsim rana up about the LACHMAIN case Hs waliteu CO nOW if Hanate, Page nau any miicary coruraet. I explained to him subseuencily that although I WaLs not certain whether they hau an Air Minisur/ contract at the momailt they were ceruaindy on the approved List of bomber contrac-tons are would therefore he in receipt of specifications or our requirements in the future. Newsam seemed UO think that itwouli be possible tor the H.O. to release LACHMANN unuer certain positive restrietior: pronipiting his elpploy ment with firms engaged il the prouuctiom of military aircraft. 321 This IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UIDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 JuLy 2oiol 22 Novemver 7t th Man Johnston Joodl in tUu sa gooub/e. Novenber 3th Burt came is Say the he is got to Maurid Lo check up 01, the Amef.! aviderce which purpozts to Show that AlerI hid bean a Spalish suuyece Tom some jesmae I wel.t with tnc DG uosee Maxwenl ubout future policy im regar to une aumissiol here oi Former members O1 the GIB. Maxwell seemau to think that this Shoclu really be a question For tile Interdeparomental Standing Connittee OlL SecuritJ. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOOUMVENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 uL 20 323 THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIG RECORDS ACT 1958 JULL 2O10 Curminghain has been appointed to sucesed Lord Got in Palesline Mortagu brought me his eport ol the work ot the W.Boara. I am retaining the original uocum arts urrru Ofe copy nere. The other copy is being sent to C. Novemver 9th Marriott Snowed me a telegram From Roger saying that i the Canadians went off the aeep end on the CORBY Case he thought we should do something apout MAY on the grounds Latt i1 the latter had not already gone completely to ground he certainly would on hearing of the arrests in Canada. Moreover the Canadians might not think that we were playing our part. Roger is to meet the PM, the President and Mackenzie King in Washington, il requireu. They will be havin, a discussion or the whole casesalte they have settled the little matter o1 the atomic bomb, and its hanuing over to the Russians or to the Security Council. I gave a talk to two Ollicers Ol the Dansh 2eme Bureau and Damish Securit. policemen, not of whom had worked yor the Resistance. Altar describing UO them the main features ol oun work ald: the inter-relatior o1 security ant inives stigutiol, have them a V vary Driel account ol our operutiors imme- 374 diately before, urine ald sinee the wul An officer orEinz Marine Called hbT'ou Geox Nicolaus von HERZ who hau servea in Baruin, Paris al. Portugal has peer interroghteu Z length in. the field. He mertions among other things Linat Briiish beaman who vicitaa Portusau were wall-trairou and gave awa pructicrly nothin. ousalvaciog Or GiD. hovevor hau bear. iziny YoTItauLe This hau wedu uOnt wa grew True hgeci aili a Linet al.il hau felt Cartieu OuD Dy ine The uaj ase al a teleseoue sorole Delesdope with mLnau unite For use at uigot Thera hau 218O beul real weal oI lolg-falige Dholuslauny. the heyor were selt uaisj to Paris Or. whdve which had uasseu through the straili an nipe wetici wane in GiutHeruoun. Novamper12 Harry Allen talkea to me about the proposa of the JIC to wamn alt British Mitilary Missions abrouu, particularly in the Russi zone, about the uiscovery 02 miies i the British Military Mission in Moscow. Vt agreed that the proper course was to issl w..rhing' out to say that experts would UE coming out to investigate. The wnLe business is rather unsatistactory since it is not at all clear who is saLJy Tese ponsiole tor Military Miss10.s, particu-ir where there is TO Embasay. Iwo 01 saciers men had intact been TO Moscow out noUcu had asked them to look at the Military Missior. There are really only two people wino can give auvice O1 Cilese miatLers,ort being ourseryes, who ate te prime ubera anu the other C.TD GrO WiIG ale th. vecnmici eperuo. C.measwmit; is appeldltJ aTUJ ine with the FO that ole 01 umpis 21U0 mert 3738 in the Embassy should made periodical inspections. So lar Treasury sarction has not been obtained. Grpris men wGulu not of course know anything about mikesy uness they were properly trained by the BPO. Col.Bradrora,who is TIOW heaa 01 the Military Inteiig ence Sehooi which was moved From Matlock to Farham, came to ask whether we could give him a lecture on the 14th Dec. He wanted Hartis Lecture O1 the 6IB. E suggested that posslbby this stajeet might oe a little ouf or late suding that the GIS hau beer LETgey liquiuatea. He gaid that as a certain number of the Olnicers wounL be going to the Britiun zone he thought 16 would be a good ening 102 them to know what the bemais zdteup Wa alo to be familiar with the oruineiy GIS Jangon: i then sugeeateu LO him that there might be other supveets counecteu with our wore or Whien he mishe like us to Tecbure nom time to time. He wecomeu this with enthusiasm. His address is S.M.I. Pierrepont House, Farnham, terephore Frenshain 211. I am asking TAR to see what can be dore about the Dec.i4t lecture. He might to it himseiror possilig get Hart or Roland Bind to give it. Scllater tells me that RSS ate sending a special unit with DRing apparatus and Sniiters to Palestine. Nobody Sees to have heard anything apout this. I said I woula speak to C. November 13th L saw Ruirer. He has been at home OT sicior leave but is going back DO the Brltish 2one shortly He would like to be cousdered 1or the Security service as permetreneip Kellar tells me ne nas acen cunniiigham who visited the DG- Keltar hus gvel: hm, and also the ADC, E long talk or the suouect of the worie of the DSO. He 1ouud Cumngnam anu the ADe quite inbeatigent quicic on toe Uptake. He thiinks nowever cha Cunning ham might o occasion he a bit peppery. He naa not quite tot the salle beriaa per sonality ab Got. I went over tc sae C.about the ueytion o1 miles. He agree that the present position was rather unsetisitetory out tea mie about his proposals tor wireless operator o1 SLU in each Ermbassy being mae esporsiute IoT periodical inspections I tol told him that these ofllcers would have LO ao a course with the GPO, since mikes were a highly specialised Job. I also spoke to C. about out responsibilitie: with regard to any prima facie case of espionage in the FO or one oi our Embassies aoroac. I sadu I thought that such cases shouu be investigated by oupSelvess I tolu him off the record that I knew ot a case where the RO had taken out a telepnove check on one of thaiir own employees, whom the, sus- pected o1 Leanage. He agreeu chat this was thoroughly irregular an undasirable. They hau been able to CO it because any Secretary OI State was apparertiy empowered to sig a warrant. I Lod 0. that il matter like this came to che notce of the HO they wouiC probably raise cain. TI twas early unasirable that this sort of thing should not De certnalised ir. ore Secretary OT state. The DG, TAR, seif JC, JOMarriotta Luie all Lan Wlrson ware ecorahatb Mine Beter OL Yugosaviay though precisely what 1or 140n aun TOT maauoo ueeg DeU senoA Ten TTR nue anon 0n pasnta ou Mated SISTT/o1 HOTORDTTT tO WOT stun on qumoonS not nTnom QLM Mar aim eeul 0anon pru eu Hppum JOT Aged aua 0n Se Aa EUTOtROS ATRuAsaudeJ SOT 03 ATueeta penoprt put esTou a epeu Atqgoad 11 and teuo out Item oun neddoup @H -tuTu TO ends aoye to sexog OMA aun TO uopa UT euo SnuBU STU DeORTd pue puPU uo TIg pateapuoo TTRa ueqan B UI Iodnd STU ind Jen -OA OU "sex00 On away euaug 110158000 SEUI O Sa/ TO snauprmnu JO.T BTABTS-onI UT @ORTd tresrn you torpaTa oInBuDouAT R TO amnn aua TIT FrItunou qRuQ ang dumI SBM TIOTToaTe eroum aun pyes eH raupa sel G anorR TIT 1aegod tnnel on pose aa Dmnom duty aun TOTITdo STU UIT grun ang seam Mat axe11 run TO asuinoa TIT pauntoan orom OTTandey 9 ITuTeneo noUtr anu0 none EH rmofeu PrTutaum-eno 1 fa remori MTE OnTL and TEL MOTUM suoraoate au TO 19TT IT GEM TIOTTPTITS aua anUM M Lrtome.iep PTTP T8D,T2 1210-Y JTH STU I EPTODTTATIO chosen IO yiren TO TTT SM mrr want menmatr ang UTIM uIgea 02 snoweu IGmanT PITy BUT rsn TO bosa on PemuBu G1M UOEUMA nueumpon 1O HoTARTESPUd aun to 0r1non and UT veto entepa DThouS OM ana meTeZUs tie Janto 110 ate Faur me/ enru man 3o11 neu Men suoToDap run sn @NT? Arngoe 011 pTnoo au aru0 peUTRTaxe BUTs au awye ams ata 912 pee -soban 5141O 1912u0 Stop yonu uaia wTOTTuN TRAETI TIT nessaip Ftoueueo eua ae auese.d GRM OTO/STL SI 91tua aroum aun TO aun Iraeumsed JPeTo MlaA ST Apogou let 32" THISI IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUDLIO RECORDS AOT 11958 Juuu 2O10. Novemoer 14th I atterdeu the meeting 01 the JIO. we polte poirteu out to them that there was some doubt as to whc was responsible Lor the securicy of Militar.i. Mission abroad. The AmDassauor was responsible tor military, laval anu air actaches but in come countries there was not an Ambassaaur but orly a Military Mission. Nobouy seemeu to KNOW the arswer. Meanwhile a telegram we suggest is going o1i anu we have been asreu to line out what persouneu. Saltery has avallaole. Col.Dalley,who may be G.P.Singapore came to see me. I gathered that he would be very ready to WOr lor us, although he is I understand a person who is apt to marse enemies and might not therefore be particu- larly suitable. I outlined to him our proposals about CICB with which he seemed to be in fairiy hearty agreement. I was summoned to Briuges anu a Selection Committee sisting of Cadogan,indlater and Taxwell. They asked me what I hau one during the last 25 eurs and then my views asyout German activities,here,berore,an sirce, the wal. They also talked about Tucure staff. I Sadu I thought we ought to have mone arTa petter people. Money was not the Ory opjecl. IT Was necessar/ CO sive a wiuer field Ol promotion. I than mentlone servica Inteltigence alu One esirauility 329 of some sort o1 permanent civiliar 5tann to give continuity to their work. I1 such StaIt's wene staoished there coulu ve promotion round the 5 berviees aru I, Everyoouy was very Sympe thetio. I saiu tna L I thought the Ruwsian prouem woun De the outataning ole 0I uae mucuTaaD would involve uS in a great ueal O1 work. Further that im this comisciion an adequate wa ching start Wlia uI the sTeaDesl importance since we snoulu nave LO cover Loberl HLssieno arru b-P. members DUL anti the satellite sLates. Maxwail bhon aSneu what it was possiute LO to When we nau aiscovensu Russiar SPr LU webisi Hot put a stop to such activities. This seemed LO se rather a Counsel 01 despair and 1 was relievea to linu that ali the other memo ens o1 the committe well upon him. In the antercom I saw Pillaitch 1ate 01 DLB aru Inglis, late ACSI. God preserve us from either Ol them ab Future UIGT Dick, ourry Charles ana I had a talk on Curryis paper on the Lutume orsarisation. The paper emphasises the rate that the respomsibilities nnust be propery paced on the heaas o1 5 uivisions AAaministra- tion, anu urgani sation, oI,B.Investigatior B. alna Cand D. security. There shotro te three directors and 5 Deputy Directors. The veputi however should be heaus o1 section and shoula Ofliciate in the civdsion Orrhyy uurinig the ausenee ot the director. In the same way the DDG SHOULU be Senior urecton and should orly operate in his capacity as DDG in the DGS abbblee. 330 November 1th S6W varriott,serpell blue Buzzard this morning. Thay tou me aunt the case ol one JONESCU, E numarian piot wh1o au brouga over ueesation upon buchareutt the Youth congresa. bryor serpetll materltl 1D seemed Uhut a Good matay ume peopaie who have Come over alc nPmemuata. JUIDOOU Hlac Been given a mission Lo curr OnU espionage at ue havianus. lie reporbeu this lact tO Cole Chasteutaine of SUE whom he Knew persouauuly ard hat expnesseu his intertlol 1OE going Dter. heheu also apparently Calleu on the Aliens Dept. Dut as he was Somewhat incoherert threy maa asked him to put it in waiting. IC seemau that JONESCU was quite genuine as he saiu that he was uite prepareu to LO mouth America if he could not stay here. we uecided that Buzzaru shouu See him anu take a statement. We would the eonsiuer thae matter further. I thought i0 woua De a good thing to have him picked up aL Che meeting allu see where he went Iterwarass TAR Came in UO talc Do me anoud passing GO OSS inormation are che Lmesirabia aliens wishing to proceeu to the UoA. T sadd I thought this intormatioi reari. ought go through the FBI wno Were the only people who could UO any thig about it. 086 apparentiy regapu bhiis ES Dieip Funeclon as tne/ Say they have peryormeu is other paces abroaa Or Dehat O1 Emoassy. I folla TAR toascerlain From the LamnDasisy what their Crlanices were aru to point out to tham that we thought he IDI was puspiu.uy a more suitable cuaneir ourry taliceu UO me apout his paper I balu 331 that personally I Was it agreement. I diu however bee certain uilliculties when we considenau the relations ol Kellaris Seccion viich SIME. The seeviol haa woKeu extremely well because wallat was hanuing YIOE only security ityyorgerisatior anl aumimistrauion ULD also intdiligelce Ti LIME was Tow going LO be a qivideu responsibility within the orlice iu might ueiu to uillicultiso. Man however went deyeru or the Co-oruine- tior at the top who it might ve chat we should have to made some wueriice in onuer to maintain the principles lcid down in Curtule mamo. Cimperman came to tell me that a man Called WEBB on the Daily Express hau asaeu him to suppl/ him with Soy Stories,au he hau siia that he was here solely in the capacity ol liaison oflicer with MIS. we tollu him tO tell Webb that he Couadl not disclose aything. Cusseu hopes that this will choke Tebb O11. I cold Cimperman I thought it would be a pity ir any emphasis was laia on the liaison Detween ourselves and the FBI as this might be awkwanu For us both. He agreed and Said the he would do avery- thing he could to camp web down. He Tang later to say that he hau Deen succdssiul and that WeDp hac promibeu to wash out the whole suojeet. November 1th THISIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCLMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Lu DoLo ,37 THISIS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 8(4) OF THE PUSLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 Ly Juuy 2O10 tnre Turairn President has D ert cousineriig UTE Tevetia- tior of certain JaCUS ayouL; Turriaa policy 4 during the war al esspeciaiey the altituue or Russid iy 1942 when, araid that Turke/ might bine with bermilnyy D Canin maui havial promises ul Derri wriia auvurlibie Lo Tursey 6O induce her LO keep he ucutpuit. 333 At that time Stalin was in aVour of grantin to Turkey large parts of southern Bulsaria including the port of Burgas, all the ureei Islands close to the urnish coast ineluuing not only the Doaecanese but also Mitilini, Kios and Samos anu a slice o1 northeit syria ircluuing Aleppo. Those promises ware made 1rst in Moscow anu were confirmeu in ATKaa by the Soviet Ambassador Vinograuov. The British Govt. iy said LO have been aware oi these proposals which were aenlineu by luniey. The interrogatior o1 Runusteut nas prouuceu some nteresbing imtormecfor. The Potin Calpiign Wes ibexdeu EO SEATE OI 25th Auar 1909 Dut in tha evening oruers wera given tohou everything. Rundstall thought that a peace leeler muait nave bean mnaue by M6s50- lin1. During the breakthrough in rraree in May 1940 Runtisteat hac at nis dlsposa 5 Armiies and 86 Divisions altogether. AS the aivisio went forward a0ross Belgium aria France they burneu left in oruer to mneata possible attack from the south. Runasteat mnentioned tha the British must have been surpriseu at the sudden stop thet was maue at Lunkir. 11 That said nunatseatiwas one on the Fwrer oruerse He suateny culleu a nalt art we were all suspended. We were not allowed to go forward moTe than within l0kmS. o1 Dunirk. Whether he was areauy tou muen occupleu wi.th tie second Ert oi na Campaign against France, that is to say the wurTI towards the south, or what cause hi DO To that, I don L know. At any rare it was, if I may say so, a Lucky stroke hor you, Tor il we hau gone ahead I ao ill thl 1. you woul have been able to set SO mang awa/t. Talking of the invasion O1 Erigland, Runasted said "We lay around until tha middle or end O1 July ana preparations were maue Ioc aIt invasion 01 Enganu. It WES youseuse, ecauss theships were not avaitlabie. They first naa to be brought from Sermany and the Nethare lands. They were barges which hau to be reconstructed so that at talk could oe driven out o1 the DowS. The the troops nad to Learn how to embark ano disembari. we o atthe whore thing as moTe o1 a same bacause it was oovious that 1O invastor W&s possibile since our Navy Was not ir a position to cover the crossing ol the charmei, ard the carrring O1 reirorcementsy nor was it possiuie for the Lo Play the part wilich shouuu lali LU the xavy. I Ireven pelleveu invasion there was YIO need to. These Vesseta nau Lo De moved anu cou only be one au hish time. supposing any thing wars to have happened en route which would have mncant that E lost one or two hours, the tiiue would nave ueer ebbing and there I womin have been of the coast. T was always scepblcall aDouc the mnatber. We had omty very 1ev paraeroops at the time. There was one airoomne division in Fotterdam. I have got the feeing that the Fuhrer-never really wanted ite He ne had sullicient courage. Alterwanas he said ton land I am a hero but I am Irightie en o1 warl Pome figure ol speech uiie that. He definitely hoped you would somehow make overcures to him. Aiterwareis it Was buo late. Every thing however on your bie hau Become much stronger. out Air Force could unuertake the job of the arbitlery ir supporting lanuing operations but they could never naverepaced the Navy which was Lacking. 11 On the Russian capalgn hunasbalit said the 338 the finst he heard ol the plan LO atoaci Russia was in the winter of 1940-41. He was insistent tha such a campaign must begin irt Mayy alter the Swampy porhou This was not possible owing to the Baukan campaign which caused a 4 weeks dauay. Rundsted himsell was Iot thusiastic apout the campaign, He had always favoured an understanding with Russia such Mas maa existed tmaer Von Seeit.. The Germans hau teemendous uitflculties with transport even in Une Summer. Runustedt remember nTOW a parzer division covreu only 7 kms in 12 hours. It is unbeievaplen ne suit, Manyone who has otseen it does not benleve it. IL it begins ruining then that is the end. On the Normanuy battla aurusteut Said that alter the laraing ie hud to reChon with a seconu lanuing specially aony tite Bagian coast. Until ne was couvirceu that this Wes 1ut the case he ecuu Fot wichurawa great aeal from that area, and once that was established the moving OI the uivisions was consideraoiy hampered by the dastruce tion oi the Selne briuges. He Was alrald oi a thrust in the direction ol tire lower Rhire anu the Ruhr anu also O1 the proxim- ity o1 our coast to the invasion coast anut Lo the V.u sites. The utter novever were not a very serious consideration in holding the German 15th Army in the Pas de Calais. Runusted avicenily thought that the landing o1 the south ol Franee Was mistake. He thought DErat Dy putting tnose Iorees into the north we might have rolleu up the front ner. When asked by his interrogator about Gemmar wiithurawals anu why theyalwaus took phuce too beud said "Oh,weil, that Was the Fuhrerts etermall principle of staring put. Where E am I 3l remain, that waa has principle LO which he unfortunately auhered in importan matters as well as unimportunt oneS. The effect ol these principles showed up in a atastrophic manrer when the Araeles Offensive was broken of. We Kept on stay- ing put all the time insteau ol morning aa sensible front line. I had to ask before I moved a single man. Hitler WES present atthe first part of the Ardennes oflenwite at headquanters,and later was permanent 1y on the telephone. Runusteut was opposed LO the oporutous in NAtricae He sad it would have been better i1 the Garmans had Left it adone altogether: It Cost them an increuibid namner of outstanding leauens an naterial. John tells me that it nas veen agreeu Dy Canada that ir we interrogate MAY we can have 1u discretion to make whatever use we like oi Corby's eviuence.. T wemlt to see Archie Bone about 1h2 ELLI Case and uiscussad with nim at 1ensth SOERI set-up in Fussia. HB again expreezeu LO me cortidentially his gruve Suapicions about George Hiil, ara also about one Gporge GRaam whose ran name 15 serse LOONTIEI a White Russiai. The Lwo are very close tied and ona always backs up the other. Archie sa/s he carnot waeradana now a man like Hill can possibly De uccepteue Lo the Russians unless tney are bettins some sort quid pro quo, the mOTe so since they Danished his mistress EO Siberia ther brought her Dack alter a certain aelayi. Hiid himsei lives in an entansive ilaty Whieh Soluen visited by the Ambassador. The expenses 01 the SOE Moscow Mission have peen roughly 27-8,000 a years am absolutely rathing has 332 come out O1 it. other member: the missio incluuing DARTON who accoruilg to ArChie is 1007o reliable, have had their suepicions all in any Cise think that the wrote mission is something oi a raChet. Archie has expresseu his views venJ lorcioly within the OIganisation organi 1or a Long Lime bue wi chouc any success, except perhaps that the whole thing is now being Close down. AEchie aaviseu strongly against it and his view was firmly accepreu. I ased him how it was that Hill got appointed to the Control Commission. He said that ther was a demand lor his Services both From the W.O.ana the F.0. Meanwhile he appears to have freedom Ol movement. On the 24th act. he called or SOE and informed Archie that he was going or1 a private visit to hussia. He had had no dif ficulty watevep about getting his visa. He as ed whether there was anything he could do for SOE on the side ard whether they would oe preared in any may to meet his expenses. There nas beer a iairlJ recat Slgsestion Item the Ambasaauor that Graham bhouua rellai on in Moscow as a mempen ol his THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENI RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 auu 200 nerve arnangeu with Archie to dine with him and Darton on Wed- nesaay in oruer to get something ol the atmosphere o1 the Moscow Mission. 33% I am getting the personal. Miles for all the representatives of the SOE mission. Neither Hiil LOT Graham o1 course really lit the bill since bhe only apparently concrete piece o1 evidence py COrBY is that he decyphereu two telegrams indicating that ELLI was ir London and workeu through the SovietM.A. I threw a fly over Alley about George Hill. He said he hau know him For many years anu that he regarued him as a charlatan. He had in fact employed him O1 oehali O1 Imperiall Tobacco in the Bakans put that he had peen too expensive even tor them. He hac also use him in the old days to maxecontact with various MPS like Commanaer Kenworthy who seemed LO De a sporesman Tor the Soviet GOvt.in the House of Commons. There were periodicall meetings in the form of Luricheor parties which were arranged by HA. The suggestion that ELLIFALLEY is I think too Tantastio to merit any serious thought. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS AOT 1958 JULy 2010 THIS IS A COPY 339 ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPABTMENT UNDER SECTION 3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 fly 200 November 17th I haa a ong tali wich Dick about lucune organisation. He haa thrown a 1/ over Curry about his running the Secretariat, but Curry evidently Gid not think the Job would be more thar that OI a gloririeu PA. Dicx wordered whether he wouulu COt De a good choice for C.Division, which is YOW a very large one with 4 sections an 61 course uoin extremely importnt ana delicate work. It is essential that somebouy shoud be in charge to give aavice who real.l/ assess the value OI records in a balanced ways The appointment woullu Tit in with the general policy OI moveing people around anu inil- trating olicers with B.bivn.experience into other divisions. Another idea in chis conneetion is that TAR Shoud Become Deputy D.Division. I also talxeu LO vica 6000 ueal EDOUE SIME anu CICB. It Seameu to me the even in peace time we shouu have EU have KL Car. bain number' ol Army Or hiif Force uilicens 01l the stands oi these rgalisuciousywhich to some extent woulil De Coutectors 01 Intelligence. SINE ward il. Iacu une principi colLectors O1 inteigerce in mia Lase at this momnt. ID the services thoushe that the/ were going to Loue drrormation a result Oi naw mana6 emant they Would Clari complain. What 1 thillc il come Lo is this AS long as BIME is covering the security 01 the military area it will have LO continue on its present Lines. II the whole area quietens dowil,and L cannot See it uoiny SO Lor some considerable time, we micht consiae 340 having all its members on our staI1. I spoke to Allec Keltar about Une New proposal by Curr/ thaD the D main responsioilities shouaa be -Div.Aaminis tration and Organ- isation,B.Division Investigution and Intelli- gence,0.8 DDivistion security. I askea him how this wouua lit in with his present functions. He din not seem to see any real didiculty. He thought that il we still had a seetion dealing with the Mid East, advice On strictly securit/ matters could( continue as it aoes now, through DDivisiony ana that information regarding Russian activities could De passed toa Russian sectio provided Mid East were kept well in the picture. Joe Archer came to talk to me about LACHMANN. MAP have hau a request I'Tom Hanuley-Page to re-employ him provided he is kept in a special laboratory apart From the main organi sation. We pointed out all the Former snags. I have just read a reconu ol the activities O1 the Russian biaison Group here anu its relations with tne soviet MiitaRY anu other representatives in the U.K. from 1941-45. IL is an appaluing record Of all give and no take. There is Io doubt that we rendereu immense services to the Soviet Govt. in every possible respect and put up with an incessan.t flow ol indignities, injustices, protests anu criticisms, ana receiveu absolutely nothing. A typical example is in the case OI Valertines,whicl the Russians wanted. IT was not for Years after the I'inst shipment that they complairec AS the tanks hau Deen termed obsolete by 341 us some Lwo yeans before the complaint, and as moreoaver we were oldy continuin manufacture and supply at tha ooviet authorities exprass request, the cnivicisi was wontnless. Gen.Fireprace says the Russian character uellights in a barhain anu they have certain standaru reaction toa gift horse. Their first reaction is that it must be a wrong tune Theyr next reaction having established tiut the horse is a bood one, is that there must De some ueep-palu scherne to exxaci appropriate copersation, and their third reaction Oon Tinuing that the horse is DoL E goou one ana that nothing is expected in return, i5 La classi- ty the giver as a prize mug. The Russian Llalbon Group, the British Military MSlon in Moscow and ever highor-placeu British organisations earned a strong repuuation as belonging to the thira categeryi. An interesuing aspece or our elations centres nounu the supply O1 incelliseuce on anamy organisatdons The service which was provided by Mel. was of thu highest order in all departinents OI Intalligeuce there was Lonuon wearly mpepin with the Soviet viet-Oruerot bautte ropreserbative who waS given the Iultest 1ormatlor on the eremy bimilr metings Cook place ad the Auminalean the Air Miuistryy Although there wene suppogres to be regular meetings our a similar kind in Moscow they rarely tooic place and when they did no informat tion was impanted. In one cuse they ashed lor- a sample 01 t cank Which at that ta time only the prototype existed. A greut dea oi trouble took place over Russiars viho ere-captured in the field lichting for the German forces. IT eb:1944 we informed the Hussians that there were laTHe numbers woring in the Todt organisation yu and also for Vlasovts Army. When we did SO the head o1 the Dovia Military Mission showed great indigration amd reruseu LO accept the possibility that any soviet citizens coulu be in German service. Immeaietely alter D.aay Russians in Germar uniform were captured in quantity anu transferred to caps in the U.K. but i.t was not until Sept.194 that the bovLet Govt. suudenly changed its whole attitude and launched what wus tantamount to an accusation against us of Detaining lberaced Soviet citizens in Germar P/W carpi The reason was a probable but somewhat inappropriate counterblast for the maltreat- ment oi British P/WS over-r by the Russian which were of course in an entirely ufrere ent category. In any case there was nothing in the Russian aecusations about treatment of their owrI national Tounu in Germall uniforms. Immanse crouple was uakenl LO 1ook alter these people at to repul uTiate them. Many OI them ia not wish Do to back and some committed suicine. Firebrace concludes that arter 4 years o1 Residence in this country the soviet Military Mission and Trade Dellegatiox anu ol our Mieslol in Moscow, relatsns have not only TOU improved but have deterioratel. The only Linic, the only common interest was the war again Germany, ar as it became more anu more eviuent that Germany was to Da defeated so in fact had the Soviet authorities beeome more and mope dillioult i1 not impossiole Lo deal with. Unuoubteuly there ate number oi them who are pleasant to meet nd appear LO be genuine in their likes aru urs- likes of people Dut they are merely part of a ruthless bureaucratic machine and their personal feelings or views cannot in any way influence their official contacts and work. THLT limu Tt tu man LT Th bn baaheereunhe thinlce thin od D gal Fa 