The National Archives(c) crown copyrightCatalogue Reference:k :KV/4/196Image Reference:12796T/viAY:pyPAJOA PnGoe} pnfopeppoATTTqTSSOd 'SSOUTTI S Jeuel st 04 SUtmo 09ouueo ATeneunnorun pay seunpuoH ustld Utantaies Teuad suuou 8T pepntouop seu euBa Te utete ano utu puas on enemou pJBu Jeue.weas pTnom I yeynT ST AtBuJeTe euo euLetra UATM esunoo e utu FUTAte eye etpuI 0seuanH pues UTu am 12u2 eTarssod aw 01 suees21 Butuo UT ed utu soedsod S JOASVreum oa se eues uyor UIM pom eneu 0pestuod I etrumuee g-I- on pmno DM 2UdTeu ue Ate pmnous am eu eTgetsep sem IMetA TO TUTOd OIJIO teJeue e mOJII asnepegH'I'C On 08 0 USIM ou pIp au Its seM 1peueptop SEM I se IBI OS MTA sTu eye ouquatu 9:0 ay uoseaJ uTUATM pequem eua sumop eTdoed SutaeT TO none UT sem I etyum12u? poteS I gOS JTOT eutuo 0n 08 0a sauemJeue ah soV:c Butuun uo 08 O4 IO HIC0108 0n ueay ATemnotaJed you SI out JIOSVUtH uees neu T etTumuBOTeaseqyutuAeua uoTsTOep Lue ayeu uea JeqJeH put u aeuutu PTOA eneu I yOuTUe-uspueaep eas onButos MOU ST p-f to 9utos SutAaqot-eunoppue SutAagot IO Deep poo B SI eeua II seow on SYOOT I suoseeJ TEOTATTOD JOI umoppasoTo aseo run eas on eMIT pmnom youtue-usipueaep 4eua shes JOISV uanH etTumueeeuruy 9u Sutssoo UTM uorpeuuop UT oweuosIO.I titu FoTdme 01 Tesodod B epeu MOu seuuoTodepep JTOI snanIg esm USIM ou pTnom aueua pues utaeu PPTIM reseo snang eu UT que-dotenep Meu run note ou TTeA 02 one 0fefsuotdse TOWTOT Lue Ut Butseaue TO youeIH eua Aa pesnopeButea EOTITO STU TO MST aua un o USTM oupTnous am a2ua semeas pino I 8u uotpefqoetarssod Auto eu 910 aua On dn uoTTSOdodau and O uoTTsOd eeq e UT ag ueupmnous I aleedo on pesodoId au MOU put oamspe4uOD S JOOTA out no purI bu JeneuSLI176I am off to Paris tomorrow.-Catalogue Reference:KV/4/196March 19thI returned from Paris yesterday. Last nightI dined with Rivatt-Carnac. He has come overfor a month ana wishes to see all he can. Hehas not b en in England For 22 years. He start-ea life by running away from home and joiningthe French Army as a medical oraerly in the:last war. He then went to his family in Inaiawhere at the age of 19 he got a job as abusiness organiser with 1,600 men under him.He then became secretary to the manager of avery large business. At this state he gotcrossedinlove,andinhisownwords"paintedthe town in blood and glory". What hadhappened I do not know but evidently heincurred the displeasure o1 his family, packedup ana arrived in Canada with $30 in hispocket. He joined the RCMP as a trooper andafter serving in the Arctic and all over thecountry he is now head of the RCMP IntelligenceDe t. He seems to have a certain nostalgiafor this country and I am inclined to thinkhe would not be averse to getting ajop inEngland. He did in fact make some suggestionat the beginning of the war, although it wasobviously better that he should remain wherehe was. I asked him about our representationin Canada in the future. He seemea to thinkthat it would be of considerable value il wecould keep an oilicer there,quite apart Iromany relations that he might have with theFBI. Such an Officer would probably havemore to ao in connection with subversivemovements than espionage. Communism seemsto pe the great bogey in the western hemis-phere. I cannot help feeling that a somewhatexaggeratea view is taken OI the whole thing.At the daily meeting toaay, Baxter said thatduring the last month 900 people haa passeuCatalogue Reference:KVI4/196through the LRC.. Most of them appear to becoming from Stockhollm not by the Americanroute but by the ordinary route and many ofthem are quite uniitted for service in thealliea armies. I told Baxter to put forwara'a note so that we can take the matter up.Propably if Passport Control were to tightenup their standards this would meet the case.During my apseuce there has been a possiplerevival of the Arthur project. The sugges-tion is that he may now be coming by midgetsubrerine. There is nothing really derinite,only that some operation is contemplated bythe same truppe as was concerned with Arthur.I have spoken to the DG about Dykes. He isquite agreeable to his going to theAustrian ontro] Commission. I have wiredtoHill-Dillon telling him that Dykes would beavailable in 10 days time and that he couldalso have the services of Miss Sherer andanother girl.The D.G., John Noble,Curry and I lunchea withthe Czech Minister of the Interior and otherCzechs who are departing for Prague. Therewere compliments on both sides about theco-operation which had existed during the warand hopes that it might be continued in thefuture. Sloane is remaining behind Forthe time being. I sat next to a major Zetchnikwho had had a rather remarkable career. Hewas fighting with the Poles at the beginningof the war and when the collapse came aeciaedto get out through the Russian front. He saidthat it was already quite clear that theRussians realised that they weulu be fightingthe Germans before long. They kept him insome internment camp For a short time and thenallowed him to join the Czech Forces in France.catalogueogte'Reference.k/4/196escapea to England.COPYGRIGINAL DOCUMENT PETAINEDL 791958 Moe 2 ejodI saw Rustan after lunch: He is getting jobwith the eAmerican Air Force in connectionwiththe examination of documents. He is leavin'gtomorrow for France.I had a talk with Charlesabout expenses. Heis not very anxious to is.sue a circuar as hethinks thinks it too difficult to define.P are to have a furthertalk about this. Ialsotalkedito him about U35 salary,whichhas been over-paid by EIO a month for thelast 8 months. He is quite prepared to writethis off or to come to some compromise ifnecessary. I also talked to him about Victorexpenses in Paris which are very considerable.Isaw Cussen about Joets office in Parise Twothings that were worrying Joe were the increa'sin staff for Ger Germany andhisefu uturerocatioAs regards the staff I said he oughtto haveanother police officer vhospoke-GermanandItold him that possibly he mightiget get Caroe alpresented-considerabledifticultieWe agreed that whensJoelmovedeforward itwould-be esirablerto-keep-some-sort-of-anoffice in Paris and that French Corin mightdoforthis dofor thisvecil-is-going-over-to-lire-to-discuss-ariounatters including the question of a U-boat whidas-been-sunkioffathe-coastorucorh -coastofcork: Theicrewall came ashore and have been interned. Themost important part is a box which was floatedashore and contained the cyphers and how towork them.I had a talk with Kim Philby about Victor. Iwar told him that I had seen Bobby Mackenzieand that in his view there was nothing to becatargie Reference KV/4/196icials until thingssettled. down This-however would-notibeVictor's line. If he did anythinghe wouldmerely have personal contacts, a good manyof whom would probably be unconscious agents:I thought however that he might have an even moximportant field here in London and that therewas much to be done in working up the intelli-gence organisation. In the past no one hadbeen responsible For the collection of inti ti-gence in this country. I said I thought iuwas particularly important that Victorshould not run paid agents in France, notbecause he would not do the job admirablybut because it would spoil his usefulnessif there was any sort of compact.E hada talk with Brooman-White and toldshinabout the set-up in Paris and the prospectsofrgivinghimeither Peter PetersHope or GranviileByrde to succeed Ramsbotham who is going to,2lstArmyGroup.I think he -would preferByrde as being the steadier individual.I had word with Buster and explained to himthat there.wasa-slight-grievance inParisabout our unwillingness: to accept certaincaptured agentsfor interrogationa 020'.Ihad explained to Paris that our object ingettingagentshere was:.two-fold.one-wastobtain information from the more importantcharactersifr from which important lessonscould e,learned, and the other was to getback hereiany. individuals who tied up withexisting cases or had known about espionageprojects in the UK. I thought it .was possiblethatwe did not always consider the interestsof Paris who sometimes thought that informationof value to them could be better extractedunder 020 conditions. Buster said that thereal trouble was that 020 couid not get informaatalogwerRelereneeikui4ladbalready been wjucked80about-by theFrench and thatit was on thesegrounds mainly that cases ha been turned dowI suggested to him that he should make thisclear to the SCI unit in Paris as there 3appeared to be some misunderstandinge ie1Lennox tells me that elements of two panzerdivisions have been withdrawn from the Weserfront and sent down to Remagen.March 20 20thI talked with Herbert and Sclater (now Lt.Colabout the lines that we should take at theJIC on our Signals Security paper. We thoughtit best to accept all the clausesand tosuggest that our requirements should bereviewed at StagerA. As regards our tinkwith SHAEF I should suggestthat that couldbest be carriedout by direct communicationbetween ourselves and Col'Walter ScottI subsequently attended the JIC ImeetingAllour recommendations-were-accepte includithe allocation of 6 sets. There: was a slightdemuron-cispar demurion part-with-regardto-alterscotas the link in SHAEF although whatopreciselyhad-todowi-th him im-I-don-t-know.T shal as> him when I see him.J.C. tells me that according to Montague Tatewas probably responsible for the sinking ofthe U-boat off Cork. He has been giving quita lot of misleading information about mine-fields:Drew and Findlater have gone to Gibe to dealwith the question of the return of Gibraltarisubjects from N.reland. While there DrewCatalogueireterencetkt4/196q! question 1u55 witha Sf omsa view162EPARNREAI WPENTHE PUBLIC RECONDSACT 1958 mau 2000to Kirby-Greenisp people being used possiblyfor deception.It has been decided that there is no point ina representative from the XX Committee attend-ing regularly the 212 Committee in Versailles.If necessary an officer of the Service concerned fromthe XX Committee can attend ad hocmeetings.It has finally been decided thatcan goback to Spain.Aeblackmailing retter to ostro has been draftedand despatched. So far there have been noreactions.ButlerteHsmetthatrithasoeen Butlertellsamett thasbeenfinall has nfinallydecided that Findlater shall conduct the:ncuinyintoztheoverlappingzbetweenrourselveand Section Ve The letter he has receivedfromthe FO-suggestsan enquiry ryinto-MIrathethan into SIS.I Findlateri not accepting Tthisr-andwillprobably replythathe-cannotpossibly deals with the question without theexaminationtof fairsofSISaswelia of scasweliasMI5:s I must say I rather resent the factthat-the-ro-ahould-haveiput-this-matterupif MIS were on the mat. - In the long rundof course. the facts-willspeak for themselvesYou have onlygot to look at the CI map tor.see that we are not only doing our own jobbut a good deal of SISS as well. The-two bestpeople; in fact the only ones who are doing areally solid job of work in Paris are Victorand Ramsbotham, and Dykes within hislimitshas also done well. In Brussels we are carryingthe whole of one SCI unit with 3 or 4 officers.We:care doing the bulk oi the work in the warRoom, and now B-W has just come over to askCatatogue eferene have Rothschiid or JamesRobertson to control the SCI units in the FarEast. Section V are also asking us to replaceRamsbotham in Paris. I have let B-W knowthat I am doubtful whether we canhelp in theFar East. Victor has got heavy commitmentsalready at any rate until things settle downin Germany, and James Robertson is fullyoccupied wit Middle East aflairs.March 21stI saw John Marriott and Vickery about anofficer and a wireless ope rator for DIB. Iexplained that the difficulties oi gettingBurton out were almost unsurmountable fromthe aaministrative point of view, he beinga servant of the Prison Commissioners, and thatHugh Astor,with whom I had a talk, was notanxious to take on the job. I haa howeverheara ofa Lt.Sheers who I subsequently saw.He had done all the wireless/maintenance workin the Mid East for ames Robertson's DAsbut has just got back under the Python schemeand may not be anxious to go out again.. I haveasked Sheers to think the matter over. Heis rather bitten by the jop.The D.G. talked to me about the programmefor Hoover's visit which has been drawn up byan F.O.Committee under Cavendish-Bentinck.The whole thing is on a very grandiose scale.Hoover might be the President or Mayor LaGuardia. Three days of his stay are givento us. D.G. thinks it is all out of perspec-tive. It is true, although it may be aavan-tageous to pander to some extent to Hoover'svanity. Anyway the matter is not in our handsI told the DG that I was doubtiul Irom whatI had heard whether Hoover would come. I amCatalogue Reference:KVI4/196quite certain that Bill Stephenson has madethese elaborate plans in order that beforegiving up his job he could show everyone thathe is on friendly relations with Hoover.It is however questionable whether Hoover willfall into this trap, if it is a trap.Victor and Dick arrived back for a few dayslast hight. Tess Mayor has got the MBE forgallantry in dismantiing booby traps atRocquemont.At the weekly meeting Cussen mentioned therecent proposal to prosecute the Daily Mirrorfor publishing details of the Lindemans case.The JAG had however decided not to prosecute,as the articles had in fact,owing to a mis-apprehension, been passed for pubiicationin other papers by the press censor, who hadbeen under the impression that the edition ofthe Mirror in which it first appearea was onewhich was printed for sending over to Ireiana.He thought that ii this was so, the informationhad already escaped from the U.K. ana therewas no purpose therefore in stopping furtherarticles on the same subject. The DailyMirror was however being warneu.Hughes said that two V.21s had not actedupt to form lately. One had not explodedon impact, and another had simply disintegrateoin the air also without exploding.Gisela has got an offer to tane a Look atTreasure's book and I am trying to arrange forher to go out to Paris to do this.Jimmy DicAson came to talk about the futureof his section. M. wishes to discuss theamalgamation of Roaney and Keyes,also a secondin command for Dickson. I tola the latter thatCatalogue Reference:KV/4/196I thought it desirable that his organisationshould remain separate and ultimately comeunder Blunt's section and that I did not feelthat anyone in M.S. would be suitable as hisdeputy. He would of course like to have Jackbut he is already too much occupied withother things. He is a little wprried abouthis agents and their doings ana thinks thatsome of them should be given extra pay to keepthem sweet. I agreed yo his doing this.Burt came to tell me that he was anxious thatthe COURLANDER case should be put on its feet.Cookie said that the JAG had turned the casedown though when asked wif he had seenall the reports replied in the negative.A comprlnensive report his now going to besubmitted, when I hope prosecution will result.STYLES has got 7 years and a very complimentarynote has been received by the DG from the JAGabout the work done by Spooner and Davies.Bertram Ede came to talk to me about aletterhe had had from Tim Airey. He thinks Tim isa bit depressed and ratherunbalanced. Hesays tha t he does not think there is enoughwork for any more officers,it having beenproposed to send out Dowas as an assistant toRusseli,DSo in Colombo. Ede thinKs that thereought to be plenty oi work, and that it will bevaluable to have an extra officer in case any-body falls sick. I said that I was mostworried about the general CI set up ana alsoabout the DSO points at Rangoon and Singapore.These latter were real commitments and it wasimportant to have officers to fill them.On the CI side I felt that we ought to havea conference with Cass who is arriving herein a few days, Penney, who is already here, aneis to take over from Lamplough, and Tim Milne.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/19616We might then get down to what was reallyrequired. There had never been any explanatioras to why we had reverted to the SCI concep-tion after the decision to have merely C.I.advisers.The B.1A report for the 8th March states that avery long incoming letter has been receiveagiving the promised details of the wirelesstraffic plan for GARBO'S Canadian sub-agent, in his direct contact with Madrid.Cavendish-Bentinck has decided that owing tothe diplomatic dangers attending the rurningof the Brutus ease and the lack of urgentmilitary reasons, it would be better to closedown.This is being done.Cecil who is in Ireland, tola me the other daythat he had heard from Tommy that seriouspeace proposals had come from the Italian frontand that a meeting was taking place betweencertain SD officers and representatives ofAlexander in Switzerland. Russian agreementhas been obtained.Sclater has produced another serious breachof security relation to the movements O1 aship called "Liseta". this ship, which is aDutch one, was torpedoed and towed intoSouthend on March 5th. This is hardlysurprising.SHAEF C.I. summary for week ending 16th Marchstates that the Abwehr have continued theirefforts to build a stay-behind etwork on theleft bank o1 the Rhineparticularly in the Eiielarea, and to maintain contact with it throughline-crossers. Staybehind network is also beingprepared on the right bank between Mainz anaMannheim. Quite a number of line-crossers anda few stay behind agents have veen arrested.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/196tOne S.D. agent had a mission to penetrate allieintelligence services. 5 agents were droppedat St.Quentin. They were uestined for Holland.Three were dropped in Lille and were destinedfor Belgium. Those dropped at Stquenten areimportant as they have information about NEBEL!successfull arrival in Germany. NEBEL has beenawarded the Kriegsverdienst Kreuz in gold.March 22ndI had a long talk with Wibroe: He came totell me apout the SHAEF Mission to Denmark,which is headed by Major-General Dewing, whois popular with the Danes. His No.2 is a Lt.Col. Braithwaite, head of G.2. and said to befirst-class. The other members oi the missionhowever are not so satisfactory and havecaused a dertain amount OI alarm and aespon-dancy among Danish circles. The Danes donot think that their affairs are being takenseriously enough. The rest of the Missionconsists of Major Brammer, British, secondin command of the PWE Section; he is I believea rather doubtful company promoter. MajorRohde, an American who was thrown out ofthe Danish Guard before he went to USA. Thereis no particular harm in him but he was rathera rolling stone. Major Christian, a Jewand an American citizerr, who is son of a manwho went bankrupt in Denmark. His real nameis Gluckstadt. Major Bayliss, British, apleasant man who has to advise on politicalmatters but has no special qualifications, eR-cept that for a short time he was at ourEmbassy in Copenhagen. Lastly Major Ray,SOE's man in Stockholm, who we threw out oi theLRC in the early days of the war. Nobody seemsto have a good word for him. He is trying tobecoa liaison officer between Danforce andREferenCe.KV/4/196 disliked and148i twould be a disaster if he were allowed tomuscle into the Mission. Wibroe himself isI think browned off with the LRC ana couldprobably do with a change. I said that iif hegot an offer to serve on the Mission he oughtto let us know and if it were possible torelease him we would do So. He asked whetherthere was any objection to his giving alecture to the Mission on conditions and themethod OI government in Denmark. I said thatprovided Baxter could spare him there wouldbe no objection. I had a word with Baxterabout him. He likes him and says that hiswork is very thorough and conscientious. Onthe other hand he frequently falls out withpeople. This is not surprising as when peoplehave been working or 4 years at the LRCthey get somewhere near the brearing poirt.The work is very strenuous and the conditionsand surroundings not particulariJ ongenial.Wibroe has just completed his thousanathinterrogation today.Marriott and Harris came to see me about Mrs.Garbo who is in a Somewhat neurotic state.Garbo cannot quite make out what is wrongwith her, but both he and Tommy think thatshe would be all right ii she could be gotback to Spain with the chilaren. We decidedto adopt the previous plan discussed somemonths ago. She will ostensibly be deporteafrom here on the basis o1 certain letters pickeup by us from Spain from her nisband.Tangye came to talk to me about the VERMEHRENS.After tremendous labout he has in conjunctionwith them produced one article which isacceptable to the Daily Mail. He says thatthe Vermehren's are peing paid E60o p.a.He cannot see what use the can possibly beto SIS in the future.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/196Joe Lynch looked in to say that he had senta wire to Washington about Hoover's allegeavisit to this country and had receivea a replythat Mr.Hoover was not at the moment contem-plating any such visit. Joe said that he haatracked the origin of this project dawn toBill Stephenson through a conversation thathe had had with Howe. Howe had attended themeeting at the FO under CavendishBentinck'sauspices, and had said to Joe that a bigprogramme was being laid on for Hoover.Joesaid that this was the first he had heard ofit and wired accordingly to Washington.At the daily meeting Walker explained thatthere was considerable activity in thepigeon world. Staypehind networks werebeing planned. This has been revealed onISOS. While there have been cases OI agentscrossing the ines with pigeons there have sofar been no agents dropped with pigeons.This may however come later. Staybehind agentswill have 8 pigeons witha range of approximately 200 miles. They cannot be kept lor morethan about 3-4 weeks without consideraplerisk of their not homing.Herbert mentioned that the M.O.I. was touringa Belgian Mission concerned with housing prob-Lems around London. Their purpose was toshow them the atest V.2 damage. As this seemednot to be a very good idea Irom the point 01 viewof deception plans, J.C. waw the Ministryand arranged that they should be kept to theWest End.Dawson-Sheppard from CICI is here undergoinga course with Roger whom I have already seen.Dawson-Sheppard was formerly in the PalestinePolice as a constable but has been workingCatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/196in RAF Intelligence in Irag since 1937. Thereis an SIS representative in the territory whoworks in very closely. He only came out in1939 or 1940 and subsequent, RAF Intelligencewas incorporated in CICI. There is a gooddeal of speculation going on as to whether CICIwill be dissolved and intelligence revert tothe RAF. CICI have a certain watching organ-isation, but as they are bound to employnatives it is not always very reliable, thewatchers always being reaay to sell theirservices to the highest binder.C.rang me up about a new Kremer message whichindicates a leakage about rorthcoming operations. He thinks that once more it points oaerto CERVELL He is suggesting that we shouldboth go on Saturday to see Inglis or Eastwood.We will at the same time deal with the Maycockaffair.MARCH 23rd.BRONX has received a letter in which she is urged tomake another visit to Madrid after Easter and promisingthe presence there of her Case Officer. She has alsobeen asked to send a telegram in plain code in-dicating the point of attack for any new landing.This code is modelled on the one given her beforeD.Day and suggests that her message then was consideredof importance by the Germans.Dick's Counter Intelligence Summary for week ending16th March states that despite retreat and consequentreorganisation the Abwehr have continued their effortsto build a stay-behind network on the left bank of theRhine, particularly the Eifel area, and to maintaincontact with it through line crossers. A stay behindnetwork is also being prepared on the right bank betweeMainz and Mannheim.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/196la'IFeeling more confidence in Belgium in has the improved Government, owing good to better food,high coal production figures. This is to. war some news extent andoffset by difficulties of distributing coal and thefailure of the Allies to meet scheduled Civil AffairsImpoots for February.In Lusemburg despite the French promise of support forLuxemburgers territorial ambitions on its EasternBoundary, economic penetration the Government of the fears country. French political andonditions in Holland, particularlyir Amsterdam;living on as little as 600 calories a day.. While are theRotterdam and the Hague, are deteriorating. Manypopulation is united against the Germans; theageneralfeeling_is that conditions are in part due to the faulfof the Allies for not having undertaken the liberationof Holland. There is a certain fear of widespreadpilfering when the Allies enter the country.GELATINE has been offered a part-time-job as trans-Latorin the-American-Embassy. the he-American an-Embassy. WerinformedF.B.I. inf ormedand will not give our consent unless they approveAccording to a Spanish report from Tokyo, public opiniothere-does not hide its disgust at the inefficiencyand of the signs, of marked disorder and lack of methodgoverning the civil L-and-militaryactivitiesof theJapanese Empire. The Prime Minister declared at a fullssion of Parliament_that-the-Phillipines_operatio). would be decisive but when the Americans enteredManilla he said that it was of no importance..There is a shortage of maw materials etc. Administra-and tive high disorganisation cost of living; and corruption, the military the catastrophe short rations., inand the Tokyo, Phillipines, the manifest the bombing lack of of aircraft the interior and of the Japanapparent disappearance of the fleet, have given riseamong all sections of the country to a great feeling ofuncertainty and insecurity, resulting in sharp pcriticisrCatalogue Reference:KV/4/196COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN EPARIMENTUNDER SECTION314 OF THE PUBLIC BECORDSACT 1958 Man ouDick' S Summary for week ending 23ra March indrcatesthat parachute operations have considerably dacreased,but that the German Intelligence Service is very activein-other fields. There is at present no sign of dis-organisation in face of the successes of the AlliedArmies. Line-crossers have had some successes, and the-enemy appears to be consentrating on the northern partfithefront increasedTu use of pigeons is expectedand Russians are believed to have been trained as line-crossers.The Abwehr W/T training centre at Sande near BadenBaden was effectively bombed on 1l6th March. Thereis good reason to believe that a large. large_numbero muimber:trained agents concentrated there were killed.Interrogations reveal increasing German interest. inSouthern France and particularly in the Cannes-Ni areaA woman agent who had crossed the Rhine was arrested inCologne. She was to establish sites for W/T sets and tomake contact with 4 agents. In addition she is said tohave had an assasination mission. Her female companionis believed to have been drowed during the crossing.Three swimming agbateurs were captured by the lst U.S.Army on 19th March with a mission to destroy a pontoonbridge with charges in/mhetal container mouinted on awooden platform. The sirimmers were picked out by search-light beam.Clams, uncamouflage high explosive, and oxygenOcylinders-similar.to those- used in acetylene gastorches', but filled with high explosives, have beenndinan-electricity generating station at Trier.These were to have been initiated by stay behind agents.who is going out to Candy to representSection-V came to see me. He indicated that he had hada certain amount of difficulty with his own people andthat-his-departure-had-been-pos postponed-several several times:He was determined not to go out just as a M.I.6. flag-CatalogyeeferenGe:kMy/gb oned out what M.I.6 hadto sell in the Far East and had come to the conclusionCOPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDOF THE PUBLIC RECORDS413ACT 1958that they had very Firety they gould try arsupply bodies, but in this they woulld have very greatdifficulty. Many would have to be obtained from Army.sources and would need instruction.2) More importantthey could provide independent communications both bacto London and forward to I.B.stafis. Thirdly, theymight be able to provide a certain amount of informatithrough their communications in Washington. All thisS thought was very nebulous and he was deter-mined to make this quite clear to his own people hereand to the .B.Staffs when he got to Candy. He feltthat it was ridiculous for SIS to make out that theyhad little information of the type supplied to. theWestern Front and they had no secret sources. I toldthat I entirely agreed with his view. I ex-plained to him what our set-up was and told him thatI was sure that he would find Tim Airey thoroughlyco-operative:T had a ord-withPeter Hope-about his going to: Paristo take up Ramsbotham's job under Trevor Yilson. Heseemed hopethat he would regain his majority. TI said that I. couldgive him-no-guarantee-about-this-b wouldmention the matter to SIS. Actually I thank they areprepared to makehim him a Major.I discussed withJoeLynch thecase-Wedecided first to wire to Palestine and ask whether thesums mentionedhad been actually the he-subjectofagree-ments or whether they were only limits within which thitFBI could operate. We thought that the moneyishould bepaid over by Sedurity Co-Ordination to the FBI or by uto Joe Lynch.The introduction of C to the FBIshould be done by Macpherson fter point one has beencleared. As regards reports we see no objection totheir being passed to Security-Coordination who wouldprobably want them if they had to pay. We feel howeverthat copies should be sent direct to Joe. The FBIhave agreed to run.Major General Penney who in 1940 was DDMI and has sincCatalogauredretepericetv4fleoy, has been postedasDMI SEAC vice Lampbugh. He called here today and wasTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDnuINDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4 F.THE PUBLIC RECORDS21oudseen by Harry Allen, Bertram Ede, andamgsalf.Cass whohad left Karachi the day before yesterday, asalsopresent. I explained to Penney. more or less what ourfunctionss had been on the Second Front., and what ourcontribution could be on the Eastern Front. He wasobviously not au fait with C.I. matters as he has notyet taken over. He seemed to agree with our views andwhile here is going to make a careful study of theWar Room and EDS procedure. Later we all went dow andsa the D.G.24th March.and Packenham to to me about035 They want him to stay in Lisbon for another 3months and produced a letter-from-Ashley-Clarkeof theEmbassy, saying how valuable his services have been.I said that I thought the D.G. would tothis, butthat he was certain to ask me what 035 had been doing.This placed me in a rather difficult position-as ve-hadreceived no r eports from SIS on u 3S activities sincelast September.promised to send over the file-andT said that T would put it up to the D.G. with a reccom-mendation He undertook to let us have copies-of035 reports in future.1526th March.At the gave an accountof his visit to Ireland. In connection with thesinking of the Submarine off the coast of Cork and thebox containing the cyphers etc which had been washedashore, it appears that McKenna nhis own initiative,had decided to transmit the contents of this box tous This had raised certain difficulties as his actwas obviously unneutral and had been carried out with-out the knowledge of External Affairs. It was thereforenecessary to get the documents photographed as quicklyas possible and returned to Ireland in case any questiorCatalogue Peference.KV dequments, instead of being put15to be gained since that had all been suckeddry before they started. We could not verywell detain them after their past services andif we did we had to put them in differenthouses. They could not obviously be put into.the Nazi camp in the I.0.M. "cu said that hewould speak to Felix.The D.G. has written a long memo on our rela-tions with SIS for tindlater-Stewart.Personally do not much like it but Ido not know now we can stop him sending it.I pointed out various inconsistencies. Heseems to be against total amalgamation andequaly ag inst taking over Sections V and IX.I havenow obtained our file in the case ofSERRA. It shows that he was recruited bySOE in India, after having come across tous in Abyssinia. He was finally brought backhere and examined at the LRC. who viewed hiscase with considerable mistrust and said so.In spite of this SOE took him on. As previouslyrelated he betrayed his colleague RMSPRONGas soon as he landed in Sardinia.SOEeventually had a suspicion that the transmitter was under control and suggested to us thatwe should use it for urposes of deception.Nothing nowever materialised. There wasalso a suggestion from SOE that another manshould go out and make contact with ARMSTRONGand SERRA and see hether they, yere in factunder control. This man was not to be toldabout O r suspicions that the transmitter wasunder control. this seems to be pretty tough.sa John Senter about the case of MrS.RitaCatalogue Reference:KVI4/196in an iron box according to the normal procedure, werein an old ammunition box. It seems probable that theCaptain and crew who had come ashore and had beeninterned, were quite unaware of what had happened.In additon to the cyphers the box contained detailsof the latest type of torpedo, which are of greatinterest to the Admiralty, and also charts of ourminefields.Cecil also ascertained that the Irish had been inter-cepting certain wireless signals between Germany and theU.K. which they had decyphered. These signals arealmost certain to be phoney I, II or III.Alec Kellar and I saw the D.G. The D.G. does not wantRyan and Douglas Roberts to come back here at themoment to discuss the affairs of CICI and SIME e Heapproves, however, of the training here of any likelyD.S.0.s for work in the Middle East.Lothian brought in Mr. Robertson, C.C. Glasgow, to seeme. Robertson was very enthusiastic about the talkwhich Roland Bird had given to the Liverpool S.B. onGerman espionage activities on the Continent.21 A.G. have sent us a captured document marked"Confidential" and issued by a local NSDAP HQ inGermany. It alleges that two officers, one from theSS and the other an Reich nationnl, succeeded in land-ing in this country in a midget submarine and proceed-ing to Burton-on-Trent where they observed, it issaid, the extensive damage done by a V2 on a largeammunition dump. It is further alleged that theysueceeded in returning to Germany. There follows anaccount of the effectiveness of the V2 weapon. It isstated that the exploit of the two agents cannot ofcourse be published for obvious reasons. There isnothing to show what happened to the midget submarinewhilethetwoofficerswereproceadingtoBurton-on-Trent and returning to the east coast; quite obviouslythe whole story has been invented in order to boost upthe morale of the Party members. There is no evidencecatalogue Referehce.kv/4y/196 has reached Burton-on-TrentThe explosion there is thought to be due to naturalcauses, and has been commented on both in the pressand in the House.0 Commons.According to a report shown to me by Lennox, the largeconcrete sites at Mimoyecques and Wizernes, were for alarge six inch gun said to be 400 ft long and firing ashell with a 40 1b warhead. There would be 50 of theseguns, which may have had several barrels and would havefired ten bounds per gallon per minute. The site atWatterns is alleged to have been for the purpose ofmaking hydrogen for use in VI and V2 and possiblyalso in connection with the Iong range guns.27th March.I, attended the JIC Meeting at which the leakage throughChinese B.Js was discussed. The Chief's of Staff inWashington had turned down the JIC! S proposal, firstlyon the grounds that they might jeopardise ULTRA ;secondly, that the channel might be used for deception,and thridly that our proposals might not be effective.Altogether they seem to have taken the whole matterrather lightheartedly. The JIC are referring thematter back to Washington again, pointing out that thereis no real risk to ULTRA: that the deception plan cannotmake sense as long as there are Chinese Naval studentsin this country who can observe things on the ground andreport to the Naval Attache; and lastly, that any planto get the Chinese to improve their cyphers would beof no real value since we know that they aresold with regularity to the Japanese. The onlyeffective measure therefore is to re-encypher theChinese messages in One Time Pad and unbutton themfor the Chinese in Chungking. Chiefs of Staff are askedtherefore to reconsider their views. This is a typicalinstance of how difficult it is to get over any pointin Washington, where things are really understood.I suggested that it might strengther the case if it wereexplained to the Chiefs of Staff that as long as thepresent system of Chinese telegrams continues there canbe no hope of carrying out any effective deception inCatalogue Reference:KV/4/196COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENTPIBLelaACT1958in the Far East As arrangements had just been madeto send-out t-deception-personnel dequipment; thishas probably impressed them.I discussed with Herbert his minute on Overseas 91Control, to which T aveadded severalpara This hasnas gone forward to DDO and DA.I tola Burt that while a highlevel contact might be all right, one had to bear inmind that ultimately Somebody would have to take actionon the inf ormation and that this would be done on amuch Lower grade. Further, that the action on this kindof inf ormation wouldnnot be confineaato one efman, butwould eventually spread all over the .CID. Burt repliedthatai in his view the whole esuggestionwas most unwise.Hersaidthat that even if Howerdid the Job:himself, wouldnot be long before the whole of heTeCIDGwas talkingabout it. They. would get to know that such inf ormationcould be obtained and one would tell the Sother How thiscould-be-done.Samething would eventuallyfgo wrongI said thatthisalso-was-my-fear. While Vhilewe-had-no no wish to putrastopeon Scotland Yard getting information of that kind,we did feel that theresw: asa-chanceloftheirspoiling chance ofhe market:: Burt said that he would speak to Howe andide him offsomorCommander Stone of Security_Co-ordination called onme to make a friendly visit as he had seen the childrenrecently at Norfolk. He talked to eabout theibadtime that American 6hipping went through when the UnitedStates first came into the war. This was due to thefactt that they refused to pr ofit by our experience ofdiversional routing. They had Some idea that submarinescould not operate in 10 fathoms and they therefore sentall their ships through the 10 fathom channels. TheGermans them like just clockwork. laid up in It the was 10 not fathoms until 200 channels had gone and down sunkCataloguerReferenca:kMAna9s that they decided toadopt our methods.asasWhen they decided to make a change, they insisted onescort vessels;, which, had our diversipnal tactics.been employed, could in considerable measure beenavoided. The result was that a ship from Tampa toNew York, instead of taking 8 days, of ten took; 3weeks, or a month, as it had to wait at the end ofeach naval area for a new escort. The consequenthold up had appalling results. So much for AmericanefficiencyJohn Marriott is going to F. Division, somewhatagainst his will. He is. to take over from DavidClarke:5dBurton is being released from the BRUTUS3 case to goto DIB as a W/T Maintenance Officer. We havemanaged to square the Prison Commissioners whoseservant he is985The question of Hugh Astor going to DIB is still inthebalance. DIB willaccept a attachment fromSEAC, a Deception Unit; Astor is prepared to go.It tstinteresting-to;see-how-these-young-peoplethink that they can make terms and conditions:Strictlyspeaking-- he should ldbe-toldwhereitl the DGthinks he could be most useful. On the other hand,if he gets to DIBand does not like the work, he isthe kind of person who; through influence,wouldegethimself out tand into another.j job.T have warnedVickery about this. Astor also wanted to go as aG.s02. It makes me smile a little to thinksomeone of his age thinks that his firstappointment in the Army should be of G.S:0:2.rank. It took me four years hard work on activeservice to become a captain.eds88De Valera-l has been making some peace feelers, bothin his conversations with HEMPEL and with Maffey.He evidently wantssto pose as a mediator: This;would certainly suit his vanityPE"C"came In to see me. T talked im-about Victorand the possibility of his being of use to us bothCatalogueeRefereneeri4/19e had in mind that he might9be a collector of overt intelligence . "o" seemedquite sympathetic to this idea."on told me that peace feelers were going on inSwitzerland through a man called WOLF who was aGeneral in the SS and had gone to Switzerland fromthe Italian front. The Russians have been informed."o" was sceptical about the motives. He thoughtpossibly that the Party might be engineering thismove in order to show that the Generals had let themdown. on the other hand, as this man Has a S.S.General it would not look too well. "c" thoughtthat the OKW, who were living in a kind of areamworld, imagined that the wheels of the German Armymac ine were still revolving in clockwork fashion,and were issuing orders accordingly. Hitler was con-stantly saying that this bridge and that bridge wasto be destroyed at once. In fact, however, nothing ishpppening."C" said that it was just possible that there would bea change of government in Japan, and that the Japs, onthe collapse of Germany, might sue for peace. This,however, was a very tentative view, and there wasno positive evidence.T had a word with Buster on the future of the WarRoom. In his view the tempo would gradually increaseand they might be working at fairly high pressurefor the nexxt six months. After that he thought theremight be a decline when the Control Commission gotreally in the saddle and were doing a lot of theirown interrogation work.28th MarchAt the Wednesday Meeting today Grogan gave an accountof French Censorship. Up to a short time ago they hadno Watch Listing system for letters coming in or goingout, to foreign addresses. They had, however, an IBList for internal use. We have now reinforced themand supplied them with most of our Watch List addressesCatalogue Reference:KV/4/19AoThey have not been given those from MSS except wherewe have already got the formation from other sources.I had a talk with Dick who is returning to France to-day with Victor. I have arranged with him that he willwrite a Memo on the part played by this office withthe Armies in the Field.I hsve also asked him to write a letter to the DGabout Harmer's transfer to SIS as a Controller of theirstations on the lines of communication in Belgiumand Holland.Ede talked to me again about Overseas Control.Kellar had drafted a letter to CICLSIME suggestingthat they should supply us with information wheneverindividuals vere sent from the Middle East under theauspicies of the British Council. Ede thought that allsuch matters ought to be dealt with by O.0. I saidthat while the re did not seem to be very much objectiorto this, things might go wrong even in a case where notrace was shown on our records. Kellar's section mighthave formation about the organisation for which theman was acting, which would be relevant and which wouldnot necessarily be carded. It seems to me thereforethat it would be far tidier for the section to answerany queries of that kind. Ede then talked about thepersonal correspondence between Kellar and CICI. Hewanted to arrange with Roger and Dawson Sheppard thattheir correspondence should be addressed to the DGand not personally to Kellar. This would mea n thatthe letters would be opened in 0.C. and copieskept. I said I thought that a decision in thismatter might really await the DG'; review on thefuture of O.C. It seemed to me of no use to tackle thema'tter piecemeal. Personally I saw considerable ad-vantage in personal correspondence. People knew wheretheir letters were going and who would handle them.29th March.Curry talked to me about the DG'S Memo on the futureof the office,which he was sending to Findlater StewartCatalogue Reference:KV/4/196ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT JNDER SECTIONTHE90Curry thought 5 unsound inicertain matters andgenerally discursive and lacking in concisemess.He had made some 20 criticisms of which the DG hadaccepted 10. Curry felt that this was not bad.The DG is T am afraid not quite on what I Shouldfeel was the Party line.Milmo cameito talk to me about making enquiries abroadon behalf of the War Room: In some cases these couldbe made better by OSS. Was it right that OSS shouldake them or should they be conducted solely throughsect. V. He had heard that there was a tie-up betweenand Pearson of OSS. I said that if this was soit was probably desirable since they were the bestpeople to know whether the enquiry could be betterconducted by Sect. V or by OSS. It was cetainlydtesirable that both parties should not make enquiries,otherwise they would be falling over each other andgetting into difficulties. AS regards an enguiryat a British Consulate abroad which was the particularcase ho had in mind, I said that he could quiteproperly write direct to the Fore ign Office. Hewanted to know in fact Some German underdetention had, as he said, had an interview wi'th theBritish-Consul in-Switzerland,At-my-lunch-with-Walter-Scott- and dSSolateriw discussethe future of Radio Security. Walter Scott thoughtthat sSshould be amalgamated ithG.C.&.C.S. sincein his opinion it would be impossible to maintain anorganisation in eacetimeisuffi to policethe ether. We should have to rely on all the YStations which could onlybe maintained on the basisthat they were providing intelligencelof aI A rather than a I B nature. It was apparentlyWalter Scott who was responsible for tightening upSignal Security, in the Middle East. He said thenthat we ecould probably only maintain the lead overthe Germans for about a year ar 18 months.. He hasapparently proved more or less correct since as aresult of our preventive measures, the Germans havelearnt many lessons and have tightened potheirprocedure to such a degree that F.C.&.C.S.lare: havingCatalogue aged us that in Francethe thaddiscovered an appalling leakage of information by the99Americans. Strong, on the basis of ULTRA hadtold him that the Germans were aware of allmovements of our troops. His American opposite Gnumber either could not or would not offer anyhelpful suggestions , but one of his junior officerson looking into the position discovered that theAmerican Military Police were communicating bySlidex Code, the origin, movements and destinationof all troops passing hrough their positions.Slidex only has a life of a few hours; it wassurprising therefore that the Germans were fairlywe informed.Dick Butleris worried about a report whichCapel Dunne has put in on the future. of intelligence.He thinks there should-be a clandestineservice consisting of an amalgamation of M.I.5s N.M.I.6. and an ov.ert service. is apparentlyindignant that Capel Dunne should have made sucha suggestion yithout-aver-having-visited thisoffice. I said that I did not think that there:waany need to worry much aboutthi report sinceCppel Dunne was only concerned with general sourcesof information and how they. should flow to the JIC30th March.I learntithrough learnt through Lennox ennox-that-the-chiefsof-Staf that Staffwhen askedifo a review by the P.M. have said ththeyexpectator in in Bremen on-4th-April,ir inHamburg on the (12th, and to more or less windup operationsiby April 15th. This-i oflcourseonly every tentative estimate. There is at themomment an afficial black out, but yesterday wewere reported in the vacinity of Munster and itmay yiwell be that by now ve are in Hankover. BeingGood Friday; there is no Evening Standard andLennox has not been able to make up his mapsEisenhower; without reference to the Chief's of Staff,has sent a message to Joe Stalin asking him wherecataingupaRetarencerk Cataloguee they cat should eferenee meet ASII believe been suggestedbeon very well recieved.203Cecil has had another interesting PANDORA messageindicating that the Germans are being persecuted inDublin by the press,owing to a massage from RadioRome, that peace proposals are being put out to theAmerican Ambassador. This seems to be based possiblyon a PANDORA message of about 26th February whichcontained a long directive to HEMPEL. There arevarious possibilities as to how the leakage hasoccurred. It may be that De Valera has been consulting with the Papal Nuncio and that the latter hasradioed from Foynes to the Vatican . The Vaticancyphers were broken by SIM before the Italian capitulation. It may be therefore that they have read themessage and passed it on to Radio Rome. The alter-native is that the PANDORA message of Hebruary 26thwas obtained by OSS from Tunpowder and that they aretrying to be clever in Rome. A last alternative isthat there has been a leakage- in Rome from-Vaticancircles. I. aversugge'sted to Jane. Archer that $13G.C.&.C.S. should monitor the Vatican Radio-whichfrom now onwards us likely to be of considerableimpor'tance. She is getting this doneI had a long-tal talk with-Cass.He He toldthat they had had considerable trouble withFergie who wished to imposethepat.tern. ofthe SCI unit in the Eastern theatre, whichwas not really suited.. He had goneoff off toALFSEA on his own and sold the idea tothem in their ignorance. This was only discovered some weeks later when he was trackedown and sumroned to SEAC headquarters. Caswho himself has had considerable experienceof IB work with a corps in the field, saysthat niunications, and particularly lateracommunications are SO difficult that theprocedure on the western Front will notreal.work except in a very modiliea form. Hesays that the units dealing vith C.I. caseswill have to be much further forward andoperating with divisions: ana corps ratherthan with Army Group. For this purpose hethinks C.I. who will indicate toCatalogue Reference recisely what is wantewill perhaps be more aavantageous. I aseaTHIS A COPYORIGINAL NAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONu(4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958him therefore why this decision had been.reversed as it now semed that we had goneback to the conception of SCI units. Hesaid this was purely an stablishmentmatter. Establishment had been provided forSCI units and any atterpt to change thiswould only lead to endless delays. He there-fore intended to get the bodiesunder theexisting establishment and then split themup and redistrioute them. I urged uponCass the importance of Signals SecurityFrom what I had heard it was lacking asmuch in the east as the west. This meantthat any form of aeception would not onlybe impossible but positively dangerous.He said that he intended to pay specialattention to this matter. He knew that theJapanese had considerably improved theirmonitoring system and that they knew quitea lot about our order O1 Battle.Roger- tert me a report by Janepasedon ISCOT which rather amplifies and simpli-fies-Curry's previous report. Therehavebeen considerable developments, and theres--not-the-slightest-doubt-thatth that the -Comin-tern in the form of the Communist International Liquidation-Committee- continues itsformer activities. There are already thmakingsofa Lublin Committee in AustriarA further development of very consider-able interest is that one of the ISCOTmessages is in fact a quotation from ISOS.I have ased Roger to find out precisely whatthis message is and where it is going to andcoming from. It may o1 course be a RussianD.A. or even our old friend Max whom we havealways suspected as a Russian double.Another point or interest is that certainGerman intercepting stations in Spainapicking up ISCOT although there are no signsof their having been able to break it.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/196THIIS S A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONACT 1958.3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSIst MarchMou 2000ramg me up about KREMER in Stock-holm. The Sweues have dedided to expelhim and are arresting certain OI their ownnationals who. have been associated with him.is telegraphing to Sotekholmsuggesting that a aeportation order shouldnot be served provided Kremer gives us fullinformation. He aoubts whether this will besuccessiul as the Sweues, in view of thepublicity which would be given to the casecould hardly allow him to remain at large.TheJ cannot intern him as he is a diplomat.An alternative suggestion is tha t the Swedesshould tell Kremer that if heTprepared tomake a ful statement the British authoritiewould exempt his name from the list of WarCriminals. we have asked that the interro-gation by the Swedes should be submitted tous foreomments before iremer is released,in case we might have supllementary. questionto put: e-have meanwhile drawn up aquestionnaire which is being sent out toS-tockholm.The-D.G-. to me about John Marriott:I told him that there was a good deal to becleaned in BlA and that it wouldbedifficult to spare him for at least anotherfortnighte- The-DG seemed anxiousthat heShoud go to Blerheim at once, but I thinkis prepared to compromise.V.l and VE ceased last Thursday presumably.owning to our successiul aavance into Germanand the possibility. of Holland beingicut-ofiI have read an interesting report on GermanP/Ws views on the Russian army ana itsCatalogdeiRaferencetk4/196 is their custom tobombard one sector of the front heavilyin the hope that reserves will be broughtdown. They then attack in another sectorwithout any artillery preparation at all.Sometimes they concentrate as many as 60tanks on a front o1 200 yards. They relyalmost entirely on weight of numpers andequipment, and their methods are extremelycostly lthough they have been greatlyimproving. It is not unusual For the f>wave of infantry to be sent over merely asa means of touchirig Off a minefiela. Theinfantry advance generally in extenaed oroforder at a distance of 3-5 yaras under atremendous concentration of guns and mortars.The: 72-barrelled mortar is much feared bythe Germans. The largest Russian tanks carrya 210 mm gun which is heavier in calibrethan any gun used by the Germans. TheRussians- have e-made-a-certain-amount-of-usof dogs. These dogs are always fed under-neath a tank and when an-attack-takes-} placeare sent forward with an explosive strappedto-their-backs and contact-canisters. contact-ca Theyrush under the tank and blow it up. .TheRussians are ery-good-snipers-and-guerillasThey also carry out extensive night patroLsnainlywitha. view to -capturing-prisoners. .capturing3rd AprilI had a talk with Anthony and Mrs. Pitt. Dur-ing the we kend a complaint had beenreceived from-a woman n-Birmingham to theBirmingham Police that she had been followed.The LBirmingham m-Police-beliove-that-this-waa censorship enquiry about which they had notbeeninformed.I fact-the-enquiry-} has beenmade by an ex-CID inspector who is followingassociates of Negrin n_behalf OI Aiba. Igot hold of Burt who knows the CID man wellCatalogue Reference:kt4/jobeisel what it is allabout. I asked Mrs.Pitt about Negrin'sHe is apparently going shortly to Mexico tomake contact with the Republican Group thereMoscow's attitude to Negrin's party a pearsto have recently undergone some change. Lais Passionaria, advocating speaking a rapprochement recently with in Moscow Negrin Sparty. Negrin himself is dependent for hisfunds on the Soviet Govt. At the time ofthe civil war most of the gold was removedfrom Maarid to Moscow. Negrin has an accountat the Moscow Naroany BanK in London and istherefore presumably heid by the SovietGovt. at the end of a string. In view Of LaPassionaria's statement and Mosoow's controlof funas, it mus t be assumed that Negrin ismore or less prepared to dance to Moscow'stune. This all fits in with the conceptionof Russian long-term policy which I heardthe other day, advanced by a friend ofWalter Bell who has no access to insidesources. He thinks that the Russians,taking a long view, intend ultimately to getcontrol of all the narrows. We already knowthat agreement was reached at Yalta on thequestion.of the, demilitarisation of theDardenelles. The Russians are extendingtheir influence in the Mia East by the estab-lishment of consulates and are definitelytaking an interest in Arab movements. Theywill therefore be in a good position to Wishin troubled waters and if they So desiremake difficulties for us with regard to theSuez Canal. In the Baltic Pandora statesif this can be believedthat when Molotovwas last in Berlin it was Russian policyto controm the Skagerack ana the Cattegat.If it is Russia's intentiony to buila a largeFleet after the war she woula naturally wishto have certain access to the Atlanticeither through the Baltic or the Mediterran-ean.Catalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/196At the D.G.S meeting today Horrocks complain-ea that hewas being very hare-pressed withvetting, particularly in connection withtravel. He asked if it were possible todiscontinue the vetting OI people wishingto visit protected areas. Harry said hewould see what could be done. This is pre-cisely what I always felt woula happen.With the reladation of restrictions morepeople are travelling, categories are abol-ished and each case has to be treated onits merits. We are gradually working backto the vetting strain of 1940. Adam asedwhether it was still necessary to take parti-culars of British subjeets arriving in thiscountry from Germany or from occupied terri-tory. I said that while I did not thinkthat the security risk in these cases wouldbe rated very high, intact it is almostnegligible, we should be very severely criti-cised if British subjects had been collaborat-ing with the Germans were allowed to returnto their towns and villages without anyexamination. It would soon get about thatthey had been working for the Germans andthere would be questions in the House. Itseemed to me therefore necessary that weshould continue the present procedure.Adam also complaired about the number ofpeople coming from SHockholm either by thenormal routes or by the American specialroute. I said I thought the orily remedieshere were the once that I had suggestednamely (1) to get Passport Control to step uptheir standards; in this connection a telegramhad already been despatched; (2) to make re-presentations to the allied govts. whose re-presentatives were responsible lor selectingtheir nationals in Stockholm for militaryservice and in many cases performed theirduties extremely badly; amd (3) to bring thewhole matter to the attention of the H.0., sinCatalogue Reference:KV/4/196ocmany of those arriving were turned on to thlabour marketowing market owing to o-theirunsuitabilityfor military service. All these people wil.themselves-in, probablymarr Britishsubjects, and have British-born children.his-will-lead-to.-en to -endless-complications whertroops are demobilised and fina their jobstaken by- foreign nationals whom the H.0,will be reluctant to turn out.Melland rang up to say that Gache would bepleased to see Columbine. Gache has beenbriefed by Melland as to what he -0 is to say.We have put Holt of PWE in touch with Gache.Joe Lynch came in to see me. He is off toWashington tomorrow having been summonedhome for a brief visit. Heesaid that hehad gained the impression that SES weretryung oibuild up BSO againas they werenowsuggesting that alt their enquiries withthe FBI should go through BSC and that FBIenquiries for them should pass through thesame channel. Cimperman had produced figuresto showhow difficultai wasitooget answersout of SIS and pointed out tra t it would beai-the more-difficult if the FBI FBIdidnoth-a man here on the spot. I rather sense inthis: a moverby Viv. to effectthe removalof the FBI from he re and thereby to forcecanalisationof-all informationfrom-ourdept. through SIS. This would certainlybein accordance with hispreviouspolicyof a return to the status quo ante.I talked to Milmo about the case of RaymondLEE Thelatter has made_ deanapp.eal app.eal against.the decision of the Court Martial to cashierhim. Mrs.Lee is taking the blame: She poorwoman has had to hand in her resignation tothe H.0. which has been accepted. BusterCatalogue Referehce:.KV4/i96 Leebad man and2i0deserves all he has got. He feels howeverthat we should not intervene-in-this-caseexcept to give the VCIGS any informationresulting from the interrogation o1 Kraus., >which we think is sufficiently reliable.Such formation however can only be givenwith the greatest reservation and should notbe in such a form as to exaggerate itssignificance in any way.THIS IS A COPY RETAINEDDOCUMENTORIGINAL IN DEPARTMENT PUBLIC UNDER RECORDS SECTION3 ACT 280(4)OFTHE1958 MayCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1962 IITHisis A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 19582 CoRamsbotham came in to see me about his newjob. He isto be in charge of the InformaticSection which comprises also documents,regitry, collection and distribution. 21 A.G. haobtaineda large establishment and are nowlooking round for the bodies. They evident-ly intend to do the whole of the cleaning upwork themselves: If this is so, there willclearly be no place for the Control Commissiexcept as a purely liaison body in Berlin.Under the GSO IB there are to be 3 GSO2S, onin charge of the special services, one on cawork (this will be Noakes) and one on inform- tion (Ramsbotham). There will. also be aGSO GSOLwit appropriate-staifs to deat with-purely military security.SHAEE CI Summary for the week ending Marchg0th- states--thatthe- German IS-are-concen- IS are concen-trating increasingly on central Germany andparticularly Weimar and dPlauenarea.. TheOKW are dissatisfied with the meagre successof their stay-behind network west of theRhine and wiith their line-crossers. Thereseemed a shortage of. W/Toperators-and equipment which is hampering the activities ofthe kommandoe and truppes. Greater, attentiois being paid to papers and cofer stories ofag ents,an captured agents state that moreCataloguesRereireacedav/4/f96bwehr personnel for9espionage. If captured the latter may poseas deserters and claim P/W status. Luftewaffe W/T operators are being attached totruppes as short-term stay-behind agents,. andGerman refugees arebeing sent back across theRhine to operate in their own areas ofresidence. The SD is continuing to trainmembers of Darnand' police for espionageand sabotage. More agents are being givenmissions to penetrate allied intelligenceservices. captured agents state that othesare being issued with camourlaged poisonfor assassination. There is evidence thethe enemy still hopes to exploit sabotagedumps in Beigium. Despite numerous hara-ships and increasing warnings of ultimatedefeat, the German people peopite show nosign of internal collapse, and frightenedby the Yalta decisions and with no antiNazirallying. point, will probably support themumbling-Whermachtto-the-a Thisattitude is helpful to GIS improvisations anduerillapreparations For guerrillaactivityhe-Werewoli organisation was formed underHimmler-in-November-1944. Himmler hisorganisatioris predominently S.S. with regional controlby-highers.S.and-po yhigher and-policealeadersItisintended to operate on all fronts and: train-ing -special-emphasis-on-w/T-is-proceeding in special localities. There aremany nanyHitler Jugend trainees.. Somea arebeing selected from men whose homes areallied-occupied territory.In view of the war situation Tate is askingfor an alternative method of 2 communicationin case W/T contact sho ld be broken, and alsfor an assurance that no records disclosinghis identity will be allowedto fall intoallied hands. Garbors domestic situation isonce more causing a good deal of rouble andit appearssthat Mrs.G.is now anxious to beCatatogue Refefereenamgeand. It is proposed to213send Mrs.G.back to Spain as soon ase thiscan be conveniently arranged.I4th AprilI had a talk with Cussen about the case ofRaymond LEE. Cussen agrees that we shouldnot go further than explaining to the VCIGSthat KRAUS did not come here with any missiofrom the Germans and that as far as efknowLEE had no knowledge oi KRAUSIS former,comnections with the G.IS.Des Graz came to have a talkabout the future ofhas recantlbeen making contact with various diplomaticOfficials abroad regarding this matter: Hehas also had a talk with Cavendish-BentinckThe F.0. wishtocontinue: asapermanent service in-so far as this may bepossibler We-came-to-the-conclusion-that Wecame-to-therit was difficult to say precisely where weshouldhave stations-until-we-new-exactlyhow theWe anticipatehowever-that it -might be-necessaryto-haveanything up to 10 to 15 stations through-outthe-Empire.. For Forthis purpose it wouldbe necessary to train a certain number ofpersonneland- personnel-and-to-see-how-many see -how-manyo of the existipersonnel would be prepared to stay on.Des-Grazundertook. to go into this and toget out an establishment list.: We thoughtthat wherever we had units they would haveto be complete and ready to deal with anysituation. When we had got this datatogether it would be necessary for someoneto travel round and take stock oi thelocal conditions and the various personalities whose cofoperasion mAghe have to beenlistea.ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSCatalogue Reference:k//1s9THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT. BETAINIEDNDEPARTMENT UNDER3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECACT 1958.u ApritA report by CIOS states that the SHAEFJapanese Section would be obtaining inform-ation on operational matters in the intelli-gence field and would be working withOSS in regard to certain intelligencetargets which they had in mind.Two infrared receivers have been found inthe University at Bonn. This is the firstcaptured of this special tupe of equipmentwiaichh had been made and represents somethingnew-fo allied research anddevelopmentin that field. A Dr.Richter. had been interro-gated ated-and-had-given-considerablerinfc had information.At t-the-Deutsche Edlstahlwerke-at Krefelddocuments oi the highest secrecy weresecured. They-relate-to-the steel programmefor tank production for 1944-1945. Atthe Mors Homberg g-Fischer-Tropsch Plantsamples of catalysis were obtained. Aninstallation: which manufacturedisy syntheticlubricating oil was discovered atHombergi using processes unknown in theUK and USA. At the Wilhelm Smiading Plantat Cologne; the documents were found onrocket and turbo-jet propulsion, a ubstanceknown as myrol which is both a propellentand an xplosive, and aluminium ailoy mineShells etc.The JIC have tried to estimate the likelihoodand possible forms OI a last desperate fhrowby the German naval and air forces. TheGerman Navy has available the LutzOW,AdmiraCatalogue Reference:KV/4/196Hipper, Prince Eugen and 5 or 4 light cruiserand up to 16 destroyers. To these mayperhaps be added the Admiral Scheer. Theseforces might be used (a) to break out intothe Atlantic via the northern mute and tocause the maximum damage possible to ourtrans-Atlantic shipping. Such action wouudentail a lengthy operation at sea if itwere to achieve any worth while results, butwould probably end either in the ships beingsunk or in their finding reruge in internmentin Spain. If lucky they might be a seriousproblem for a time. (b) to attack convoys offour East coast and onthe Thames Antwerproute,possibly also carrying out bombardmentof coastal towns. These would be feasibleoperations especially under conditionsunsuited to our flying operations. TheGermans might appreeiate that they would havea fair chance of returning ithout heavydamage. (e) to break through the Straits ofDover and proceed dow-chamel attackingour shipping whilst passing through thechannel, subsequently emerging into theAtlantic. It is considered highly unlikelyalthough it is just possible that one ormore ships mightbe prepared to make theattempt, preferring suicide to surrender.The is no evidence to suggest that any ofthe foregoing operations are being plannea.With the exception of one large cruiserall the heavy ships and most oi the des-troyers are now in the Baltio and engaged insupporting the land Fighting and in theprotection of military shipping and evacuation movements. Operations OI the kind ues-cribed would have to be conducted eitherfrom Norwegian or North German ports. Atthe moment the enemy disposes o1 about 170U-boats, operationally effective. Of theseabout 65-70 are at sea on any one day frombases in Norway. >he total at sea at anyCatalogue Reference:KV/4/196one time could be raised to 150 ana could Demaintained lor a period oi 6 to 8 weeks.It is thought unlikely that U-boats willattempt to engage in any out normal opera-tions but it is possible that some mightattempt to penetrate local harboursyestuariesana inlets ana to do as much uamage aspossible before scuttling. The morale OIU-boat crews is consiuereu stiti fairly good.Operations by the German hir force aredependent (a) on the availability OIairfielas (b) on the ability to assemoleairerait,crews, luel,ammunition ete. ana(c) capacity to plan anu execute an operationof this scale, in a period oi militarycollapse. These factors would make itimpossiole for the Germans to employ morethan a small proportion oi their presentestimated first-line strength of 5,700 aircra:for a last desperate attack on London,eveif Hitler were prepared to abandon tacticalsupport of the battle front. There are veryfew aerodromes within a range ol 400 milesof London from which jetpropelled AR 2545could reach London carrying a bomb load. Theycould not however return. Jet-propellecME262s could no longer reach Lonaon from anyairfield even on a non-return basis. Theforces available woula De limited to some200 fighters representing a total bomo-load of less than 100 tons. None OI theseaircraft could return to their bases afterbombing their target. The above refers to dayoperations. Detaileu planning would benecessary which might tane as ong as 5 weeksana there is no evidence at the momentany such preparabions. Night operationsagainst Lonuon by twin-engine night-iishterscarrying bombs and long-range Dombers arepossible. Not more than 50 long-rangebombers could be employed and night-lightersCatalogue ReferenCe:KV4/19e Compinea they coula217not drop more than 200 tons. This woula beincreased to 300 tons if an aaditional250 night fighters were employed on a non-return basis. The morale of the G.A-F.is low ana the training o1 the crews poor.It is unlikely th erelore that more than halfthe aircraft engaged would reach the targetarea. This estimate takes no account ofthe losses inilicted on the attacking forceby air and ground de. fences which are increaing in depth as the allies advance eastwarathe use of chemical or bacteriological bombcannot be altogether excluded. The Germansmight appreciate that the allies would be unwilling to undertake reprisals in kindagainst an area which they were about tooccupy. In conclusion the HIC think (a)there is no form in which Hitler could maisea last depserate rowcomparable instrategical importance with the naval operattion planned at the-end of the last war;(b) the last desperate operation by the Navyor Air Force against Lonaon is thoughtimprobable but still feasible. (c) there isno-evidence tosuggest that such plansfor naval or air operations are being made.Sclater showed me the minutes for his ad hoesignalssecurity committee. The Admiraltystate that after Stage A they propose toconduct a good deal-of their communicationwith ships in the outer zones en clair. Thi,would not in any way compromise the order Obattle. It was the opinion.o the meetinghowever that normal vigilence ana monitorinshould continue at any rate for a time.Jim Hale brought Col.Chretien and Capt.Vaua-reuil to see me. It was merely a Irienalyvisit.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/196THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED)1IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.Mou2000Marriott has just returnled after 2 days withF,2 at Blenheim. He thinks the show isextremely well run and that the job will bequite interesting. He things too that thepersonnel are efficient. He wonaers a littlehowever whether things are not being done intoo much detail. I told him that while itmight be that concentration on certain indi-viduals with B.Div.tactics might be proable, a good deal of detail work wasinevitable, if only to debunk scare reportreceived from SISand from people in thiscountry. I could recoilect many occasionson which we had been told by SIS - that certaincommunist had attended meetings abroad andwhen from-the-carefully-compiled-historysheets Miss Saunders and Miss MacCullochhad-been-able-to-say-that-the-! man was-inthis country. There where times when negativeinformation-of this. s-kind was even more xalu-able than positive information.Charles had the directors of aivisions at ameeting to discuss expenses.. He is araftinga circular for heads of eivisions only tocommunicate to their officers. It says merelythat incidents have come to light whereexpenses coula not justifiaoly. be a charon the office, that entertainment of one officer by another within the dept.could notnormally be justilied although there might beexceptions. I suggested to Charles that weshould have a regular meeting of directorsto discuss postings either inside or outsidethe office. I thought OC should also bepresent. Charles agreed to this and we areto meet at 11 on Thursdays.Kellar and I had a discussion with Wood,hepperd on CICI. TheCatalogueemed to oe that the219head of CICI should be an Air Force officerdressed in Air-Force-uniform-with indepen-dent or quasi-independent status. This onthe assumption- that Iraq should revert toAirForce control. The organisation mighthave_.a perfectly open Security. oIlicerattached to the Legation in Teheran andelsewhere who would work through Air Forceiaison Officers as atpresent. It shouldOOk to London for general guidance andshould I think be an MI5 or joint MI5/6commitment. DIB should have a liasion officeith the organisation. It was felt thatSIS should operate Irom outside the area.Their present set-up was quite absurd.They had a vice-consul performing no vice-consular functions in a place where he isnot needed. The building had a huge wirelessmast on top of it, two of the flashiest carsin the area in which itsse agents werefrequently seen, and the officers dined withtheir agents in public places. Added to thisthey were constantly getting across thetracks of CICI by trying to penetrate theRuSsians in the most foolish and obvious wayAt the same time they were trying to Keepup a pretence of not being interestedinRussian affairs. When they were in diiii-culties they nearly always went to CICI and>very often CICI had to do their work forthem. They meanwhile sent the reports backas their own. Latterly Seetion V in theperson-of Nick Elliott-had been-outtherewith obvious intentions of building up anorganisation for CE purposes. Thas iS-seemsclearly absurd since CICI haveribeen doingthe work for years good recordCICI have buiit up quite a good show andhave tapped all the resources. that theypossibly can, apart from running a certainCatalogueeReferencer Catalogueereterencenkvi4posron-shepperd. on-Shepperd mentioned-tO me that the police advisers are due toTHISDEPARTIMENEPUBLIC RECORDS9oo600retire. They: had proved very useful in thepast as nd-for-any-policerecords they wanted without causing anycomment. to be done It to Seemed replace desirable them. We for all something agreedthat it was almost impossible to oget-anyfurther until the question of the relationsbetween MI5/6 had been decided.I saw Peter Hope and explaineu to him thedelicacy O1 his mission. He haa haabut did not feel very cleaabout what he was supposea to ao. He thoughtthat his principae job was a quasi-politicalone. He was to. try and discover who wasreliable, who was likely to stay ana what thegenerall trend was in French inteiligencepolitics. Iimpressed upon him that heshould not be rushea into pOring his noseinto French domestic allairs since this couldonly end in disaster. He should do every-thing he could to assist the French andestablish the best possible relations withthem. If he could do this he would prabablylearn-fre learn free gratis andfor nothing anythinghe wanted to know. He is rather worriedabout his pay since-if-hecannot gooutas a major he will drop about E250 a year.I-gather that is seeing what hatcan.bedone about this.in the evening to say thathe understood that therewas a fellow calleddoing some sort ofa course here.He thought it might be a good thing ii hesaw him with a view to his future employment.I said that we had alreadygot aesignsohim and that if he contemplated building upa CE section in Irag. I thought he was makinga great mistake, since this work was beingdone pretty efficiently by CICI. I then toldhim off the record that the P.Section work inCatalogue Reference:KV/4/196221those countries was not very highly thoughtof locally. He did not know who was incharge of the P.Section at Broadway.Blunt and Caulieild came to see me apout aprospective Jugoslav agent who stands quitewell with the Partisans and wants to stay onhere to stuay at the University in additionto his work at the hegation. He could onlydo this if he receivea a subsiay. I saidI thought we ought to contribute. The methodoi payment is however somewhatuelicate.Caulfeila is going to sound the ground.Harry Allen told me that he haa been havinga talk with West,Ronnie aylor anu BillWilliams. They were all very arxious ForDick to stay on at any rate during thetransition period. I toia Harry that Ihaa already discussed this with Gen.Strongand Dick. He could probably be sparea untilabout August or Sept. but if he wantea to stalonger he might be jeoparaising his careerin this office which would by then I hopedbe peginning to take shape. It was opento Dick to decide but personally I felthe ought to be here- I gather too that thisis his own personal wish.April 6thI had a long talk with John Gwyer today. Hetold me that the position o1 the AustrianControl Commission was a bit fluid. It hadbeen their Function to run the British zonewhich comprises the southern part 01 Austriafrm Vienna where they would probably have anairfield and aLatterly however the Russians had shownsigns of not being altogether content withtheir zone which the wished to extend thewhole Length oi the Hungarian irontier. TheCatalogue Reference:KVI4/1960?Jugoslavs too were laying claim to Carinthia,which they say is XX ethnogrephic Jugoslavterritory.Af the Russians and Jugoslavs walkin there are will not be much left o1 the Britishzone. The Control Commission proposes todivide their work up into Section l, underJohn Mair, detection, investigation, collatio]SIS, and SCI; who Section is not thought 2, possibly to be under verysuitable. Hooten ofThis section would perform the executivefunction of raunding up whole categories.Section 3, under Crean, travel control, arSection 4, Information, under Gwyer.Gwyer thinks that the Austrian controlCommissior ought to have someone in the WarRoom who would look after their interests,both there and with EDS. until it moves.They do not intend to pile up duplicatesof EDS records as they will at best oe com-paratively small as a zone and would notjustify the work involved.April 7thBurt told me this morning that the Commission-er was reluctant to give a Germanspeakingofficer to us for the purpose ofdealing withrenegades in Germany. Burt wanted to knowmy views about sending one of the B.5 officerspresumably Spooner. I said that providedhe could handle the work on sabotageeases I had no objection but that althoughthings were a bit Slack at the moment they mmight very well become quite lively.SeconalyI did not think that Spooner,goo as he was, Vwould really fit the bill seeing that heknew no German. It is not So much theinterrogation of British subjects that hisservices were wanted for but for the interro-gation of German witnesses.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/196223Wren came in to pass the time of day. He isnow back with his own firm on civvy. street.He said that when Springbock arrives he wouldwould do his best to get him some sort ofa job on a temporary basis with his firm.I talked to Marriott, Cuthbert Hesketh andIan Wilson about certain reports found era German P/W who has been inthe hands ofESDIC. These reports relate to informationreceived from the Abwehr under what appearsto be a daily summary sent out by Fremde-heere to Gruppe West. Some of them appearto be identical with reports put across byGarbo but this is being checked. It raisesthe more important point as to what: arrange-ments there are fr the interrogationorepresentatives oI Fremdeheere. Thatorganisation is in a way a closed book: Weknow that it receives Y.material on the onehand and agents reports, recce reports etcon the other. Itwould be of great. valueto us to know what importance they-attachto an agent's report and now far theyintegratedeagenls reports-with Y.materialalso whether they got details from theAbwehr-abou their agents-and the historyof the agents. Furnival-Jones thinks thisshould be a SHAEF matter. and that-some sortof directive should go out, indicating thatwhen intellig ence officers. were picked upsteps should be taken to ascertain whetherat any time they served in Fremdeheere. Ihave asked that similar steps should- be takenwith CSDIC who may have quite a number ofintellig ence officers in the cages.Charles and I saw the D.G. who has agreed inprinciple to ourtenay Young coming backprovided we can produce a substitute. Wealso tackled the D.G. about 0.C. I think hewill be prepared to issue an order that theCatalogue Reference:kV/4/196THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONa3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958Middle East, the bI its intelliglerceproduct and its personnel problems, Shouldbe a B.Divisionmatter, pending a final -settlement as to what shape 0:C. should be.The D.G. for some reason does not wish totackle the major problem until FindlaterStewart has been round the dept. PersonallyI should have felt that it would have been:a good thing to get the situation tidied upbeforee Kindlaterls visit.I had a talk with fommy arris,Herbert ancMarriott about various queries that CyrilMilils had put up about Moonbeam. We decidedthat the best thing to do was to get Cyrilback and put Moonbeam into cold storage.b bytelling the Germans that he is going downtoSanFranciscoto try and pick up information about the conference. The D.G. hasagreed-toMills! return-.355 agent, has s-declared-himselfto une americans as a British agent. I do notkow where he e-was found but the news comesfrom OSS in Paris. We are taking steps toget him back here.? Meanwhile. I have sggestedtoof Section V. that U35should be got pack to talk to him.April 9thI.had a long talk. with Rivettz RivetLGarnac.H Carnac Hehas been asked to spend the 12th and 13thwith SIS. It was also -suggested to him byArnold-Forster that he should meet Cavendish-Bentinck. Carnac is a bit chary about thisas he thinkxs that it might involve him inpolitical matters, on which he is notauthorised to express views. I explained tohim generally what our feelings would beabout amalgamation with SISs We saw many greaadvantages but certain disadvantages. We.were however quite convinced that SectionsCatalogue Reference:KV/4/196ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTOON3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958. Nou DoorV ana IX should be amaigamateu with DanuF.Divisions on the grounds that C.E. andsubversive moveents OI an international kindare one ana indivisiole. They cannot O.:investigateu partly in this courtr/ andpartly on the continent. I Said too that inmy view since both these subjects wereultimately the responsibility OI the D.6.,he should have some control over thenvestizaticn Ol such matters abroad. Hewould at any rate have people posted in cer-tain capitals For the purpose o1 overtliaison with our opposite nuruers. It wouldbe logical too for any defensive service tohave a footing in Passport Control.I told the daily meeting that I had read throthrough the case of GRUNDELL, a Swedish sea-man who was an agent oi Einz Marine inAthens and had Deen picked of a Swedishboat at Gib. It seemed to me that this casewas a classic example of the resent cumber-some procedure for dealing with C.E. in twohalves. The man haa featured OL ISOS lastDecember.of Section V.who keeps arecord of agerits and the ships on which theyare serving, notified us that GRUNDE..boat was proceeding to USA or Canada. Withcur agreement he communicated with BSC NewJrk asking them to notif'y RCMP and thelatter to bring in Cyril Mills. Gavin Youngwent up to Ottawa and told the RCMP that theoriginal information came from a secretinformant O1 the FBI ana asked that obser-vation might be kept on GRUNDELL when hearrived. This covering-up oi the ISOS leato considerable ais liculties and uitimatelyof course the RCMP learned that there was 1oFRI informant in the case at all. RCMP mikeda number OI conversations between GRUNDELL,another seaman named BERG anu an Americancalled ARROWSMITH. The colversations wereCatalogue Reference:KV/4/196certainly of a suspicious kind and indicatedvery clearly that GRUNDELL was up to no goouand that possibly. ARROWSMITH had been spyingin America for the Germans ana Japs. In anycase ARROWSMITH was violently pro-German.All this information was sent down to BSCNew York, transmitted to Section V.whopassea it on to us. Meanwhile GRUNDELLhad left on his ship for Gib. He was interro.gated by the DSO who according to customreported to Sectioav.as the originalinformation was MSS. Section V.consuitedus and we advised that the man should betarem off. By this time however the ship hadLeft for Athens. GRUNDELL was pulled off onthe return journey. There was no real reasonfor SIS to come into this case after communi-cating to us that GRUNDELL was on his way tothe western hemisphere.Robn. came in to say goodbye. He is goingback to his solicitor's business in Glasgow.He has done a very good job of WOrK For thisoffice, as an SCO Giasgow and in charge oITravel Control at SHAEF.Cecil and I were taken over the AdmiraltyWar Room. We saw all the plots o1 enemysubmarines. All information poth Irom Y.and other sources relating to enemy sub-marines is brought to this room by thespeediest possible channel. There is a tele-rinter service direct with Dletchley. Whena submarine is reorted on its outwardjourney an estimate is made from all thefacts available as to the course it is mostlikely to take. An average speed is takenand day to day the position of the submarineis recorded. It may be that after some daysa piece of further positive information wilipin-point the position. e.8. a weatherCafatogtue 1S computedRefere submarines at seaaccurately Irom Y.sources.22I I averages at the moment something round 60.This figure is fairly high there having beena very marked increase in submarine activityin recent months. It is therefore true tosay that the submarines plotted on the mapare on the average Fairly accuractly placed.It then remains to route the trans-Atlanticconvoys in such away as to avoid any submariaction. These convoys are being routea andre-routed as the information comes in.Shown on the map were about 8 submarineswhich it was known were aue to start froma particular point to carry out a westerlysweep on a route which the Germans thoughtwas used by our convoys. In fact this routewas not being used. The Americans operatingon a similar basis from the other side ofthe Atlantic had sent forward certain war-ships to deal with these submarines. Weapparently went over and helped the Americansto set up their War Room which is on similarlines to our own but of course on a muchmore grandiose scale. The two War Roomsare in constant communication. There was ascare some time ago about our mine-fieldshaving become know to the Germans,ans thesuggestion was maae that there wa a leakageat the Dublin Shipping Oflice. Although Sigs.denied it at first it was subsequentlyascertained that they were sending outdirections to ships in a code called Mersigwhich can be easily broken. We were toldthat Tate's work in connection with sub-marines had been most helpful. The Germansapparently use different codes for differentareas. A submarine operating in the BristolChannel wold have a different coue from oneoperating in the English channel. This is a ffairly recent development and is thought tobe due to a fear by the Germans thatcaptured U-boat crews might give away too meeCataleghe REferencekvranpgehowe howed us round, saidthat the box that had Iloated from the Germansubmarine off the west coast of Ireland hadbeen quite helpful in the matter oi codesIt is anticipated that quite a number ofGerman submarines may continue to ope rateafter hostilities have ceased in Germany.The morale of U-boat crews is in generalxxfairly high. The capture of Bremen andHamburg will not have very much effectexcept perhaps to increase the number ofU-boats ope rating in the Atlantic. Therewill rot be special shelter for them inNorwegian ports and they will therelore haveto go to sea. There is no lack of dieseloil or of torpedoes. SOE apparently did agood job in blowing up a certain number OItorpedoes but exactly where I cannot remember.Cadogan has sent in the sugoestea terms oirererence Ia Findlater Stewant. Theyreally constitute an enquiry into theaffairs of MI5, the only rererence to SISbeing par .2 which is concerned with CE inthe UK and British Colonial territories.It is said for this purpose it may benecessary to investigate the seetion in SISconcerned with these matters.!loth AprilBurt came to see me about Spooner going tojoin Stephenson in Paris. I said that in allthe circumstances I thought we should haveto take a chance and let him 8o.I spoke to Smithers M.I.19 about COLUMBINE.He told me that Kendrick had no vacancy ashis own S.P.S were. not fully occupied atthe moment. I pointed out to him thatCOLUMBINE was rather exceptional and had beenused with very great advantage for theCatalogue Reference:KV/4/196299purpose of direct interrogation. Smitherssaid he would speak to Kendrick again analet me know.I had a talk with Patterson who might liketo stay on here. There arevarious jobs thathe could do at the moment. He could go toSeymer's section to help with P/WS, he couldto Paris to help Joe, or he could go intothe War Room.Harker spoke to me about the case of BOLSOM.It has apparently been decided by the DPPto let the Yard loose on all concerned in thehope of getting individual evidence but inany case of frightening everybody. Hewondered whether it wouia be desirable forBurt to interrogate the military personrel.BOLSOM'S racket is faked medical certificatesfor exemption from military service. I saidI thought Burt should be given the reportand we could then get his views.Charles,Richard Butler,Horroc S and I consid-ered the draft terms O1 menerence Lor Find-later Stewart. We all agreed that they tookthe form O1 an enquir/ into MI5 ana thatany investigation into the aflairs O1 SISwould be strietiy circumscribed. we thoughttherefore that some para. at the beginningplacing the enquiry more on a funetionalbasis might be appropriate. Meanwhile Ihad a discussion with Heroert who araiteoa much shorter and much better terms ofreference giving Findlater Stewart all thepowers he requires to ascertain how securityand CE are at present being aondueted by thevarious departments concerned and to recommeneamalgamation and redistribution o1 duties orreorganisation if the present machinery isconsidered inadequate.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/196April llthThe Times today gives the war casualtyfigures for the Empire, to February 28ththis year, since the outbreak of war. Thetotal killed among J.K.forces is 216,287,missing 30,967, wounded 255,142, P/Ws 183,242,total 685,638. The total for the BritishEmpire is made up as follows: Killed,306,984,Missing, 70,872, woundea 422,476, P/W326,470total 1,126,802. The casualties amongmerchant seamen were: deaths 30,179,internees, 3,982, total 34,161. The U.K.civilian casualty figures compare as follows:killed (including missing believed killea)59,793. Injured and detained in hospital,84,749. Total 144,542. The figures of U.K.civilian casualties is nearly 3,000 higherthan the highest number killed among thedominion and colonial forces.I saw Limmy Dickson who is rather concernedabout his agents, many of whom wish to takeon other more permanent employment. I toldhim that this was a thing that we haa to facebut that where it was a question OI guarantee-ing employment for another year or increasinga weekly allowance by a small amount he couldgo ahead.Grogan talkea to me about Censorship. Thereis a move virtually to cease censorship oftelegrams within the Empire and USA afterstage A. While it would be difficult tomake a case for the maintenance Of suchcensorship at the moment, I am rather reluc-tant to agree to this course until we seeprecisely what is going to happen.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/196IHIS IS A COPYORIGINALIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS731ACT 1958Moco.Milmo and Barry came to see me about thecase-of KRAUS. There is a question-down in.the House and the Press are working up astory-that-a-man.. they call ICaptain KLAUS"had arrived here under somewhat similarconditions to HESS and that he is being-keptunder special conditions of luxury, becausehe is related to Mrs.Reginald Fellowes. Inactual fact he is at 020 and according toStephens has recently been privileged toscrub lavatory seats.I had a long discussion with J.C. and Marriotabout BelA. Marriott thought that Bili Lukecould run the section after he goes to F.DivJ.C. thought on the other hand that he himselmust remain in charge and if he does SO hecannot complete the B.lA War Diary. In factI have for a Iong time felt that he was notanxious to complete this work: John thinksit would be far better if he did, and thatLuke took over the winding up. It is truehowever to say that there are a number oftangled ends which cannot veryeasily behanded over I told J.C. that ashouldshavto say to the D.G. that if Marriott went toFoJ.C. would-either-have-to-remain-in intool of B.lA in which case he could not dothe War Diary; or that he-wouldthave-todo hethe diary in which case a number of matterswhich-demanded his-presence in B-. couldnot be carried out.Stopford came to tell me that he had justrecruited ane.who is apparently both anti-Germanandanti-Russian. He will not thowever beable to operate as. the Swedish air line is-being closed down till August unless hostil-ities cease in the interim. SIS do not wishto mase contact with him in Sbckholmbecause this might cause trouble with theCatalogue Reference:KV/4/196737Swedes who are playing very well over KREMER.On the 17th March Ribbentrop had an ofi-the-ecord-conversation-with-the:. the Japs. He hadcome to the conclusion that while theremight-not-be any possibility at the momentof separating the USSR from Britain andAmerica, therelwas considerablela anti-Russianfeeling amongst British and American off rswho had been taken prisoner. He thoughttherefore that there was a possibility atsome later date of ah anti-Soviet crusadein Ghichngermany might join. If this wereknown to Stalin, as he thought it probablywould be, Russia might be prepared to do adeal with Germany. He thought that with theexception of former Geman territory, Hungaryand Croatia, the whole of the Balkans couldbe given to the S.U. and if the USSR wantedto penetrate to the Dardenelles and evenfurther, for instance as far as Suez, Germanyshould support it. If contact could beestablished he would be quite ready to flyts Moscow and negotiate with Stalin. Thefirst thing was to find out what Stalintsfeelings were and it was suggested that thismight tpossibly-be-done-through-the through the JapsStockholm. The Jap MA Onedara.came to Be Linon the 27 th March. He said that althoughhewas not on intimate terms with membersof fthe oviet-Legation- he was acquainted- lththe Charge d'Afraires. He would have howeverto-proceed-veryelicately.. to-proceed-very-( -very-elicately. Riboentropsaid that he had just had a discussion withHitlerwho still held that there wasinoreason to suppose that Stalin would at presentconsiderpeac with Germany and-thoughtitheymust at least secure a military success; ofwhich he thought there was a chance. Hitlerstated however on the 28th March that heto it would be to?S if either she orr:33Japan approached theUSSR. Thematterwouldtherefore haveto be dropped until Hitlerthought the situation was ripe for negotia-tions. He had no objection in principle tocoming to terms with the Russians althoughhe categorically refused to entertain suchan idea with Britian and America.Ribbentrop had a further conversation withthe Jap on the 5th April. He said thatlthough the Fuhrer had originally intendedto launch a big offensive in the east aboutMay or June, the deterioration of the situate-on in the west had made this extremelydifficult. The reason given was the collapsof the Luftwaffe. Ribbentrop had mentionedagain to Hitler the subject of making peace.Hitler had however ooied annoyed andreplied that he had already madersthe matterquite quiteciea cear to Ribbertrop-notonce twiceThere was therefore nothing to be doneexcept tohave-the machinery readyand toapproach the Russians in Stockholm if asuitableopportunity occurred.SHAEF EFCISummaryfor for weekendingth Aprilstates that there is evidence of furtherconcentration-of-G.S.-HvQ-in Thuringiaa general eastward move by kommandos andtrippes--thile-koramandos-and.truppes areurgently engaged on tactical espionagemissions and may al.o O be used to fill gapsin stay-behind networks, the G.I.S. ha awhole is increasingly engaging in sabotageand terrorist activities. Interrogationsshow that the main terrorist activitiesconcentrate in werewolves and are beingplanned regionally under high S.S. and policeleaders. Recruiting for this appears SOCataloglie jlie ReferenegiF4/96 te and inefficient.ine-crossers are now operating in smallTHIS IS A COPYRIGINALDO DOCUMENT RETAINEDINDEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTIONOF HE PUBLIC RECORDS1958. Mes 2pruobodies and field units ay be usee forespionage purposes in view oi the increasingdifficulties in transport. and communicationsof kommandos and truppes. A German P/W.states that agents are being trained toattack allied personnel in order to secureidentity papers and insignia. Since theoccupation of Germany 27 Abwehr and S.D.schools have been overrun. In Francea PPF ranndyup recently occurred in Pariswiththearrestof18membersmembersbelievecconnected with the G.I.S. In Belgium ththere are extensivestrikes in theminesin the Liege district. Only 3 out of 22pits are working normailya Itisconsideredthat Socialists and not communists are theinstigators and-that.th theformerare-eploiti e-exploitirthe disaontent of miners for electoralpurposes12th AprilS.I.S. now say that.they cannot give PeterHope the rank of major in Paris. They suggesthowever that they Should put him on thestrength of their SCI uit forGermany..about this and intimated to himthat were a little- tired of beinguseda being used asa recruiting ground for SIS and that I was noat all sure that it would not be better:for Peter to join either the Austrian orGerman ControlCommission Control easkedthatPeter should seebeforereaching -any-decisionJC-came: to tell me tha.t he had spoken to theDG who had said that all he wanted 1or Currysreportwas--a eport-was--an-8-page..do document fro-B.l sinceCurry's office report was. to be no targer tha]Gwyers-bool This_of course. is quite fantas-tic but pr.esumably there is nothing to bedone. JC intends. to continue the report asCatalogueReferencerkdm4lltoanwhile to initiateLuke into the mys steries of the XX Committee.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958We had our first Stair meeting today; underCharlest auspices. Jim has undertaicen toget particulars of personnel in the I.0.M.We thought they might first be trained herein the war Room and then fed out to 21AGand AFHQ.The rest of the meeting was taken up withRageris difficulties. He says that Shillitoi no good and that Bagot wants a change andis anxious to go to the Austrian ControlCommi ssion. I suggested that Roger mighthave Patter: on when he has finished his jobwith SLB3, and Horrocks suggested thatColledge might be transferred. There was adiscussion about the importance of Russianespionage and how little is at present beingdone about it.Roger is very inclinedto think that Russian espionage should be handea back to B.Div. I said that I would bequite prepared to taice it on but that I didstill think there was a good deal to be saidfor running it in its own environment. Therewere two ways of getting Russian espionage,one through contacts abroad or through closechservation on Soviet citizens here,and teher was through the Party, which in thelast resort probably had to do the work.In the past we had always worked back to aSoviet agent through the Party.I mentioned Hill-Dillon's aemana for 12 girls6 of the Officer class ana 6 secretarial. Theview is that permanent stali cannot reallybe spared but that anyone who cares to resigncan of course get joos if the Control Com-mission is prepared to accept them. Mrs.Soring isi.a case in point. HorrOCis saidthat if they resigned they would run the riskatalegue RefereneeukVp4/196 M/L. This I learnerlater was unlikely,sinc Miss Sherer and MissMackenzie have been kicking their heels For3 months because the M/L could not Mindthem anything to do.Curry brought me an NSDAP file,0F.22/1 vo1.2on which was a minute Signed DJ K.uateu 22.1.34. It was written as a result oI a HOWwhich I hau put up orl the ISDAP at Hamwure"Spoke Sir Russell Scott as to wnether heexpected us to tare any special stepsaoout Nazis in this country. He said th tunless we discovereu in the ordinary courseo1 our work any case oi subversive propaganaaor other inimical steps against the interestsOI the country we were to Lea.ve them alone.There fore no HOW at present. Six monthslater Iput the warrant up again On the ratherflimsy eviderice that a man thought to beconnected with the Gestapo was trying toget into touch with Otto BENE, and stressingthe connection between the NSDAP and theGestapo. This apparentl did the trick anathe warrarit was otaired. This was thefirst warrant we obtained on the Partyabroad. It was only much later that we wereallowed to intercept Party correspondencegoing to addresses in this country.Burt came to see me ara told me that he hihad read through the report on BOLSOM andthat he dia not wish to have arthing to dowith the case. I pressed him to sive me hisreasons but he refusea.to e specific. Hesaid that he thought whoever was in chargeof the Case at the laru Should interview theSoldiers ana that it wouili be wrote for usto interfere. I think that from what he hasseen he is quite convinceathnat the case willcome to nothing, alio that those concerieu willCalalogue guo'peterenceak:y/441gi6 He I therefore asked him prererspoint-blank whether he thought anythingwould be achieved and he was clearly aoubt-ful. He realised however that those concerned would at least receive a bit of afright ana that possibly someone might beinduced to turn King Evidence.He then tola me apout the case OI RosieSCHMIDT. He and ppooner haa interviewed herat Hastings. She Saia that shortly Deloreher father dieu in 1911 he loanea the sumof E250 to Emile KICHLE at 5j interest anathat on her fatherts death the credit Wastaken over by her mother. The latter dieain 1931 but beforehand arranged for the aeotand interest payments to become acknowleag-able to Rosa. Miss SCHMIDT then said thatshe received from KICHLE the sum of E12.10.0by way of interest die on the 2250 Loanregularly each year till 1937 when they weresuspended presumably owing to the difficul-ties created by the civil war in Spain.The payment of E50 reeeivea by Miss SCHIIDTrepresented the payment due to h er from 1937-1940. In respeet of the El0O remittanceshe said that owing to her property inBlackfriars being destroyed by enemy actionshe found herself in somewhat straitenedcircumstances. She had therefore written inJan.1944 to KICHLE requesting him to repaypart of the loan. This proaucea the -100remittance comprising E50 principle andE50 accumulated interest. She could notproduce the letter from KICHLE. Asked i1 shehaa any documents evidencing the loan fromher father to KICHLE she said she haa some-thing in a deed box at the Midland Bank inHastings. She produced one letter FromKICHLE date 21st Feb. in Spanish. Despitethe fact that both the writer and aaaresseeare Germans. This merely rererrea to theinterest payments. The name anu address OICatalogue Reference:KV/4/196the aaaressee had been typed on to thisletter on a different machine after thetyping of the letter itself. She couldoffer no explanation as to why KICHLE haa notliquidated his Joan. Burt was not 1avourablyimpressea py Miss SCHMIDT who was undouotealypro-German in sentiments despite her Britishbirth. He did not regard her explanationabout the two mittances as entirelysatisfactory particularly since the 2100which was said by her to have been sentpy KICHLE more or less in compliancewith her request was in fact sent by aperson name COSTAR. Burt requested SCHMIDTto write to KICHLE expressing h er need formoney and soliciting payment of the E200Loan outstanding: She promised to do thisand to write today. KICHLE! address is21 Pasco del Recoletos,Maarid.April 13thAn announcement was made this morning ofRooseveltis death yesterday afternoon. Theeffect of this may be considerable since itwill be hard to achieve the same measure ofco-operation that was due entirely to thesympathy which existed between the P.M. anathe President. Nobody seems to know anythingabout Truman, and there is no reason tosuppose that he has any intimate knowleageof Roosevelt's policy. He has ony peen withhim months, and in any case the vice-Presisdent forms no part o1 the executive machineryof the government. I doubt whether infuture, in view o1 what has happened, theAmericans will be much help to us in thereconstructio of Europe. One effect may bethat Russia will be driven into our arms sincenow that the President has one there will peless toleration towards her in the USA.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/196THISI A COPYORIGINALNDEPARTMENE UNEEH SEtloN2 393(4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958. me o0oAt the daily mreeting Burne announced thatwe-may-have to receive some 35000 Danes.There is evidently some possibility ofDanish ships-making-a-bolt for thereis any attempt by the Germans to destroyshipping. We came to therrconclusion-thatthe matter woula have to be handled by theports.. and any doubtfuls. sent to--the-LRC.Crew lists would be obtained and checkedagains.t records.Burne also read out a le.tter fromabout a man calledanAustrian agent of OSS who had been. here and,according to the informant of Dansey's; engaged in political propaganda: Dansey haswritten to Cavendish-Bentinck complaining:I understand that this has aroused the angerof Donovan, who produced file to SIS Show-ing that the whole thing had been arrangedbeforehand. Our papers Show that the manwas brought in as an unaccredited agent:Meanwhile Dansey has telephored to OSSEI cannot quite make out what is going on,but it looks as if Dansey made a 1oo1 ofhimself.Curry told me that he has seen the DGS letterto rindlater-Stewart on the Office: He intended to tell the DG that he thought it wouldberbetterthat he should not sent him aletter .but hand him some considered memo com-piled-by-the-staff. The best thing O6 coursewould be to tear it up since it is for manyreasons not-very-good. On the:otherhandIt may be better to have it as an informalmemo-whichmay be circulatedVon Papen has been captured in the e'Ruhr pocketon his own estate. - There appears to be noCatalogpporieterenoeskay4rig6the pocket and on theextreme southern portion of the front and in2the north in Holland. The Americans arenear Leipzig, have bypassed Magdeburg andare not more than about 50 miles from Berlin.The Russians are said to have started theiroffensive in the Berlin agea.Bronx has received another paymant of 2197.It is not yet clear what this is intended tocover since she was last paid a month agoand in the ordinary way we should not haveexpected another payment till next month.The Germans have been trying for some timepast to deliver some jewellery to; Gelatineby way of paying her. We thought at firstthat it wouldbedelivered by BronxeGermans have now announced that they aregoing aheadwith thedeliveryby someotherchannel:Mrs.garbo is once more causing trouble: Herattitude to-the proposal. that thatshe she and her2 chilaren should return to Spain continuesto-bechangeable. avingeventually agreedto the journey and the aaministrative stepshavingalreadybee put intrain,she hasunfortunately learned that a Naval Officerfor-whom_someconsiderable time ago sherm-ed an attachment, and Who subsequentlybecameaF P/W., has been released and isdue to be repatriated in the near future.She is being told that it is now too lateto change her mind ard it is hoped that shewill accept the position. Meanwhile arrange-ments are going ahead for carrying out out.th thelong-discussed project of Garbo's escapefrom hiding in this country in order thathe may meet the Germans in Spain and discusshis future.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/196Ine Germans are tr ing toheaveagents-behindin Turkey and the Turkish IntelligenceServices are preparea to connive at thisSo long as Germany resists the Russians.Reports from MSS have recently become availab-le showing that the RSHA is in W/T contactwith several parties of agents in Russia.One of these parties is working in theneighbourhood of Rybinsk. 3 further agentswere dropped in this area to join the partyalready there. The second party also con-trolled from Danzig appears to have had anagent in Moscow. The party was apparentlylanded by plane near Moscow with the taskof settling down there and reporting backto Danzig,or the position not only in Moscowbut in the Kremlin itsell. Danzig in factbecame very querulous when a report wasreceived saying that it wes not possible toget information within the Kremlin.This group had been instruetea to get intouch with members of the Committee ForFree Germany inside Russia ana was alsogiven the task of the reporting or theformation of a Vlassov Committee. Danzigwas still in touch with this group in mid-March. The thira group exists in theOrel-Bryansk area which has also been intouch ith Danzig.April 14thHart and Blunt came to see me about Colum-binev Pending some solution I said I thoughtwe ought to put him in one of the B.lAhouses or house him with Padgham. He hasalready met Padgham and they both appearto like each other. Meanwhile I have writ-ten to Dick to see if there is any chanceof employment on the continent.Burt came to ask me whether it was possibleCatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/1962to get a small rise for Fish. Spooner whois going to join Joe Stephenson will getan extra allowance of 150 like Skardon ashe now has to run two homes. This leavesa wide diserepancy between Fish and Burt.Fish is perhaps a little disappointed atnot getting a similarropportunity of serviceabroad. I told Burt I would see if it werepossible to do anything. Hart came in andwe discussed the letter which Rose SCHMIDThas written. She has asked KICHLE tosent the E200 but in her letter hasexplained to the position exactly. Her letterather leads one to think that she has putall this in in order that KICHLE may beprecisely informed as to her predicament,and play up to her story. We are consideringsubstituting a letter which may have theeffect of making KICHLE deny her story.We are not making any decision until wehave seen Rosie SCHMIDT'S documents relate r ngto the loan which are stored in the bankat Hastings.Aaam rang me up to say that he was callinga meeting of the Executive to deal with thequestion of the Danes as thee were SO manyinterests involved. He also tola me thatthe Travel Committee was proposing to havea discussion on Friday about travel ofBritish subjeets after Stage A. It is beingsuggested that they should be allowed totravel freely. I pointed out to adam thatas long as there were Jap Embassies inStockholm, Lisbon,Madrid Dublin and BerneI did not think it would be in conformitywith the Chiefs of Stafis directive if weallowed all and sunary to travel to thesecountries without pe rmits.I had a word with Bill Stephenson whe isgoing back to America tomorrow. HethinksCatalogue Reference:KV/4/196213that Washingto will be in an appallingmess. Truman he thinks will be a yes-manto Wall St. Security coordination is tobe split up at Stage A. Burie TS communi-cation section will come under the Chiesof Staff, Connop Guthrie's outfit may comeunder similar auspices or under consularofficials. Section V will come under Pass-port Control. Bill is counting on beingout of the whole business by the end of May.Roland Bird came in to talk about radio-telephone system between this country anaSwitzerland. It has been open to the pressto use this service until they round it wasunsatisfactory so they dropped it. Whileit is difficult to see in the present stateof the war ana of security generally thatthe opening of this service is likely toincur grave risks, we feel that as theJaps have entrenched themselves ratherfirmly in Switzerland the service should natbe reopened for the time being. RolandBird will try to put this across at themeeting on Tuesday.April l6thVictor has returned from Paris for a few daysand he has been asked by Ed Saxe of 12thArmy Group (USA) to come and organise theircounter-sabotage section. This will probablytake a few weeks. He may then go to otherarmy groups.John Marriott came to discuss his future. Hehad heard of the Civil Service scheme fortaking on personnel with the rank of principaand above. He wondered whether this wouldnot give him greater security oi tenure. Isaid that in a sense it would but that itmight not necessarily have such good pros-Catalogue Reference:KV/4/196pects. In so far as security of tenurehere is concerned he could I thought feelfairly confident. As regards prospects,muchwould depend on the shape of this Officewhich we Shoud not know until FindlaterStewart had report and some decision haa beermade on his report.erbert,Baxter,Milmo,Cecil and I had adiscussion on a paper prepared by D.4. askingwhat duties performed by SCOs at portswere stirI necessary Iror a B.Dimn.pointof view. We came to the conclusion thatit was extremely difficult For us to sayanything definite at the moment ana that adecision should really be postponed untila month after VE day. Much depenueu on thefuture of the LRC. II the LRC were to beregarded purely as an organisation for theprevention of espionage in this country itwas difficult to justify its existence atthe present stage. On the other hana il it iis regarded as an organisation which willassist our laws in dealing with collaboratorsand generally cleaning up the continent,itstill has a definite function. Lastly itto some extent protects the H.0. againstthe observation here of unaesiraole aliens,a function which the Immigration Dept. onits present streng th and calibre couldnot very easily undertake. We thought thes-forethat a paper should be prepared forthe HDSE on the future aims and objects ofthe LRC, if any. Meanwhile we coula say toD.4 that it was certainly desirable tohave machinery For checking listedt personsat the ports and for dealing with Britishcivilians and P/WS on an SLB3 basis.The case of SETH was discussed at the dailymeeting, an SOE agent who is to be broughtback here from Brussels. We had originallyCatalogue EReference:KV/4/196be delivered at 020daily for interrogation untilwe could getto the bottom of his case. It now seems thata good deal of telephoning has been going onabout him on a high level between theBritish Minister and the F.O. I suggest athat we should find out precisely what theposition was, by obtaining copies of thetelegrams from the FO, also those from theMA from the W.0.Ostro is suggesting to the Germans that theymight give him ana his network 3 monthspay in aavance in order to fesuaru theorganisation against a possible niatus dueto the military situation.Alex Kellar has had a wire from Palestine thathat a revolt is possibly being staged forV.day. Palestine have asked that they mayhave 24 hours notice oi the Supreme Comman-der's declaration that all organised resis-tance has ceased.Hollis tells me that the SCI unit in Belgiumhas pic ed up a German named BOEHNKE whois described as a line-crosser. On interro-gation he has said that he was part O1 thecommunist underground movement in Germanyand that he had been in touch Dy wiretesswith the Russians. He aiso claims to haveinformation about U-boat signals. I talkedthis overr with Roger and Buster anu itwas suggested tha the man shouta oe broughtb CK as an ordinary category A. prisonerfor interrogation at 020.Walker has returnea Irom a visit to Parisand Brussels. He found apout 5 dilferertFrench organisations dealing with pigeonsbut Finally got them together and in Futurewill work through D.S.D.M. The French aregoing to insist on the registration O1 allCatalogue Reference:KVI4/196pigeons. In Belgium Walker found thatpolitics came into the question. Apparentlythe association of pigeon farciers is apowerful boay. They are however quite readyto co-operate provided they are allowea toexercise their own pigeons. This point hasbeen conceded. Meanwhile they have unaer-taken to go through the list O1 ali theirmembers and ascertain whether any of themhave been collaborating during the last 4years. Therewill be an exchange ofinformation on pigeons between ourseives,the French ana the Beigians, probablythrough the War Room.The W/T Security Committee wish that thereport to the J.I.C. on W/T Security aiter Ststage A should go through themselves.Originally of course they said they dia notwish to have the responsibility for W/T Sec-urity. Now however that an aa hoc committeehas been set up with their concurrence, theyseem to be anxious to get control O1 it.Personally I am quite indifferent providedthey do one thing or the other.John Senter rang me up to say that he wasrather worriea about the case O1 SETH.He thought that possibly some expert ough*to interrogate him on his peace missionfrom Schellenberg of the SD. I1 as atpresent arrangea SETH wrote out his storyand was then cross-examined on it severalweeks might elapse, ana the great ones mightbe asking what conclusions had peen reached.The were aware o1 the existence O1 SETHand his story Since there had been a greatdeal of telephoning between the F.0. anaBerne. T said that T thought the First thingto do was to get SETH' whole story. Onlythen would it be possible to say whatCatalogue RefePenCe:KV14/f96 ttached to any proposal2u7that he had to make. On the face O1 it itLooked as if he was pitching a tall story toact as a kind of smoke screen for his owmisdemeanours. The one thing to be avoidedwas that the case should get into the handsof the high-ups before it had been propertysifted. We had already had a bitter experi-ence of this in the case O1 MARCUST Senterthought that possibly SETH might be interro-gatea by Seetionv. but I felt that iiMason got hold of the case he would be cer-tain toogo off the deep end with possiblydisastrous results.April 17thHarker showed me a rather peevish telegramfrom Airy asking that any telegrams S entby Cass should firstibe approved by theoffice. He referred to a telegram recommendinCourtney's return and his replacementby someone called Short. It had beenarranged that we should be the first toinform Airy about Courtneyl possible returnbut our telegram ana Cass's were sent offwithin a few hours of each other and evi-dently Cass's arrived first. I gather fromHarker that Airy is rather trying to Work hispassage home. He in fact suggests that heshould come back lor a short visit in thetelegram. He seems to be rather a roilingstone. No sooner does he get settled in ajob than he gets prowned of ana becomesphlegmatic. The D.G. is not inclined topander to this. The suggestion is thereforethat Ede being ill macIver should go out anatake stock of the whole position. As a re lac-ment for Courtney I have sugbestea Watts. Ithink he would do the job extremely were Itreally involves carrying MI5 representationin the Far Eastern War Room.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/196The D.G. and Jim Hale returned 1rom the IOM.Jim is to let us ha ve a li t o1 officers anaNCOs,some of whom have very good languagequalifications. If we do not grab them theywill go into the Intelligen ence pool. Theright course is I think to train them andsend them out to the Control Commission.I had a long talk with Adam and also withPaddy Barry on the question of travel controlThe Chieis of Staff's ruling aboutsecurityoetween Stages A and B has beenchanged. Washington say that they are notconcerned about the identity, location ormovement of Anglo-American forces on orfrom the continent ofEurope after the ceasefire. They are however still concernea withthe despatches of forces from this countryor from the USA to the Far Eastern theatrebut naturally in a rather half-hearted way.They say for example that even if the Japsdid know that certain divisionswere leavingthis country for the Far East there is verylittle that they could do about it in thepresent state of affairs. This of coursehas a considerable bearing on a discussionwhich is to take place on Friday at theTravel Control meeting on whether there areany real grounds for restricting travel ofBritish subjects abroaa after Stage A.If the rather hali-heartea declaration o1the Chiefs of Staff is to pe implementeato the letter, we should presumably continueto restrict travel to places where there areJap Embassies or Legations. These areStockhoIm, Lisbon,Dublin,Maarid and Berne.Lisbon and Maarid are likely to disappearbefore long. Meanwhile we know that theJaps are building up Berne in anticipationof trouple in he.Peninsular. Even thoughwe take a low view OI Jap espionage acti-vities I presume that we Should maintainCatalogue Reference:KV/4/196aside O1 UMQUY - MOU ae UoIIReQ JeSeefsTu seeG6TYVHANT TVHAF:OSLRSfRHOR6BfeTeSate S 1 Auezoys uneno ea on putueqHJOT-oT-pue-sTetowro-oottod.pul Bottom JAustuL AqasTueJo ate s2uefe S I uuewz geng eu aq 0nsueasuotoursip TeeJ @uL pesetrea ASJIII9 sem ueua JeSoTo aa Leu anq JeeTo you SIapueeoaeapdefes S- Luazoys pue aeiemBIITEAS IOT uorsTUeSJoS:S S uueuzsengueamnaq aruotaauuop OUL SJOyIOM uteJorse peenop UOISSIU Teotape JOI pesnag MOU New aseua aeua pure sJoteOqeTTopuSTeoI IO sense are eeu BTaTSsOdSI Et in SurIpUTMp ST Jenamou 8euotdsesusuep OUL yorunn UT MOU oe VHSH eu IOsadep ePuL sureunow uereneg au SISiI:geu JO senenbpeay euo IO ueueAouteeues OuL eTSUTINUI' WOI spemasee-uSuTAou oe suotemo AeTtT O peypeaeS.I:D eu TO sJenenbpeeu eu apu serensSViVLT urpue seem JTOI Aeuurrs T 3 davHson0Ssuen-apeedTO sseunsoTosrp Leuoresues oue STUedoapmnous the ae e-uotuente Lue Lauaumenep Step ue ae eSpnf uotTSOd JeeqeutequeuTteus-M aa ueua SISpU Spuaoson HOSo Onperetnbto TTIM sode au IO satdoo puetied ETeeplutiaraupeu peuruexe ag TITM aseo STHeprou ounI Tu AtreP:OHT au e JodaJpmoushe au apua HLdS LI? uoua pmom Hdn senBU SutJPATo UT set: qTOunE ou TMAtinI HumRIedo-00 TO Aatssepeu aua WtU uodnsnpue uotTSOd see IO Aoepttep aun utuon uterdxe < Tentite to HJLGS 0n yeeds pmnomuessno 4eua peate seM I tHLS IO aseo aunto Sumeaw e peu TI pue pITE'ensng'uessnoetppes aua UT TTeM one sdtusJosueppartte aua se uOOS se SE 8uL IV esesJen te syuou S 08 On ST TtPU TO dtusosuassueidete pue True TO dtusyosues osTe naTuaunos esou? on TeAen peotseJ: Atuo ounTHIS COPYINDEPARTMGNR3(4OFTHE P 3(40F THE EnconDsACT1958An S:D. W/T agent has Surrendered at Saar-brucken: He stares that he desertea fromthe German Army in 1942, was dropped onBerlin by the Russians, captured, and turnedround by the S.D- A party Oi 18 Germanslanded in Cherbourg area from Guernsey on5kih April with demolition, charges on asabotage mission. One only, an officer; isstill at large. Further operations areconsidered probable and imminent. SomeFrench members of a recomraissance partyfor Jagaverbaende. operation involving100 to15o. men were arrested by the Frenchlst Army and killed trying to escape. Theyhad plastic raincoats ana walking stichs.A PPF round-up has revealed a network ofle men and 9: women-which-hadbeensestablisheby the leader since the liberation.Additional AdditionaltotheirWerewoll theirwerewolfyandespionaseactivities a German document shows that theHitlerjugend areexpected to. volunteer toguard and finally set off demolitions pre-pared by the WehrmachteApril 18thAt the Weanesday meeting Baxter mentioneda Pole who. had come here from Stockholm.had representea him as anaccreditedragen while Section V were nowsuggesting that he should be arrestedas a German agent. The man is evidentlyundesirable and were i't not for the factthat he knows something about Kremer itwould be much better if he dia not come hereat ait. It looks as if SIS were trying toget rid oi a dud agent from StoCKholm. Iasked that cases of this zinashouid bevery carefully scrutinised in future.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/19April i9thKellar suggested to me that possibly wemight ta e on George Kirk in his section.It is possible that Hunloke may have tocome back under the Python scheme an Novemverin which case Kellar sugge.t ts that JamesRobertson might succeed him. It would thenbe useful to have someone who could takeRobertson's place at any rate for the timebeing. I am putting this up to the D.G.At the Staff Meeting toaay the case of MissBagot was discussed. The D.G. apparentlydoes not want her to go and has said thatif she insists she will have to resign. Itwas decided to waitand see whether her appli-cation was accepted. Df it was we would doeverything possible to persuade the D.G. tosecond her to the Control Commission. WhileRog er could ill afford to let her go he didnot wish to stand in her way. Everyone agreethat the change would probably do her good.AS regards. Colledge going to F.2. it wasdecided to ascertain whether his applicationfor the civil service had been accepted.I mentioned the case of Miss Gask. Anattempt is being made to clear the positionwith the M/L who have,accoraing to Horrocks,put a freezing oraer on permanent staff.I ashed once more that Mrs.Arbuthnot's caseshould be considered and was to1 thatthis would pe done this afternoon. It wasdecided that in all the circumstances it woul(be a good thing if McIver were to visitKandy and find out precisely what was requireand why Airy was So troublesome. It wasalso agreed that Watts would be a suitablecandidate to replace Courtney Young,althoughWatts may be in a category for fairly earlyrelease.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/196I took Rivett-Carnac down to 020 where wehad lunch. Tindye put on a teemendous show.Once more I haa to go through the emparrass-ing performance OI inspecting the guard.TinEye seemed a little concerrea apout the020 camp which is ultimately to be establishedin Germany. He thinks that it will benecessary to leave a smail nucleus here andhe is anxious to come back from time to timein order to supervise its activities. Hethinks however that the majority includinghimseif could go O er to Germany in apout2-3 months time.At 3 pm we had a meeting to aiseuss theabolition of 18B in the colonies. we cameto the conclusion that it could be abolishedbut that 18B(a) would have torpe retained.The situation in Palestine would be coveredunder the emergency powers of 1936.Hughes came in to talk to me about a trans-mitter being operated by one o1 the voluntaryinterceptors.. This man had been sackea andhis set take away. Another V.I. with whomhe had been commu icating had however beenleit at large because the Lancs police refuseato take out a warrant,and the local PostOffice were reluetant to.act. The policewere apparently saying that having got awarrant on the statement of the other V.I.the wirleless set might in the meantime ha vebeen removed. This seems to me ratherchicken-hearteu. They want a warrant From us.we could of course give one but we are onlysupposed to issue an 88A if the matter is Sourgent as to prevent us From etting a magis-trate's warrant. The case has no securityinterest but a misaemeanour has been committedwhich should be dealt with. I have aSkeaHughes to try and move the Post Office whoCatalogue REferenCe.KV/4/196 there is a wirelesstransmitter but have in fact no right ofentry. The whole situation is ratherfarcical.The .G.,Harker,Charles ana I discussed thequestion O1 macIver going to Ceylon. It wasagreed that he should be sent out with aletter from the D.G. to Tim Airy. It wasalso agreed that Watts should replace Court-ney Young,i this can be arranged domestic-ally.Sclater came to talk about the decision ofthe Air Ministry and Navy to operate enclairafter Stage A. It rather alters the positionin regard to signals security. I suggesteathat he should go and discuss the matter withFirth.Yesterday I had a talk with Cyril Millsand explained to him our difficulties in thecases of COLEPAUGH and GIMPEL and the GRUNDELcase. I said that I wanted to aiseuss Laterwith him the future oi our station in Canada.April 20thLemnox came to talk to me about hissection.He has prepared a memo on its future Hesuggests that while Watts couia be spareu fromthe point of view O1 the work he is likelyto be in an early category for release as ajournalist Marcus is likely to wish toreturn to his firm after Stage A and Lennoxwould evidently De quite pleased to see Boda-ington get some job with the Control Commis-sion. Thiswould leave Lennox with nackneyand he would be prepared to remain as longas his services were requireu. BetweenStages A and B Lennox conceives his dutiesto cover looking after secret armaments, theverification of suspected Leakage and lookingCatalogue ReferenceKV/4196 Secret trials might26ukeep Hackney intermittently employed, checkingup on suspected leakages could very well becarried through other channels ana cannotpossibly amount to very much after Stage A,ana the PMS visits constitute a Job whichwe should never have taken on.I discussed with Harker and Charles theposition of Watts as a possible substitutefor Courtney Young. It seems taat Wattsis in an early category for rerease and thatif we send him to the Far East we mightcause him to lose his job. Ingram's namehas therefore been suggested.Marriott is joining F.Division on Monday.Claude Knight,who has been working in PWE inBelgium, came to see me on Brook-booth'srecommendation. He is very keen to obtainemployment in thisaept. He is not a veryimpressive character but seems to have haaquite a career in Intelligence. I promisedhim I would bear his name in mind.I had a talk with Tommy Harris and Milisabout Garpo and Moonbeam. Mrs. G. is forthe moment at any rate agreeable to returnto Spain and has got her marching orders.Cyril will have to Ily back the week afternext in order to get Moonbeam on the air.Cussen came to see me about a telegram fromthe British Mission in Odessa which relatesthat 4 women either British porn or marriedto British subjects, who were in an intern-ment camp in eastern Germany when it was over.run by the Soviet forces, were raped byRussian soldiers and generallytreated veryharshly. They have all made sigred state-ments. Tfethey some to this country ana thepress get on to them a pretty serious inter-Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1962national complication is likely to arise. Itis suggested that we Shoua m ke sure thatthe F.O. are thoroughly acquainted with thecircumstances. I am suggesting that Anthonyshould go over ana have a word with Cavendish-Bentinck.April 21stBurt came to talk to me about the aoeumentsthat he had found in Rosie SCHMIDT'S safedeposit at Hastings. On looking at them moreclosely they do not seem to agree with herstatement. Herbert thiniss they only aenotean evasion of Income Tax but we are going tosubmit them to closer serutiny.Richard Butler told me that Arnold-Foster haarung up somewhat concerned about the terms OIreference for Finalater Stewart. He wanted tohave a talk with me. I rang him up when hesaid that he had been proceeding on the assump:tion that we were still oi the opinion thatthe question of amalgamation shoula pe review-ed. I said that broaaly speaking we were,but that I personally had received rather ashock when I saw the original terms oi reier-ence. It seemed to me that they merely con-stituted an enquiry into MI5. Quite frankiyI had been somewhat irritatea and wondereawhat was going on. Arnold-Foster said hedid not like the terms of reference becausehe did not think they were wide enough or thatthey would give Finalater Stewart full scopeto look into the affairs of poth debts. I saiaI was very glad he left this way ana that Ishould be very pleased to discuss the otherpoints with him as soon as he felt fit enoughto dine with me. I to,a him that while I wasquite prepared to say that I should welcomethe whole proolem being reviewed from theCatalogteRelerehce.kV4/196 nation it was quite156hopeless to think that the DG would do thesame. He had come down heavily on the otherside and nothing would shake him.Paday and I attended the JIC to discussthe Chiefs of Staff elegram from Moscow.This telegram related to security arrange-ments after Stage A. It was extremely paalyworded and there was consequently a greatvariety OI opinion as to what preciselythey meant. My own view is that they see nopoint in maintaining secret the identity,location and movement O1 Anglo-American forceson and from the continent of Europe back toEngland and the States, but that they didattach importance to maintaining secret thedeparture o1 units from this country and theStates for the eastern theatre. This apparent-ly agrees with the view of the ISSB whohave very definite arrangments with SEACfor covering the departure of troops Fromthis country. It was generally felt thatuntil we got this point ceareu up it wasdifficult to comment beyondt pointing outcertain other inaccuracies. The Chieis ofStaff in one o1 their statements had saidthat the Japs knew the order OI battle alreaayana that therefore we shoula not be tellingthem very much. Bevan who was there pointedout that although the Japs knew theidentity of the actual units engagea inthe western ana eastern theatres they aia notknow the identity oi a numper o1 notionalunits which had peen ereated through ourdeception policy. It was importan thereforethat in giving any publicity we shoula avoiaany suggestion that we were revealing theidentity OI all units which had peen engagedin Germany. It was at O pointed out For theNavy that the movement of our Ships which theJaps believed to be in the Far East ana whichwere actually in European waters, was anCatalogue ogreRefefenfce.kv4f196icularly where capital257ships were concerned and should therefore bekept secret.. The Chiefs of Staff in Washington did not appear to have taken the Navyinto consideration at all. one of thedifficulties about co-ordinating plans ofthis kind between ourselves anathe Americansis that the mention of any component part,of an American division immediately givesthe whole division away whereas if we say thaa battalion of the West Yorrs has come Backto this country there is no indication as toche number of the division or even brigadeto which it isattached.Glover came to see me about Ingram. He saidthat he was an extremely pleasant individualwho got on very well with everybody:. He isintelligent,hardworking and very keen. Hehandesrall his cases extremely weli. I IIhhehas a fault it is that he is perhaps inclinedto-take-too-charitablera-view-oi-th those withwhom he is dealing. He is anxious to stayon-with-us-afterthe-war PersorallyIthinkhe is well worth a trial ard that we shouldget -training in-orderthathemay take Courtney Young! splace in Kandy.Kellar and I had a talk with the D:.G. aboutGeorge-Kirk.The-D.G-e George-Kirk G-ehas-agreedthat-KirShould be allowed to work here in Kellarissection.-He-wildcertainly be useful.Kird does not know whether to go back tohis old employment but I think that in duecourse he may well do so. Meanwhile he isprepared to remain on with us on a kind oftemporary basis.Thomas came in to teil me that he had metSETH and had made him a little speech,pointingout that he had a good deal to explain, andto attend at the LRC at 10 am tomorrow. SETHsaid he had a code and time frequency forCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1969582the receipt of messages for the Germans. Thishas been passed on to RSS. I supsequentlytelephoned to Baxter and assed him to findout from SETH early tomorrow precisely whatthe code was, what message he is expecting toreceive from the Germans ana howhe was pro-posing to..communicate with them.April 22ndI had a, talk with Baxter on the phone thimorning; His examinerthas ascertained frSETH that he was expecting the Germans togive him an address in Switzerland withwhich he was, to. communicate. He was alsoto-communicate-by-wireless-if-they-coulmake arrangements to deliver a set to him inZurichIgathe urichIgatherzthat-something-a rthatsomethine a propos-othis is going on: SETH had with him a medicalcertificate-stating-that-he-was-subject, toparanoic tendencies: From the sensationalnature-othis-story-this-indeed-seens-likely.I had lunch with th D.B. He is stayingonin SISfor a year or two tillThis he says he is doing onthe Special request of Cadogan who feels heis isitheon sthe only man capableol setting the showon its feet However he is very welldisposed towards us and L am sure that Sohas he is there he will give us full co-opera-tion: He thirks that all special materialShould be done by us in the postwar periodand that the secret ink side should also becontroied by us on behalf OI Doth depts.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDINDEPARTMENTUNDER SECHON3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 MA DereoCatalogue Reference:KV/4/19THS IS A COPY THIS COPYORIGINAL NALDOCUMENT RETAINED28.IN DEPARTMENT UNDER RSECTION(4).OF THE PUBLICACT 1958.1958M0w20023rdI had a talk with Cass who is leaving forKandy tomorrow. toldhim about Ingram whois to replace Courtney. He seemed quite satis-fied.. He said that he had hadhad had one ortwo twoilluminating interviews with SIS who had beentalking Fergiesinc Fergie since thetattersreturrr.PS blames the whole thing on Felix. They sayatFergie was sentout on-awild-goose-chaseand that he was not properly briered. Theyadmitthati fact they have-nothingtoputin the kitty except a few boaies. These are-and-aneother:Ilunchedwi hCyril and Tommy when we discussthe Garbo case: It is agree that we shouldeep-Moonbeama at anyrate: any rate ior the time beingand that if Cyril had to leave canada we Shouleitherireplace himiby Ronnie Reed or arrangethat he should go out once every 3 months tosend: a communication by letter. He would workin the, interval on the Canadian press and thenget the Ds of I in Ottawa to pep the informatiup to some higher grade. AS regards Garbo himself we discussed quite seriously the propo-Sition of selling his own organisation to thessians. Tommy's plan is to get him to writethe Soviet M.A. in London anonymouslybefore he leaves for Spain. He would tellthe latter the whole oi his story and give therhis code. He would tell them that he hadbeen working for the Engiish againstFrancoand that if they liked they ould-monitorcoramunications-between ourseivesand-the-Germato get what information the liked and inci-dentally cosatisrythenselves asto his bonafides. He wouia the leave them entirely alonefor apout-aryear-when-he-woultewrite-rererrinto his previous correspondence anu suggestingGatalogoe tReferenoe Referenee:k/4/196 de. IthinK this maybe worth going into in some detail.TFAS ISACOPY COPYORIGINALDOCUNEN UAENT BETAINED60INDEPARTMENTUND3(4)OFTHE THE UPLIC HEEGR DSAeT 1958 Mor o00Dr.Page came to see me abbutwho helped us considerably over the CALVOana other cases.has nOV. become somewhatmental and suicidal en account of the part thathe played in bringing about the aownrali ofCALVO and ALCAZAR. Page thinks he ought tosee Brown, a psychiatrist oi considerable emiFnence. I have got Charles to agree that wecan spend up to E10O or this as we may to someextent be responsible formental state.I had a talk with Charles about our stali drasdiscussion whichis to takeplace on Thursaay.The DG wishes to decide whether offers can bemade to certain people of postwaremployment.I said that I thought before we could do-thistwo things had obedecided (l)whatourcharter was to be, and (2) what should; becomeof ofnumber-of-useless-m of-useless-members-or-the-permanentstaff. If they had to be fitted into thepostwar-organisation-there-mig not be enoughwork for the new staff to do.I had a talk with Ingram who is keen to go toKandyan seems a suitable LecandidateAccordingto-a-BJthe-greater-par BJ >thegreater partor of the staffof the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has beenmoved moved-from-Berlin-to-itzbuehl, to-Kitzbuehl, BadGasteinLake Constance area, Garmisch and SaizburgThis sdescribed as being einginecessary owingto the "burdensomeness" of the situation.Judging by the number of ombs,shell's etc.loosed on Berlin during the last few days thesituation might well be described as burdensome.Discussions are now going on between the F.0.and the British Minister in Cairo on thequestion of the Suez Canal. The War Cabinetare being asked by the Suez. CanaI Committeewhether negotiations S ould be opened on thecatalogue Reference.KV/47196 that responsibility for the6T/tIAX:eDueOJed on6ojerepunou upeu O1 sette pAriTe MoTTe ueu pue11409 upuep ueseid eu WOII IOMOd earnpexeezeus on aupeuyem eu JOI SI soeup SuTJeAeIO Lem Auto oun eu paepisuoa AeUL padsequeeritp B aunsse 1uTu uoreRI eu 'speauTBn? TeINTNOTISP queaIn JeTOTued UT SUOTRO-noso Tewou JTeu? aunsaI On ATJPP peseeteJ eqoTNOM sOuto ua penI TuUOD peu OUM esou 4244JemTOs ueue aua 02 epeu ad pmnop osTuoaouos TI nbedsod e uons epeI ueu eteqUT et eueI OmNOM satptos ueuen yougeua peentsuoo Reun JnoaeT peoI UI pelotduuawhunoo Mo red ee1 suerssny euMOU uaas ButaeH seyJom-nBTs se eissny 01ages ea U9T UOITTTU OT sdeued put ago onSIee/ JOI Teuostd utewa prnom SJerptos ueuwesrun ad 01 peeedde Toedsod eua veuM JepueinsOn UOpuueM eua pueuuope Reun pInoo Jeu?Teu 'ssetemod AtTeeJ eem STeees eua Acts"efeas SIUA ae uotaenats aun apeIe ATeYITad pinom senTesmeua La ueweomnouoid Aue 48u4yutua you pIp Aeyn JenoeOW SeITIuEI JTeuSUTRRe ueyea ea pinom a2u STPSIdAJ aunTO esnepea pe ae spueu JITeu eu? TeeJLaun pauspootq Liessepeuun aene snoIxueae pue eerep arupe Feun eTtum rseopeoJaon pauitoep anpu aau sTeJeue ueuep ULpISSNH on put 1d/9 oa dogTaenemedun ad Key six unou una 'Teueo euIO ennI run On se sJemod eaU eu? Aq uoris-snosip Aue prone 01 ueey fen SI H euTO qJoddns 10e2 au utenqo 01 Tissod ITTTAM og DINOM AT 4eu sestape anq suordunsseaseua UO peepod pmno S am syuIu ueeIIiy1asB0 emppIw eu IO TOINTTOD pue epuerepeu ut ued queuruopaud B Retd pmnous UTetug110 42ua eTqersep sB 11 piece suosea-ebis put TBOTATTOd JO.I 1400-W-] (Z) pueAamnedjed UT 12409 teTadAg run pue ueuuenon"W-H UT pensen aa pmnous Teueo eu TO epuerep192 9 2262SHAEF JIC do not believe that any mass risingor Large-scale attacks are likely to tane placein Germany on the lines of communication. Theythink they can prevent any serious attempt atespionage or sabotage but the regard the Were-woives as the most serious threat to security.They think that they may engage in assassinationof allied personnel ane German officials workingfor the allies, attack supply columns etc.and destroy aircraft anaIuet supplies.Personally I ao not think there is muchjustification for this fear.SHAEF JIC have examined the possibility ofa stand by the G ermans in the redoubt. Theysay that numerous reports indicate that thereis in preparation a fortified area in southernGermany and northern Austria, the purpose ofwhich is not yet clear but which may well befor a lst Nazi stand when Germany is overrun.Fanatics are likely to be used, out themost that coula be employed would be 10 divisionIt is possible that the progress OI alliedoperations may not tpermit a planned occupati onof the redoubt, since many of the forces maybe cut off before they get there. It isrecommended that energetic steps should betaken to do this by the allies.April 24thI had a talk with Mrs.Pitt about the threeCharlies They were got out of Spain as theirlives were in danger. We were very muchindebtea to them as they had been responsiblefor double-arossing he.Germans in failing toblow up four of our ships in southern spain,a couple of years ago. They were registereehere in farsenames ana in their income taxreturns had failed to show that they weremarried or haa children. the resut is thatthey have paia E210 too much income tax.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/196THIS IS ACOPY THIS IS A COPYORIGINALDOCUMENHTRORIGINAL DGINDEPARTMEN UNDEH.S3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORIUS263ACT 1968. mo tooI spoke to Chartes about this who thought thatit would be simpler to pay the money out ofB.Divn.funds, otherwise we should get involvedin endless explanations which would be embarrass-ing.SIS and SOE are having their part in resistancewritten up for publication. We have asked toope the MSS before it is printed in case therea security aspect affecting this dept.At the DGS meeting Adam said that in loosenisgpaport control for British subjects at StageA shouldrfirst be discussed by the HDSE: Jimsaid that most people would be rereasedfro fromthe IOM shortly. 100 Italian Fascists wouldbe held until they-couldberdumpedonthebeach at Naples.At the daily meeting Mrs Springsaid thatStuttgarthad- gone-off -off-the-air-Berlin-wasal Berlin asalsoff the air and nothing had been heard fromHamburg for-two-days. The-station-that-wasat Stuttgart is operating again but it is-notyet pinpointed.Adam-discussed-with me the case ofhe OSS agent who had been dabbling in Austriaolitics in-thiscountry.-SIS had said thatthey now wished to drop the case but hadgiven reasons.. I said that I thought SIShad agreed to this man being brought herewithout passing through the LRC and withknowledge of what he was going to do or theyhad been double-crossed by O.SS. In either caseI thought that we ought, to Know the: truth.I had a talk with McIver about Ceylon,andigave him all the information I could. He isgoing out to see Tim and Size up the positionCatalogue Reference:KV/4/196Richard Butler tells me that CavendishBentinchas sent a suggestion to the DG that FindlaterStewartis terms of rererence should be widenedto include a survey of the whole field: of SISand MI5, and to see whether fusion is possibleor desirable. It suggests also that thoseparts of MI5 which perform duties other thanpurely intellig ence duties should also beexamined. This is of course Arnold-Foster'ssuggestion and oncemore we have the old rumptheory coming up. I havesaid that while weshould welcome the extended terms of reference Wwe should make it ciear that any breakingof the component parts of MI5 is out of thequestion. Having read Curry's excellent memoabout theorigins of this office; T am morethan ever convinced that it would be a mistaketo separate security from-our-otherfunctiors.Ihada word-with-Giselarabout-her-future.She seems to have failed all along the lineto get a job-. Tpropose-to-takeup-her-case euphercasewith Leonard Ingrams and see whether we cannotgetherinto-UNRRA.April-25th-Rivett-carnac-cane-in-to-say-goodbye.-he-seens Rivett-Carnaccame-i in-to--saygoodbye. He-seemsto be thoroughly satisfied with his visithere. visit here.Anthony came to te I me tha.t according to aJap Ba-Swiss-journalist-na AESCHMANNhad applied for a visa to come to this countryandewasinfact to collect general informationof a political kind for the aps. Having Urangein mind Anthony thought that we might possiblyallow him to come and fill him up with what-ever lies the FO or the Controller wish to putover,e.ge there is no rift in the Anglo-Russianlute and Japan may shortly expect a majoroperation on the Far Eastern front. Unfortunately ly Cavendish-Bentinck is away at the Sanatargusecp Reference:KVI4/196Conference: I therefore got Anthony-265to go round and see Johnny Bevan who seemsto be rather taken with the idea.I had lunch with Perks,Baxter and Hervert. Iput over to Perks my suggestio that L.O..sshould do a course in this office ana thatgenerally speaking we should work much moreclosely in the postwar perioa with the Immi-gration Service. I suggested too that ourRegional Officers should mae Tairiy requentvisits to the ports. Perks seemed quitetaken with this idea. We also aiscussed theimmediate future o1 the LRC. While he quiteagrees that the LRC must go on he thinks thatcertain categories should pe included. Ipointed out to him that the main flow was comingfrom Sweden and that many oi those who weresent over here were entirely unsuitable forthrown enlistment.in on the allied labour market. forces. they This therefore was creating gota problem for the H.0. in the future. Our ownsoldiers would be returning and finding Dutch-men,Norwegians,etc. doing their work. H.0. wouldthen be confronted with letters from firmssaying that the alien S services were indis-pensible, that he hadmarried a British wifeand had a British-born child. I thought thatthe real answer was for Passport control to cutdown the visas and the allied Governments toexercise far greater scrutiny, nuputtingpeople forward for the Iorces. At the moment tthey seemed to be regarding this country as akind of aumping ground for their nationals whowere an embarrassment to them in Sweuen. Baxteralso pointed out to Perkes that there werecertain inaccuracies in Carew-Robinson's letterabout a thing the which handing I did of not aliens. know beiore, Peers explained that whatis known to I.0.S as I(l) of the Aliens orderis the clause on which they mainy operate. Itstates that the alien must satisiy the 1.0.Catalogue-Referehce.KV/4/196to be allowed toland. This clause does in fact give the I.0.complete discretion although it isdoubtfulwhether it was really draited for that purpose.All the other clauses specify particular typessuch as crooks,share-pushers etc. There is nodoubt that the attertiors of the YI.o.s in thepast have been mainly directed towaras peopleof this sort and that it is only in looking forcrooks that they occasionally come across awhat spy. a If spy they looked were like better and informed what he about did theywould probably be able to produce betterresults. Perks saia that it wqulu have beenfar better if at the begirning O1 the warhe haa handea over his best I.0.s to us andput them into uniform insteaa of appointing alot oi SCOs who for a long time had not thesightest idea what they were doing and whoafter 6 months began to think that they kneweverything. Personally I am inclined to agreewith this view, since the I.O. who has beenworking for a good many years should have afar better nose for an undesiraple alien thananybody else. The service is however rathera low-grade one, in Fact Perks let slip thathe had recently been interviewing rospectiveI.O.S who were being offered a salary o1 L6a week. This is of course quite absurd. Ittranspired too that the I.o.s have very headresponsibilities and aid not get a greatdeal of direction from the H.0. He quoted thecase of an Austrian footpaller who came 4 timesto this country in order to join the Arsenalteam. The H.0. told Perks who was then atDover that it was quite useless for him toring up and ask or guidance. He shouldexercise his own discretion. He did,ana theman was R.L.L.Garbo has received a rather peculiar messageteiing him that the Abwehr and S.D. in SpainCatalogue ReferenCe:KV/4/196267cannot give him any help with the Spanishauthorities. They wili ao everything they canto help him in the way of documents anaiinance in France but he will have to make hisown arrangemen about getting back into pain.They say they are in difficulties because theauthorities to whom they would normaiy LOOKfor guidance in this matter are "in distantlands". What precisely is meant by this isnot clear. It may be the Redoubt or theArgentine.April 26thPWE wish to bring over here a Hungarian MPcalled FABIAN, a German called MELER, a Czechcalled KOMANN ara a Greek cartea EZRATTY, whoallege that they are ex-internees 1rom aGerman gas chamber camp in bitesia. The ideais that they shoula broaacast. we have said thatwe will grant them REL on the unterstanaingthat they will be returned to the continentas soon as theur jop is linished. They willbe examined at the LRC.Spooner is leaving as a captain to join JoeStephenson's office in Bermany.-Teresa tells me that NEBEL @ OSTRICH has beenoverrun with two others and is now beinginterrogatea.Ronnie Haylor came to tell me that a decisionhad now been reached to effect a merger between21 AG C.I. and C.I. of the Control Commission.Both authorities are to be in Berlin underBill Williams, during the SHAEF period, anduntil the appointment of the MGI. At the end O1the SHAEF period it is a matter of speculationwhether R.J. will come in in charge of C.I.under the M.G.I.Catalogue ReferenCe:KV/4/196-26%Tommy Harris shewed me an -SOS message fromMadrid to Berlin dated 19.4.45 showing that ontje orders of Lequerica the Spanish ForeignMinister 33 Germans were being ordered toleave Spain. This included KNAPPE @ FREDERICOwho has been running Garbo and Kuhlenthal. Afurther list o1 expuisions is expected shortly.All those on the list are for the time beingto go tosome place near Barcelona. This moveis probably the result of the various pro-tests that have beenregistered anu to thelast F.0. reply to Francots overtures, whichwas to the effect that Spain had activelyassisted the Germans urtil there was someapparent change O1 heart. Full cooperationwould be a dfferent matter. we are tryingto get the paniaras to pipe aowr on Kuhlenthalwhich may be useful to Garbo later on. Thiswill however have to pe done without it beingapparent that we are in any way interested.The above telegram probably explains previousmessages about the difficulties to beencounterea by the Madria Station and thestatement thatthe controlling authorities werein distant lands.The D.G. called a meeting at which Harker,CharlHorrocis and Dick Butler were present, withmyself, to discuss the lists of Officers whowish to stay on after the war. There appearto be quite a number who do, but the difficultyis to make the a firm offer untiiwe Know whatour chateer shoula be. It is however possipleto tell those who want to stay on and who arenot in fact wanted that there is not likelyto be an opening For them.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/196-209April 27thDuring the month of March 995 cases werereaaed From the LRC. Arrivals totaltea1,158. 598 were Scanainavians, 217 Dutch,194 Polish, 167 French,3 Belgian,2 Czech.12(5)A orders were applied for against 4 people.3 escape boats arrived, 2 Norwegian and oneDanish.According to the Swedish foreign Ministerthe German Minister r.Schnurre now in StocK-holm had instructions to make certain peaceproposals but Schnurre did not think that anygooa would be done by acting thus owing to thecatastrophic developments in the militarySituation.A report by JIC SHAEF dated 14th April statesthat nearly all reports continue to speak ofthe docility and apathy of the German civilianpopulation. Violations o1 curiew orders werefew, military government meets with very littleopposition and the Swift and strict punishmentmeted out to all offenders by military courtshas made a great impression. Cities whichhave suffered most are now the most frienalysas in the case o1 Cologne. The only exceptionwould appear to pe Bad Kreuzneu, where aconsiderable number o1 troops had to bediverted to eliminate sniping which had brokenout after the occupation. German officialshave So far proved on the whole satisiactory.They seem to show little desire to ta e Oliice.No sound evidence as yet exists O1 the existenceof any widespread anti-Nazi organisation andthe Germans in most cases tare little spontan-eous action against the Nazis. Neverthelessthere are alreaay signs of bitterness ana resent-ment against the occupying forces,partly onaccount OI the stern attitude Ol our troops,Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1962170partly due to extensive requisitioning anapartly due to the fact that the first carelessrapture of being released from pombing,shelllinand the horrors total war hasnow expired.There have been scattered cases oi 1oou short-age, but in most places some stocks have peenfound. The German authorities are being com-pelled to provide food for displacea personsbefore Ieeaing the German population, put atthe moment the food problem is not acute. Inspite of a certain apprehension, I shouldsay unjustifiable, about werewolves, it isfelt that no mass risings or rarge-scalelooting and attauks on lines of co mmunicationby the population are hi ely. In France it isexpected that there will be a swing to theRight rather than to the Left in the Iorth-coming ministerial elections. The impressionis formed by the fact that the Left Wingparties appear irresolute and undeciaed asto the course of their campaign while the C.P.is still adhering to its policy Of support forthe Govt. The Right Wing parties are ta ingadvantage of this situation and gaining ground.The return of French prisoners is considereda potential source of unrest. There are nonew developments in Belgium. In Holland thereis a feeling that the Dutch have been forgottenin the great alliea invasion ol Germany. Thegreat thing is to provide food ana uel as oChquickly as possible for the starving popula-tion.SHAEF C.I. .summary for week erding 20th Aprilstates tha despite extensive eliorts during thelast 3 months by enemy interigence kommanuosand truppes of army heaaquarters to establishstay-behind espionage networks on German terri-tory the results to date are considerea negii-gible. Failure has been due partly to Shortageof W/T sets ana petrol which have hinderedtraining and recruiting, party the speed ofCatalogue Reference:KV/4/196271the Allied aavance and partly to the low moraleof agents. In attempts to retrieve a desperatesituation permission has been given for theuse as stay-behind agents of W/T personnelOf komrandos and truppes ana foreign worrerspreviously intended for work abroad. These arelikely to pose as allied collaborators ortry to obtain joos as interpreters. Forcommunication pigeons ana coureirs are tosupplement W/T. G.I.S. Control Station continueto change location almost aaily. So War no-ommando or truppe in Germany has been reportedcut of or captured. Capturea documents andinterrogations support the general theory thatthe office of Obergruppenruhrer Pruetzmannprovides unaer Himmeer's authority centraladministration for the whole resistance move-ment, co-ordinates the work of the RSHA terror-ist units and the local networks Dy nigherS.S. ana police officials.Mrs. Garbo is due to leave for Spain on May Ist.One of Garbo's agerrts has had to be cut outof the organisation. He was watching the Istairborne division and as SHAEF carnot give anyrleease of information apout this aivision ithas peen necessary to get ria of him. Garbohas explainea to the Germans that though theagent pretenas tha he ran into trouple Garbofeels sure that he has concoated this S toryin order to provide an excuse for desertingthe cause. In coonsequence of the lastmessage from the Germans Garbo's organisatiorhere will probably be further reauced, as heis aavised to give leave to his agents unlessthey can provide political information.Tate has received a questionnaire identical withone given to ostro which indicates that theGermans propose to use their submarine reservesto the utmost.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/196At the daily meeting Herbert gave details OIthe analyses oi the American JMA informationwhich shows that most of the identificationof American units was one from the press. Thereare a few correet identifications which camnotbe attributed to press Sources. The sameapplies to both western and eastern theatres.Buster gave details about the case of SPECK,a German P/W who had former Abwehr connections.He has thrown considerable light on thecase O1 a Galle whom we detained here out whowas never completely broken Le Galle hasrecently been sent over to the French who saythey have got a confession from him. Thiswas a case on which Buster and I disagreea with20 wao were inclined to white-walah LeGALLE.Rawlinson came to see me about the future O1CSDIC here. Buster and I told him that weexpected an increasing numper of P/Ws comnec-ted with the Abwehr whose examination in thiscountry was essential owing to records andgeneral background. We hoped tharefore thathis: camp would continue for some months. Heseemed to think that it would be possible tokeep a small nucleus here roughly until theene of the year. He had a useful suggestiorto make about COLUMBINE whom he thought mnighbe giver a commission in the Britis Army asa pioneer ard then conduct interrogations inthe field. He quoted a precedent lor this whichwould have to be arranged on a high level ifwl A G. agreed. Buster will discuss this casewith Noakes next week.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/196273Aprid 28thI saw Burt today. He tola me that the sale-breaking job carried out in Hampstead hadinvolved a loss oi E2,000 in notes. He isfairly confident that ZIGZAG,t to whom hehandedover E1,000 and ELOO for two Leica cameras,was responsible for the Hampstead ourglary.ZIGZAG is at present living in a flat inKnightsbridge for which he pays 25 a week anasub-lets a part for E7 a week. He hasrecently visited Compton Mackenzie and alsoMacartney regarding the publication of hisbook which he has promisea to submit forcensorship. Burt is fairly confident thatthe book will be written by Macartney.Burt told me that he was assisting in theBOLSOM case by passing any information orreaction which we got direct to Chief Inspec-tor Barrett. At the moment BOLSOM hasa rather pleasant little sideline. One of hisfriends wishing to get rid of 83,000 in noteshas handed them over to BOLSOM in exchange fora cheque. Before paying the cheek overBOLSOM sent round a bogus revenue inspectorto interview his Iriend. The friend thenbecame scared and went to BOLSOM lor assis-tance. BOLSOM said that prouaoy for the sumof E1,500 he could, bribe somepoay in theinland revenue to lay OII. The 21,500 o1course goes into BOLSOM'S pocket ana his Friendreceives a cheque for E1,500 instead of E3,000.A document has been captured in the llela acted22.3.45. It is addressed to the Front Auf-larungskommando 306 from the Commanaer ofthe Security Police and the Security Servicefor occupied Hollana. It relates to theinterrogation oi Anton SCHRADER who wasapparently taken on as an OSS agent andCatalogue Reference:KV/4/19pprehended at Groningen on 10.2.45. He savea lot of information O1 very little signiii-cance concerring his training by OSS anu alsoa good deal OI information apout the DutchSecurity Service. He attempts to explain theorganisotior of the British Secret Service butbreaks down rather badly. He says that theequivalent of the Dutch Intellig erce Serviceand the British P.I.D. is the American F.B.I.He sas that the British Secret Service isP.I.D. He quotes a Brig.Dunne who accord-ing to our records was at one time propos-ing to get him a joo in P.I.D. The depthengaged in the search for enemy agents aswell as doing counter-intelligen work inco-operation with the Middle East Serviceis Dept.6.5. o1 Scotland Yare. The Officerwho interrogated him says that his informationmay be treatea as confirmation OI alreaay-Known facts apout the Dutch anu BritishSeeret Services. SCHRADER spoke o1 difleren-ces between OSS and th British. He says thatOSS was formea because the Americans wantedto get their own information apout militarymatters in the European theatre which untilthen they haa had to request the Britishservice to provide. Also the Americans ais-ap roved of the British having first choiceof agents from the Patriotic Schools whereal emigres arrived. The British uiu notlancy this idea of an American Servicein Europe and it appears that there existsa certain rivalry which has lea to aiscrepan-cies in France alreaaj. SCHRADER mentionshis means of communication oy W/T. He haa atelephone apparatus described as a horizonttransmitter receiver set, with which hecoulaoommunicate to aircraft. His voice wasrecorded in the aircraft during his trainingfor the purpose o1 identification in futureoperations. This case is interesting SinceCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1962747we had a good deal to do with SCHRADER ana wediscovered that he was interviewins SIS andSOEagents. We came ultimately to the conclusionthat there was nothing really wrong with him,but we aavised against hi employmert as anagent.I have read Curryi chapter 5 which is anextremely good aocument. I have suggesteu tothe DG that Findlater Stewart should beallowed to reaa this memo on the origin ofthe office ana its work up to the outbreak ofwar. I thought that in many respects suchdocuments woula of greater importanc tohim than those which related to our worksince the outbreak of war.April 30thI talked to Miss Barnes about the case OI oneDODGE, a repatriated P/W who was one oi the air-men in Stalag 5B who escaped and was recap-turedonthe occasion when the Germans shot anumber of British officers. He was sent sub-sequently to Oranienburg where conditions werepretty bad. Later he was release anu at largein Berlin where he was placed in touch with anumber of Nazi officials subsequertly hewas put across the Swiss border with somethingin the nature 01 a peace mission. There is noreason to suppose that he is a renegade.Arrangemets hav peen made Tor him to begiven a gentle Side-door interrogation by theLRC. There had been some suggestion of nisgoing to the FO and it seemed uesiraole thatwe should see him first anu siIt his story:Keltar talked to me about Simonas who isproposed by Douglas Roberts as the successorto Hunloke. Hunloke is due to come back underCatalogue Reference:KV/4/196276the Python scheme and Roberts does not thinkthat on the security side he is very eilicient.Simonds is from what we can gather fromother sources not a very attractive characterand apt to be quarreisome. There have beenallegations that he was partial to the Jews.This however Seems to be unjustifieu sinceunder the orders OI SIME he had enigratiateahimself with a number of teaaing Jewishpersonalities in the Middle East. Havingcollected all the information we can I thinkwe shull probably recommend againstSimondts appointment.Cussen came to tell me that he had seen Diekand that he wished me to know that he did notintend to accept any appointment as co-ordinatorbetween Contro 1 Commission ana 21 A.G. untilhe had dise ssed the matter with me.I lunched vith Mills. I told him that allthings being equal I should be glaa to seehim remain in Canada until the FinalaterStewart commiittee had promulgated its views.If we were to be allowed representation. inAmerica I would prefer that his successor shouldgo out and overlap a New weeks rather thanthat there should pe a hiatus.ad Cayzer came to tell me that there was acertain amount of anxiety ain BritishHonduras about a possible attack by Guatamala,backed by Mexico. Guatamala has incluaedBritish Honauras in its new constitution andapparently wants hali of Belize, the otherhalf to go to Mexico. It is said that therehas alreaay peen a - raiding party. The Governorwants air support. the C.0. do not appear totake a very serious view OI the situation.Carew-Robinson rang me to say that he wasexpecting a visit from Sam Hoare. There is toeatalogaeRefetence.kV//1g6 o1Lorus on the277admission of aliens before the war. Sam Hoarethinks that as the prewar Home Secretary hemay be attackea for his policy. He would liketo be able to saj that there haa been no caseso1 spies amongst those who were aamittea, Isaid that this woula not be entirely true sincea certain number of spies in the striet Senseo1 the wora had come in anu gone out againand that there might be one or two cases oipeople who had actually settled here, budwhat in any case it was aesirable for a numberOf reasons to continue to Keep the Germans inthe dark. There was however another aspectOI this whole problem. Before the war Germanactivities took the form of propaganda andthe collection of information quite legallyabout the state of our rearmaments. This hadbeen due to a number of causes. The resuithowever had peen that the Germans haa verynearly succeeded in blinaing this countryto the possibilities of war and that they hadbeen placed in the position oi knowing thestate of our rearmaments from month to monthsMilmo came to discuss the cases of he RAPPARTand de GRAAF. Both these people are contesseaspies and de RAPPART is a Bellgian naturalisedCanadian, he GRAAF Canaaian porn. Theyaretherefore interned in the I.0.M. under 18B.At Stage A 18B is likely to be abolisnea. WeShait therefore have two proven spies wanderingabout this country without any powers toaetain them. ae most that we can ao is tomake them report to the police under L8A whichwill continue until Stage B. Milmo thinks andI agree that since they will have to be rereasecin a few weeks time w.e may as well proceed atonce in order to avoid their collecting anddistributing messages from other internees.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/196-27%Robson-Scott came in to say gooabye. He isgoing back to LondonUniversity. In his quietway he has done quite a good job on Germansana Austrians in this country.May IstBurt came in to ask me about Fish who has haaan offer to go to BOAC. I said that as he hadhanded in his resignation to the Yard I feltit ifficult to object, sorry though IShould be to lose him. Obviously the Jop inBOAC offers him uite good peace time prospects.This leaves us with only 3 sergeants. Burttold me that he had seen Rosie SCHMIDT but hadnot really succeecea in getting any satisiac-tory explanation out OI her. She took the linethat she was ignorant and dia not know thatthe original loan was paid by her aunt LUDWIG.We have to consider whetherwe will sena O1Ithe letter written by SCHMIDT or anotherletter or whether we will have enquiries maaeby SIS direct in the Peninsular.Dick Butler tells me that Stron has sentanother invitation to the DG ana that the DGwants him (D.B.) to accompany him. I suspectthat Keneth Strong wants to persuade the D.G.to allow Dick White to remain in Germany toco-ordinate the Control Commission ana C.I. Owl A.G.Aaam came in to ask whether I could give him ananswer about the duties ol SCOs at ports andwhether they could pe cut down in such a way asto release personnel. 1 said that I thought thatat the moment SCOS had more responsible WOTK anamore difficult work than they haa haa since thebeginning O1 the war anu that as long as theChieis of Staff wanted security maintained andCatalogue Reference:KV/4/196-?9as long as the LRC remained in existence,ourrequirements from the BDivn.an angle would notchange.At the 12 o'clock meeting today Herbert raiseaonce more the frightful question Ol the BlackList. He thinks that if the list is to be oneproperly it shoula include not only Future casesbut past cases for which purpose it would benecessary for seetions to review their files.This will O1 course be a stupendous jop.irstly I think we shoula get D.4 to let themhave a list OI the people that they have puton the CWS Black List. TheJ coula then reviewthese and say whether they are for iciusiorin the postwar Black List. Fon the rest theywill have to rely largely on their memories.The LRC can of course make a considerable con-tribution.The Chiefs of Staff in Washington have decidedthat they want Censorship maintained betweenbatin America and the Peninsular until theconclusion of hostilities inthe Far East.This will be rather a blow to Herbert. Whenthis question was raised several months ago weentered a caveart on this very point.CurryAllen and I saw the D.G. apout the Futureof the L.0.s. It was agreed that the D.G.and I should go and see Maxwell and try and gethim to put the service as a whole ona higherlevel. We would also put forwara proposalsabout co-operation with the I.O.S in the post-war period. My idea is that we shoula givethem a course here and that our Regionalofficers should visit them.Briscoe is anxious to collect specimens o1 inkfor documents type in a Germar soluble inkfor use in warships. II these documents fallinto the water the ink is immeaiateiy ObliteratecCatalogue Reference:KV/4/19628502He thinks that such specimens may pe found inI.G.Farben. I put him on to Professor LinasteadO1 CIOS.We have obtained Orange's co-operation in theAESCHMANN case.Viv.rang up apout the Case OI Crocker who haseen paying notes to a man eallea BURNETT whoruns a string of night-clubs ana whoseaccount was brought to the notice of Nea ReiCrocker apparently hanaies alt the finances O1RSS and is regarded by Gambier-Parry as relia-ble. Viv. is proposing to see G.P. about thismatter. I tola him how delicate the matterwas and that I dia IT t wish on any account theinformation to go back to BURNETT. I wouldspeak to Nea Reid anu see how far we coulago. It was not surprising if BURNETT was supply-ing RSS with Black Market products.May 2ndOn 20th pril oue MA in Madria telephoned tosay that instructions had been issue for theGermans to cancel their Lufthansa service toSpain owing to lack of landing grounas inGermany. A pilot of the last German planewhich left Barcelona had instructions toreport to the Personnel Luftstaiiel ofHitler and Himmler consisting of 8 planeswith flying radius of 9,000 kms which had beenprepared for a flight to Japan or manchukuo.A Civil Affairs report dated 14.4.4 states thatat Idar-Oberstein the Germans are reported tohave risen against the Yolkssturm when it wasplanning. to defena the city against alliedoccupation and in Seliegenstaat the burgomasterwas beaten by the populace because he failedCatalogue Reference:KV/4/196281to wave the white flag as tanks approached thetown. He later killed his family ana committedsuicide. In Bretten-Baden, the "azi burgomasterand all but one of his family committed suiciaewith the idea apparently of posing as martyrsto the Mazi cause.-The same report,under the heading "Monuments,Fine Arts and Archives" states that 7 directhits by bomos were uscoreun on the cathearalat Cologne.An interrogation report O1 a P/W named RuuoliRATHKE, a member O1 the Gestapo concerned withthe detecting oi illicit wireless and runningD.A.S is of rather special interest as it showsthat the Gestapo did quite a Lot O1 D.A. work Wwith captured Russian agents. One of thesecontrolled agents asked Moscow what he shoulado in the case of an alied invasion O1 France.The answer was that he shoula remain at hispost. During 1937-38 the Russian IntelligenceService organisea an espionage network inFrance,Belgium and Hobland. he originalmission of this ne etwork headed by an agentknown under the cover name o1 General GILBERT,was to furnish information about political andeconomic trends in those countries. Alter theoutbreak OI world war 2 the entire S. stemwas transformed into a military intelligencenetwork. In Nov.1942 the Gestapo succeedeain raiding and arresting the entire networkincluding GILBERT. this rouna-up startea withthe arrest of HermannWENZEL a Russian-trainearaaio operator who was operating a transmittingstation in Belgium. Several minor agents wereShot and among them a Russian woman namedSOKOL who was shot in Brusseis on the personalorder of Himmler. Other agentswere taren toCatalogue Reference:KV/4/196-9Paris For further investigation. Goering issaid to have taken an interest in this organ-isation, and followed the disclosures withmuch attention. The Gestapo decided prutilisethis illigitimate radio communication withMoscow and to turn the traffic into a Funkspiel.Most of the operators were to continue theirtransmissions under Gestapo control. this newset-up was known as Rot Kapelle and was sub-divided into a Paris anu Belgian branch. Al]information transmitted to Moscow had to bepassed by Abt.4A2B O1 the RSHAir Beriin. Mosto1 the information was true as it was antici-pated that the Russians wouru have opportunitiesfor checking up. The transmission o1 militaryinformation however become more area more iti-cult owing to the un-eooperative attitudeof the military authorities. When in earty 1944one o1 the transmitters made a request forfunds Moseow gave directions to contact a Czechcitizen named CHERVINKA residing at rue Edisonin Brussels. CHERVINKA was married to aRussian woman who had a son employed at theRussian Embassy in Kabul. This son was allegealysupposed to furnish $5,000 to be paid toWENZEL. The P/W was oraerea to im ersonateWENZEL and to establish contact with CHERVINKAbut his repeated efforts to extract moneyfrom her met with no success. The stationwas known as Weide, and was closed down inHeb-March 1944, butfor 3 months aiterwarasMoscow continueato call. Another station knownas Tanne was operate From Amsterdam oy oneTino WINTERINK, a native of Arnheim. He anaseveral others, among them a Dutchman namedNAGEL, were arrested by the Gestapo in Nov.1942Two others evaaea capture. Owing to variousbungles by the Gestapo, Moscow aavised inMarch or April 1944 that the station Shouudiscontinue. They tola the agert to join anactive resistance group. Another station KnownCatalogue Reference:KVI4/19-2833as Buche-Pascal was operated by a Poviet armycaptain who in 1937cam to Belgium with afalse Finnish passport using the cover nameO1 Erich JERNSTROEM. This man broadcastalternately from Liege and Brusseis. He wasinduced in Nov.1942 to work For the Gestapo.When he asked for funds he was directed to atimber merehant ir Charleroi who had anaccount of 50,000 French Iranes in Russia.Pascal was to ask for a Loan bringing greetingfrom a Russian business friend. The merchanthowever remained indifferent and tola Rascalthat he had recovered his loss from an Italianinsurance company ana was not in a position togrant a loan. Another station known as Buche-Dob opened in Nov.1942 and was operatea by aRussian army officer. The Officer was capturedand shot as he refused to cooperate. The stationhowever was taken over by another agent opera-ting from Paris. It discontinue in mid-July1944. In Paris GILBERT was inauced to continuetransmi ssions to Moscow but he sueceeded inescaping in November or December 1943. TheGestapo are said to have found out that he hadalso been working for the British intel intelligence encein collaboration with a brother of the BelgianMinister SPAAK. This station continued tillthe allied invasion. The Germans claim thatkhey obtained a considerable amount of moneyfrom the Russians and also information coveringFrench resistance groups by iniltrating themwith Gestapo agents. The codes used in thesetransmissions are on record.SHAEE C.I Summary of 27 th aprit statesthatthe H.Q. of the German military espionage ser-vice now seemed tO have eompleteu withdrawalinto Bazaria, the main concentration being atMunich. It is perhaps noteworthy that no highofficer of the RSHA has so far been captured anuicatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/196 irmed report - says thatKaltenbrunner has been superseded as head ofthe RSHA. Captured documerrts now prove thatwilling recruits for a stay behind espionageorganisation in Germany were aif icult to lind.This may explain the use of personnel O1 commandand truppes for agerit work anc o1 foreign worercover for foreign collaborators originallyintended for workoutside Germany. Inthe politi-cal field a wave of unrest is passing overBelgium. Despite lack o1 encouragement fromRussia communists are fanning this unrest andjockeying for influential positions when warceases. The position is egarded as potentiallydangerous owing to the large numper OI armsdumps known to exist. in Belgium ana to othersbeing smuggled into the country from France.In Germany the work OI C.I. teams has beenaffeeted by the speed o1 the aavance. Therehave been difii culties oi processing suspectedpersons and securing C.I. targets. There hasalso been a shortage of ersonne to coverever-increasing areas. WorK has been Iacilitatedhowever by the docile attituae o1 civilians.There is no evidence that any anti-Nazi movementis in existence in Germany or emerging. Activities of werewo.lf organisations appear So farto be negligible.We are threatened with the arrival Of 5,500 int-erned and some 10-13,000 uninternea Britishsubjects. Efforts are being made to set up acamp in order that we may eiect the necessaryscreening. We shall only be able to Look up thowho are sus ect and to check the party againstour list of renegades.Bertram Ede tookee in to know what had happenedabout the controversy ov.er 0.0. I told himthe position. He said that according to Charesthe D.G. did not wish to discuss the matteruntil Finalater Stewart had given his Findings.eatarogu Reference:KV/4/196wonderea whether we could agree that288Kefar should send copies of his personalcorrespondence with the Mid East to 0.C. Isaid that I did not believe that there wasvery much of this which was not Or a highlysecret nature Dut that I would much prefer notto raise the issue until the whole questionhad been settled. I said that I thought the DGS going to rule that for the time beingMid East should not he in any way an 0.C.commitment. This without prejuuice to anyfuture decision. II however the DG was notprepared to consider the matter at all it couldonly make trouble to arse it Or a lower levelApart from this Eue told me that he himselfwoulu be away for arother 2 months. It seemeatherefore rather pointless to insist that rellarshould send ail his personal correspondence toClayton who could obviousiy made little con-tribution.Dick Butler came to tell me that he had hadi.aconversation with Arnold-rorster which at timehad become rather peevish. A-F evidentlyresented our decision to aavise against. theinclusion of the SIS cause in the terms ofreference which focussed the limelight on thetal amalgamation OI the 2 organisations. Dicchis mean that we KX no longer--believed longer believedn amalgamation? Butler replied that in theDG' view the derma o1 reference that he haadrafted gave ample scope to Findlater toenquire into this.particular matter and thatthe additional Clause was therefore unrecessaryButler also discussed with C. the uestion ofa number of male ana Female German cryptographywhose presence was aesired in this country.I talked to Heroert and Sclater about the lattermemo on Dignais Security which he was intendiCatalogue to sena Reference.r tO ADNI. L 1147196 saa that L thought thisTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION283-(4) OF THE EPUBLIO RECORDSACT 1958oldwould be a mistake. The memo alleged continuedindiscretions by naval wireless which wasleading to the sinkings OI ships by submarines.I said I thought a more profitable line wouldbe to show it tO Montagu ana ask his aavice.It would be unfortunate il we gave Firth theidea that we were going behind his back.Kenneth Younger came in. He has just beenplaced iYI charge of all C.I. matters at 2xdArmy and will shortly be a it.Col. this isa great triumph for the d Iice,as we now havethe leading CI. posts at SHAEF,Q AG anu 2ndArmy notto speak of many other. posts in France,Italy and elsewhere He was quite interestingabout the atit tube of the Germans. On the wnolethey had peen quite cooperativeAt Osnabrucka keen Social Democrat had walked in Iferingto-give information. When-he was asked il hewould like to be contacted at some less cons-picuous place he said that he diu noe care inthe least and that he woula continue to cometo H.Q. There has not been a flood of inlormantebut quite a number of collaporators. Kennethtola me what the SIS manhad aireaayhad a raspberry from Bill Williams who does notintend..torallow. intend -allow him to operate except understrict control. Even that seems doubtful.Kenneth is rather apprehensive apout the abiitof many of the regular officers and oi theCivil Affairs oflicers to handle delicate poLt-tical questions. Many of the regulars are bone-headed except on military matters and the CivilAffairs OIficers are generally cast-oiis, infact rather the equivalent O1 the Town Majorsin the ist war. Kenneth was full of praisefor Niall macDermot who he said haa done averyfine job. It was however to some extent a one-man job. It was difficult to deputise Ior Niallhe liked doing things himself. The greattHatalogue tatalogueReferenge:k4/196 had the capacity andenergy to do them. Kenneth thought that as longas he and Bill williams were at 21 AG thine swoula not go very wrong on the political side.I had a meeting with Hervert,Jim ana Rogerabout the post-war BlackList. We agree thatD.4. should send sections the names oi allthose that haa been put on the CWS B.L. to seewhether they should go on to the new black list.E and Divisions thought that they could goIck on their records fairly easily in oruerto get suitable subjects for the list. Thetask of B.division however would be moredifficult. The LRC would give considerableassistance to E.Division. we alt had gravedoubts apout the userulness of the list as itis extremely aiIricult to say who really shouldgo on it. If you coniined yourself to importantpeople they may not necessariiy e those whowill travel. However it may be necessary tommke something of a start ant then prune andshape the list later on.A German bomeer has lanaea in Scotlana with aerew of 5. deserters.Dick telephoned me to say that he would becoming over next week to aiscuss with me hisfuture. I think he can stay with SHAEF untilAugust but no longer.May ayrdAt the staff meeting today Horrocks said thathe had heard from the M/L about Miss Gask.She can be released if we can manage to coverthe work within the oIlice. It was deciaea thathat a tentative oiier OI permanent employmentwould be made to Kellar,Courtney Young,Jo hrMarriott,sands, Baskerville-Glegg,Colledge andpossibly Hil Al that can be saia however isthat their services will be retained For 12Catalogue Reference:KV/4/196months and that there is a reasonable chancethat they will oe askea to stay on permanently.They will however still be Lire allothermembers OI the stail suoyect to a months noticeSuch notice however woula only oe given ii thecircumstances were exceptional ana uemaidedsuch a course. It was thought aesirale thatin an office O this ind the DG should maintainpowers of summary dismissal. Ten years servicegives pension rights. Only a proportion OIthe war service counts towards the ten yearI mentionea the case o1 Tess.. Horroeksana Charles said that proviueu Noei-Baker couldsquare th M/L which he presumapiy coulathere was no oojection to her going.Branaes has peen given 12 manths pay For hisnotionat agents anu Ostro 6 onths payOn 1.5.45 Garbo received a long messase thark-ing him for his service ana that O1 hisorganisation. It is hope that in the courseof a New aajs he will receive the necessarydocuments to enable him to travel to France.If not, he will either have to remain wherehe is or mase his own arrangements. A remit-tance is being sent. The message ther statesthatinordertoleaveopenthepossipilityof making contact should circumstancesmake this necessary, with agent 1o13 or withGarbo himself, if he remains in Englana, "youshould let us have py message the name,surnameand address where we could send a plain post-card which would pe sent fror a man FernandoGomez who would communicate to the aadress hisintention to trave.l on a given date. On thisdate the wireless should start up contact inaccordance with the yearly plan which is inour possession". It is left to Garpo'sjuagment or that o1 agent 2 to make similararrangements.with the network oi No.5. TheCatalogue Reference:KVI4/19628message concludes as follows. "We do notthink it is necessary for us to reiteratein these bitter hours our proven sentimentsofgratitude and appreciation. We. firmlyhope that providence will inspire the Leadersand build resistance for the future inorder that we may avoid at the. Last momenta definite chaos which would envelopeuropen defencalofewhos ideals we have struggledtogether. We will be istening daily fromtomorrow So that 3 can communicate hisapproval of our suggestions and send theabove mentioneda address as soon as hehasconsulted with J. Before definitely suspendithe present contacts with Almura the wirelesstation) we await our instructions in thiscomection.: Very cordiulrefardsfromusallTrevor-Wilson rang-up-about-Verneuilcomingto 20: I said that this would be arranged.Healso -wishesto-see-the-D.GMilmortold-me-that-there-was-to, meetingof the JIC tomorrow to discuss the liquidationOfCSDIG hereinthe-ve verynear future Ourarguments are that this would be undesirablesincewecould haveinoplace of interrogationfor prisoners in uniform who weredikely toincrease-and-were-ofm more importance as thecontrollers of Abwehr and SD activities thmanyotheragents alreadycapturede It wouldbe difficult for this work to be done abroadsince it needed daily brieiing from recordshere if not actual examinatior of the recor#oby the interrogation staff and on occasionsreference to most secret material which couldnoteasily be transmitted abroaa.Kellar showed me the lotes of information sheCataloggeqReterence:V/4/tost the Hagana areinclinedto-tak the law into their own handsTHIS IS A COP THISI A COPYORIGINVA OGMENa9oaDFPARTMENT BDE SeeOF THE PUBLIC RECORES1958 aThey had apparently castrated a man who wasalleged. to have committed rape:I went over to see C. about the case ofHe entirely agrees with our viewthat she should be allowed to go after havingbeen spoken to on the lines suggested: Hesuggests however that in order to keep somehold over her at any rate for the time be>somebody in his office Should, if she seems-to be the right sort of type, offer her asmail salary to.keep SISiformea about anyactivities of Germans in Spain after: her returnWe talked quite a lot about the Russians. Hethinksuthat they are going to present uswithtremendous problems and he is anxious to getahead tpresent somewhattied He is proposing to try and get somedefinite-instructions-fron-the ns-from-the-chiefsolstafThe moment may perhaps be opportune as everyoneisgettinga-bittired Russianbehaviouryparticularly the last movein setting up aprovisional-government ntin-AustriaItoldhimwhat I thought about the possibilities fitheirtrying tobuild big ndtocontro-the narrows in the Baltic and MediterraneanAs regards he-BalticIreierredchirndoratelegram in which Ribbentrop hadstated that Molotov: had said on onhi his lastvisit to Berlin that the control of Cattegatand Skagerack was a. cardinal point in Sovietforeign policy... He had forgotten this andwas extremely interested as he had been issuingstrong warnings about the urgency. of our gettinto Lubeck and thereby controlling the KielCanal. He had done this on the basis ofreports that the Germans were desperatelyanxious for us. to seal off Denmark as theyCatalogue ReferencekV4l19e Reference: eferencekyausggansto-drop-parachu-29(tists in the area.Lastly I discussed with C. the FinalaterStewart enquiry. I said that when we receivedthe original terms o1 refererce we got theimpression that the pur ose o1 the erquirywas to establish whether M.I.5 had done theirjob properly during the war. This hau struckus as being somewhat insulting. C.saia thathe aid not now who had araitea the terms ofreference or why they had peen draited inthat form. They had struck him in exactlythe same way. He was particularly anxiousthat we should notthink that SIS were pehinait or that they in any way questioned the workthat we had done. He then outlined to me thevarious moves which I alreaay knew ana tola methat their amenament to the terms OI referencehad been devised in order to focus rindtaterisattention on the question O1 possible amalgama-tion. I said that the DG autaren the viewthat the amended terms of rerererce adequatelycovered this poirit, but E was sure that iiC. really attached importance to it the DGhad no objeetion to the enquiry taking thatform, although he personally woula not agreethat total amalgamation was uesirable. I thenaskea C. what his own views were. He was hewas completely oper mindea and that he couldargue a case either way. He thought howeverthat nothing but good could result Irom athorough ana intelligent enquirj and he agreedthat in order to come to a decision Finuaterwould have to mane a careful stuay O1 themachinery of poth depts. I strongly emphasisethe point that in my view it would pe entirelywrong to split up MI5, that if there was tobe amalgamation it would pe uesiraole to,notto separate what was sometimes reierre to aspure intelligence Iro securit, measures, sinceCatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/196-999ii some control over security matters was notretained, a great deal oi intelligence workwould pe ilficult and much o1 it would Deentirely negative. I nstancea the variouscontrols which had been set up and in particu-lar the control of radio communication whichhad been responsible Ior giving more iniorma-tion to the enemy than they haa got from anyother sources. I Said that I aid not think thatthe retention of these powers or controls needin any way embarrass a secret intellig e1 ceorganisation and that they provided manyppportunitiee,eg.the work of the D.Branchesfor picking up valuaole intelligence Iree,gratis and for nothing.Before and af'ter I saw C. I haa a talk withArnold-Forster to whom I explained what Isubsequently said to e. T totu nim that Ehad suggested to C. that he should weigh inif he was not satisfied apout the terms ofreference and I dia not think he woula meetwith any opposition to which hehad repliedthat he thought this might be better one byCavendish-Bentinck as the F.0. had madethemseives responsible for the terms ofreference.The DG gave a dinner to Dica Dutier, at whichCreedy,Charles Russell,Toby Mathew andNewsam were present in addition to certainmembers of the staii. Newsam was ooviousiyI think pleased at being asked, and was ex-tremely friendly. He made a Short speech inwhich he outline the H.0. point o1 view inthe early days of the war. He said that theywere forced to some extent to follow puplicopinjon but that as soon as the, could theycame down on our side. It haa therefore beeninevitable that we should be at logser-heaasin the early days oi the war. He was gladthat that period had assed ra idly and heCatalogue Reference:KV/4/196-293felt that relations were now on a very satis-factory basis. He hoped for this cooperationin future. I talked to him privately on thesame lines. He was very complimentary aboutmany officers of the dept. and the atisiactoryway in which they had worked with the HO.He mentioned that there were occasional incitenin the H.0. of people writing stupid Letters. Ithink probaoly he was referring to the hintin this respect that I had given sometimeago to Miss Nunn. I had had Hill particularlyin mind. Newsam thought that dinners of theKind that we were having were extremely goodvalue and helped a great deal towaras gettingpeople to understand other points Of viewand to know each other on more personal anaintimate lines.I talked to Creedy about Findlater stewartisenquiry. It was satisfactory to fina that hebelieved strongly in a co-ordinator who wouldre-adjust the spheres as between MI5 and MI6and work aireet to the Ministry of Deence, iithere was to pe such a minister, ii not tothe C.I.D. He agreea that it was wrong foreither depti,being advisory, to work to oneparticular departmental minister.May 4thThe war seems to be winding up ana we areexpeeting VEDay propaply on Mondai. Every-body seems. to be taking things very quietly,including the assasination oi Mussolini, theliquidation OI Hitler, the surrender in Italyand the fall of Bertin. The end OI the waris falling rather Ilat, and V.E.Day is undoupt-ealy going to be a colossai bore, with no Goodand no transport. The only thing to ao is totie a union jack to the beapost and go to bea.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/196-994Verneuil came to see the D.G. with Trevor-Wilsoand Vauareuil. Verneuil is head o1 TravauxRuraux and wants to set up an 20 in theFrench zone. We are sending ham down toOxfora.Burt came to teli me that Smith hau hau a heartattack at Scapa ana that he is propably to Deout of action For some considerapie time, andwould certainly not pe availale for travel,on any scale. weanwhile there is asuggestion from Cussen that Fish ana possidBurt shoua go to Italy to ceai with Amerywho was detained there a Iew days ago. Thiswould leave us with only two sergeants. Isaid to Burt that we shoula either have toget some assistance or we shoula not be ableto fulfil our commitmentss. In so far ashis going to Italy is eoncernea I personallyhave no objection provided the work ca bedone T am to leave this to him.The D.G. called a meeting about 18A and 18Ba)in the Colonies. There was a case oi a manealted de NORMAN in Kenya who would have to beset at liberty if 18B is abolishea. As heis an Indian of S.African origin we aresuggesting he shouid be sent to bAfrica. we ththink that 18A shoula propaply be retained inthe Colonies as they will obviously have thesame dilliculties as we have in keeping traof people who have to be released under LOB.This however is largely a matter for theColonies themseives. As resaras LOB(a) wethink it shouiabe retained in all Coloniesuntil we get some idea apout attempts byNazis to get away to S-America anu elsewhere.It gives us power to take them OII the shipand bring them back to this country.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/19629I talked to Milmo about the case of BRODERSEN.The Norwegians want somebody from 020 to giveevidence at a Court Martial. It is unlikelythat such a Court Maetial can be held hereif the death penalty is involved. The officerwould therefore have to go to Norway. Theold objection about 020 O ficers givingevidence,namel, that it might lead to awkwaaarevelations about the technique ete. at 020has largely gone, but it would clearly beextremely inconvenient if rot impossible for020 or LRC officers to be travelling tovarious countries in Europe to give evidence.BRODERSEN' case might quite easily create aprecedent. Many O1 the officers might be inGermany and others mightihave left us alto-gether.Baxter came to talk to me about the 14,000returning British subjects. We agreed thatthey need only be checked the list of renegadesand looked up if the circumstance seemedsuspicious. This should ease the resistryproblem. Albertis W.S.form shoula undoubtealybe filled in by all.J.c.came to tell me that Canada were anxiousto release the story of Watchdog. Had we anyobjection. I said I coula not say oIr-hand butI thought that the case should be lookea intoco see whether there was any B.IA aspect. Weshould also consider whether we might not becreating a precedent in the release of suchstories.Kellar showed me a report about the strengthof the future British Army. The regular armyis a parently to be about 300,000 plus amilitia of 150,000. The militia will be formeafrom youths who will do a years service betweer18-19 and then go on the reserve for 5 years.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/196Hugh Astor came to see me. He said that hehad a tertative offer from SOE who are carryingthe duties of PWE in the eastern theatre. Hewould act as deputy to some PWE officer in KandHe seemed to think that this $ob wouldinterest him and he was quit e definite thathe did not want to join DIB. I pointea outto him that as the whole o1 his training haabeen here, it S med rather a pity that heshould not continue to do something on thelines for which he was best qualified. HoweyorI was generally against trying to persuadesomeone to do a job which he did not reel hehaa got his heart in as he would be strugglingall the time to get out and that in this caseDIB would then be stranded. I thought there-fore that he had better go if PWE were preparedto accept him.Grogan talked to me about a variety of censor-ship matters. There are a number of rathertrivial relaxations with regard to telephonecensorship to which we can easily agree.Herbert is resisting the suggestion for redn-tion of censorship between Latin America andthe Peninsular at Stage A plus 5 months.One of his arguments is that the Navicertsystem even if it isnpessible to maintain itwould by no means cover the situation, as thereare many ships which could evade theserestructions. The Chieis O1 Staff in Wash-ington are being asked to state more speciii-cally what they are trying to safeguard. SISare being asked For their views. There isalso a suggestion to cancel the ontrol ofCommunications Order in So Tar as northernand southern Ireland is concernea. This meansthat printed matter can go between thiscountry ana Irelana without a permit. Thisseemed to me to de end on two things (a) whatprinted matter is allowed to be published he reby Press & Censorship which could be of useCatalogue Reference:KV/4/196297to the Japs and (b) how long will Irelandremain a cul de sac. This whole questionseemed to depend on the ruling o1 the Chiefsof Staff about security aiter Stage A. and onthe dissolution of Jap Embassies in neutratcountries. II Ireland ceased to be a cul desac there would seem to be little point inmaintaining control of comunications orderSO far as the continent of Europe is concernea.May 5thI went with the DG this morning to see maxwellabout the future of the Immigration Service.Maxwell was very receptive to our idea ofgiving IOS a certain amount of training andvisiting them at ports. He thought itimportant that they should act with greaterknowledge. He would have a talk with Perksand Carew Robinson and hoped that when Find-later Stewart had finished his enquiry we shoulbe able to arrange periods of attachment orcourses.Last night I dined with Verneuil, Vaudreuil andKnock. Verneuil gave an interesting accountof his experiences in working with the FrenchResistance. There is no doubt that he hadmany narrow escapes. The outoreak O1 war roundhim in Belgrade as M.A. He eventually gotback to France via Austria and later startedhis underground activities. IncidentallyVerneuil is not his real name. He knew atleast 2 months before that the Germanswere going to attack the Russians and he toldme that the Russians had giver the Jugoslavsan undertaking that when they were attacked,before long they would come to their assistanceThis seems to imply that even if they had notbeen attackea,the Russians woulasooner or laterhave attacked the Germans.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/196Bird brought me a draft memo which Hill of theH.O. is proposing to submit to the HomeDefence Executive. It relates to travel byBritish sub elects anywhere without E permit inthe near iuture. It is once more a questionwhich depends on what the Chieis o1 Staii laydown for security between stages A and B.II Censorship is to be maintained in neutralcountries presumaoly there shouiu be somecontrol over travel particularly to thoseparts where Jap representation exists.At, the daily meeting Mrs.Spring spoke aboutthe case of EIDANBERG. This man who is a Czechis resident in this country. Aceoruing to areport received from OSs IromBucharest,whichhas been given by a P/W EIDPNGERG was wor kingfor the German I.S. in Vienna in 1935 and hada mission to this country. A check-up shows thahe did in fact visit the UK at the timestated and that his last arrival was in 1940.He is now in prison doing 6 months For blackmarketoffences.Irecommendedthatweshouldget fuller details From OSS,examine his H.O.and police files and then tale a look at hisbanking account.We should ther be in a betterposition to know how to clear the matter up.Sclater came to tell me that there had been ameeting under C's chairmanship on thequestion of the future o1 Y.units. the ideais I gather to bring them under G.C & C.S.though wheth r this includes RSS I aont know.Sclater will have a Took at the reporta copyof which is in possession of D.D.Y.At the weekly meeting last Weunesday Herbertmentioned the case of SCHURCH, a Swiss born inLondon, who has now been taken prisoner byOSS in Rome. He states that he worked inLondon from 1936 onwards till 1940 as a spy forthe Italians, and later continued to spy forCatalogue Reference:KV/4/196299them in Jerusalem and Egypt. His father is awaiterat the Savoy.._ As he is a Britishsubject his case may have to be dealt with onthe lines of those of de GRAAF and de RAPPART,as after Stage A when 18B is abolished weshall not be able to hold him excepti.under 18A.As however he has served in the R.A.S.C. at ontime we may be able to deal with him as adeserter. If his story is true this is the firstest case of an Italian spy that has come ourway.John Senter came in to see me. He is goingaway on 3 months sick leave and will then leaveSOE and go back to the Bar. He was full ofthe co-operation he had received from thisdept:May 7tho355John Marriott gave me his impressions of F.2.He thinks that there is a lot of importantwork to be done, that there are some goodofficers and that they are fully stretched:He doubts howeverwhethe the work kisraltogether being conducted on the right lines: Heinstanced the procedure-by-whieh-each Partymember was notified to C.C.s and the informaon passedfrom one C.c toanotherwhentheman moved. The only case fortthis is that ifParty members are to-be-prevented-rron-gettininto positions where they have acces's toconfidential-information,somepody has to keep.track of their whereabouts and occupations.Johnpointsout. however that this syste isby no means infallible and someone succeededin-gettinginto gettinginto-ubealloyst the other day.This arose fro the fact that Birmingham Policeand some otherpolice other police forces,including theMetropolitan, did no.t when notified takeCatalpgueRelereAee;Kv4919e movements. In thisTHIS IS A COPYORIGINA! POSUMEN RETAINED0NDEPARIM TUNDE SEQHOA3(41 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 w0coway Birmingham did not report that: hadentered Tube Alloys until some enquiry aroseover isjwife. All this work reporting onParty members, whether they are importantmembers or not, diverts a considerable amountof energy which might be better employed ininvestigating more important cases. Johnthinks that if a close tab is kept on thework of the centre it would be possible torelax to a considerable degree the enquirSabout those on the periphery. Anotherpoint which he raises is the running ofinformants,He thinks that MS should bemuch better informed about what is going onandshoud do: a greatdeal morethan atpresent in sowing seeds for the future. Whilehe-thinks-that-the-work-of-David-clarke wasgood, a great deal of it was in his head andneitherne-nor-Rogerappearto neithernenor.R nor-Rogerappearte-have-iventheir subordinates much scope. The atmosphereofthe theDivision ion-is-not-therefore-very-good is not good.Burt rtacame came in to ask whether would agreehis going to Italy wi'th Fish. It seems5necessary that 2 officers shouldigoa asAmory's case will undoubtedly be an importantone. DPP intends to prosecute him under theTreachery Act.. He is not however to be broughback here until statements have been taken.It may be of course that Amory will refuse tomake a statement without his solicitor. Mean-while B.5 machinery will be reduced to twoofficers,Edwards and Davies. This is rathera serious:matter if,as may be expectea, wecalaloguerep 8/4/196cases. Burt howeverhas evidentiy, set his heartsron going to Italy3otandIam and am reluctant to refuse him leave to go.I think therefore we shall have to take achance.Inspector Coveney of SB came to see me with Thelatter ashed as ed whether SB had any informationa letter that he had had from Cimperman.ewhich would lead them to Believe that theRussians were using micro-film or dot films,for communication. I said that T wondereda little why Cimperman had not casked us thisnot know the form. Coveney also asked mequestion.It may be of course that he doesrecommendation if he put in aor Jjobvas C.C-whether I would be prepared to give.hi aI saidthat: these natters were not normallyreferred to us but that if in isapplicationeliked to uggestethatreferencershouldbemade to the DG and to mertionithatl hadknomnineboth at-s.y-and-herertlesshouldibeprepared mownyhimbothats, to do anything Iocouldeto help him:S.yandhererlashouldbeLennox came in to say that the surrendertermsfor-all Germanarmed: forces had beensigned at 1 hours today and that the PMwouldprobablybe making a statement..C: and Tommy came in totalk aboutGarbolsGermans future. indicatingrth A message ting-that-they-would_welcomehi has cone in fr m thearrival in Madrid in order to discuss futureplans. is eminently satisfactory. Thedifficulty is in getting GARBO to Madrid.Notionally he-will get.alif get lift by American plaunder a false name to Franee and make his wayacrossthe frontier. Actually he willthaveto go by air or. sea to Lisbon wi'th a transitvisaon his-ovn passport. It Itris is important tthat he should enter Spain with proper documentation. The-only snagiis that he leftCaralogueaefereaeeaky/4ing6thatthe InternationalIHISISANDERARTAN UNDE340F FHE PUBLIC BE CORDACT 1958. Mu 2e00Police there might conceivaby uestion nimif they have put his name on a Black List.ommy suggests that his lanting card shouldbe in the name of GARCOA instead of GARCIA,a difference which would prevent his namebeing traced in the T.I.on the otherhand, the SIS man', says he will have nodifficulty if he is in transit.Tate has remained in contact with Hamburgright up to the evening of 2.5:45.At the end of April peace negotiations weregoing.on between theaps and the Chinesein Nanking; Nanking having apparently havinga very tenuousy. lik ithChuggking WhereasNanking apparently wanted to bring aboutpeace by conversationsswith the apschungking was reluctant to act without thecconsentofAmerica, Buteventhisattitue ofrGhungking seemed to osbe somewhat doubtiul andthereseemed no immediateprospects-of-amove:The The.War Wan Room-monthly summaryeforthe 5thAprit states that for the past month theenergiesofathe atheadquartersaat regional stations within the Reich, have beerabsopbed-in-the-adminstrative taskofevtion. IT At the end of Feb. certain planningsections moved fromthevicinityofB Berlinto Thuringia. During the month of Marchthis movement continued. The sabotage andsubversive section Mil.D. would be therear party near Plauen ana the Signals SectionMilE moved to. Eisenberg near Weimar. Theregional staffs at Wiesbaden and Colognewithdrew towards Thuringia and later toMunich. Since May 1944 a section of Milamtin neutral countries has been going on. InCatalogoetRefeneneerkVisl to draw all Milamtactivities under one head and ensure against803further allied attacks by directing the aetail-ed aaministration of this work from the coverof the Embassy. At the same time arrange-ments were made by which a few high levelofficers would be incorporated in the Embassywith diplomatic status in order to directthe work on the policy level. The head ofKDM in Spain now exercises a general controlover all Milamt work in the country, thoughformer agents still work independently andwithout his knowledge for KDM'S within theReigh. The day to day administration hasnow been removed from the Office working underEmbassy cover to shadow organisations whichare now under the control of heaa agentsusing commercial cover who have also adoptedpanish nationality when possible. At thesame time the number O1 low-level MilamtOfficers using diplomatic cover is beingsteaaily reduced, mainly as a result OIallied pressure for their expulsion,but alsoas part of a corrscious policy by which theorganisation Iorthe future has been plannedunder cover o1 the dissolution of the organisation of the past. Meanwhile theee havebeen fficulties about the dir ectorate Oisneior officers as fully fleagea diplomatsand little assistance is being obteinea fromthe Embassy in Madrid. This whole plan ishowever based on the assumption that a centreo1 resistance ana therefore a centre ofcontrol will remain in Germany, and the catas-trophic turn of events along the westernfront has to some extent thrown it off itsbalance. It was always assume that in theeven of the pro-German elements in Spainbeing forced into opposition by the democra-tic revolution within,the benefits of thisplan,particularly on its subversive side,would be shared with them. For this purposeCatalogue Reference:KV/4/196-304sabotage material has been dumpea in >painand arrangements have been made to drop armsand ammunition shoula the situation demana it.But it was also an essential feature of theplan that it sh uld not be knowIl in detailto the Spanish authorities lest as a resultof a change of sides on the part of thelatter it should be suppressea at birth. Inshort the Milamt's shadow organisation wasonly envisaged as working with the extremistsin Spain if and when they lost power.In spite of this and possibly as a resultof panic, at least one section working withKDM Spain has handed over part of itsreserves funds and details of its stay-behindnetwork to the Spanish Chief o1 staff. Eventhe head of the KDM is now pursuing awaiting policy with regard to furtherincorporations and has prepared for the worstby removing from the Embassy suilicient funasto pay his whole station for 5 months.There is therefore a possibility that in theevent of a German collapse the whole of thisplan may fall into the hanas O1 the SpanishGeneral StaIi tor use in their own irtarestsbut it would be wrong to count on this.An idential plan appears to have been workedout by the KDM in Portugal.May l0thStamp came to talk to me about certainarticles which the Press wish to public aboutLINDEMANS. He agree with me that it wouldbe impossible for us to censor these articles.We could merely say that the case was subjudice in Holland ana that we were not in aposition to say how far publication would.embarrass our allies. They alone could bethe judges. In the present state of theircountry it seemed undesirable that anythingshould be donenwhich might conceivably hamperCatalogue Reference:K4/196 quite apart from the3ostjudicial aspect of the case.At the W.Board meeting today J.C. gave anexpose of the work O1 the XX Committee duringthe last 16 months. He began by explainingthe 6 purposes for running D.A.S and thenexplained how our organisation had gone gradu-ally into liquidation since Overlord owing tothe military situation. we had beer leitwith5 agents who would continue to comunicateybutonly one of whom,namely Garbo, would be likelyto survive in the postwar period. J.C.therasked for leave to dissolve the 20 Committeebut to retain the various links in ServiceDepts., Controller's ofrice arid H.D.E- whowould act as approving authorities For any mes-sages which we might wish to send over inthe future. The Board passed a vote of thanksto M.I.5 and M.I.6 for the very successfulwork that had been done during the last 5 yearD.M.I. expressed his intention of writing bothto M.I.5 and M.I.6 on behalf o1 the Boara.The future o1 the Board was discussed. It wasdecided that on C's recommendation it shouldbe kept in being and to have aa hoc meetingsas heretolore. A general write-up is to bemade of the work of the Beara. This wouldnot occupy much space but it is to includea write-up of B.lA and the Controller. Acopy is to be kept by ourselves and by C.After J.C.s speech I drew attention to thevery valuable work done by the Services inwireless deception which hackea up themovements of all Garbo's notional units. Itseemed to me that probably the fact OI Y.material supporting agents' reports had beendecisive in misleading the Germans during theOverlord period. One was complementary tothe other. The Controller mentioned evidenceof the success of our deception plans. Notonly had we got the map showing our positionsin this country on the 15th May but the recentCatalogue Reference:KVI4/1963report by P/W employed at Ic Gruppe West hadgiven an account of how the Germans thoughtthat we had corcentrations in the south eastof England which were likely to be usedagainst the Pas de Calais. H Col.Arnst hadrecently given himself up with a suitcase ofdocuments and had ledo the authorities to aspecial cache at his own home which he hadburied in his garden. He had kept these aocu-ments as souvenirs ana he clearly gavethem up in the hope that his wife ana lamii,might De allowed to remain in their schloss.These document are OKH daily intelligencereports and T believe contained a good dealof the stuff which we put through Garbo.Hastings rang up about the German cr. ptographe]including 4 women who had been sent oy theI.0. to Holloway. We subse quertiy got them outto ightingale Lane Hastinss says he wishesto keep this party for at least 5 months.T saia I aia not think the Oratory Schools orNightengale Lane were very suitable placeseven if we could get the 1.0. to agree- Irecommended him if possible to line otheraccommodation He is tryig to get the useof Praewood.May l1thAt the J.I.C. today we discussed the paper byCavendish-Bentinck on his visit to America.It did not contain in fact very much that wasrot known already. The future of AmericanIntelligence is still in the balance althoughefforts are being made to unify it under aMinister of Defence. O.S.S. are presumablyto play some part. I gave my views about theFBI and the RCMP.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/196307 3I lunched with anthony Long formerly ofM.I.14b, now in the control Commission. Longhad just been to Munich to deal with civilintelligenc targets. He had Deen accompaniedby Fatrick Day. He Said that the Americanswere not really tackling the problem at all.In the short time that he was there he had notbeen able to achieve very much except toconvince himself of the necessity of sendingout qualified interrogators and Germanspeakinresearch workers. A good many of the documenthad found their way down to that area and therewas a mine of information. The danger was thatthe documents woula either be destroyed or bedispersed by people who did not know anythingof their contents. He described the Germanpeople,including the Gestapo prisorers, asbeing extremely docile. they were all sayingthat their consciences were clear. He had onerather remarkable experience with a woman who hhad implored him to shoot her. She evidentlythought that he was a Soviet officer, butwhen informed that he was British she witharewher request and handed over some antiquatedivory flint-locks etc which were taken away.I attended the H.D.E. this afternoon to discussa pa er put up by the H.O. on de-restrictionOI travel control for British subjects.Herbert outline the decisions reached by theChiefs of Staff regarding Censorship. It haabeen decreed that censorship to all buropeancountries shoula be maintainea lor D months.It seemed therefore that travel shoula followsuit. I outlined the position as far as weknew it with regard to the remnants of the G.I.S. and Jap organisations. At present thesituation was in a state of flux, althoughthere were signs of the GIS trying to reorganisunder commercial cover in Spain,portugal andSweden. There was a possibility that it mightCatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4Y19 activeinthose3countries and also in Switzerlana. Therewas also pending a proposal to the JIC thatthe Jap Embassies should be closed down inneutral countries. This could not howevera ply to Switzerland who were a protectingpower. It seemed desirable that for the timebeing travel by British subjects should con-tinue to be controlled in conformity ithCensorship and until the position becameclarified. Stafford emphasised that the vettingof travellers would be increased probaoiy100% and doubted whether we should be ableto serve the Passport Office without longdelays. I said that this was a commitmentwhich we should have to accept. It transpiredlater that even il permits were issued notmuch travel could take place owing to lackof accommodationwhich would be likel/ tocontinuefor another 15 months. As soon asthis became known applications would probaplydeerease.Hughes,Selater anu Howard o1 RSS diseusseawith me the possible re-licensing O1 amateurwireless operators. I said that 1 thoughtthey ought to be ofr the air if possibleuntil the end ol the Jap war or certainlyfor the next 5 months. therwise regulationsapout censorship seemea to De rather silly.We agreed that when licences were reissuedamateirs should be asked tO report any sus-picious traffic ana that they might perhapsbe visited either by RSS or by our R.0.S.from time to time. Wireless parts can nowbe bought but it is an oIrence to piece themtogether in the form o1 a transmitterTommy discusssed with me the plan For Garbo.It now seems that his return via Portugalmethod o1 getting him back to pain into isis fraught with danger and that thesend him round via some south American republidwhere he could get a new passport, his old oneCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1963having expired. This may' stake some time whichisapity since: it would. be convenient forusto have him in Spain while the G?I S:is reforming. We feel however that the riskso1 sending him direct are too great.May 12thttended, the JIC toaay when the last tiegramom thecombined-Chieis- OI staff onSecuritybetween Stages A and B was discussed. variousproposals were putrorwaru in reply.general view was that while the dispositions 01unitsonorfrom.t he-continent of Europe was-of no great importance, re-deployment to thearEastshoula be held. Admiral LThompsonwho was present pointed out that the Admiraltywere somewhatinconsistent He had instructions about keeping the movements even ofmerchant vessels secret in the Med areawhereas the Admiralty were now rather inclinedto take the view of the Americans that movement of convoys was not of any very greatimportance: There is of course a certainamount to be said for the view that Jap submarines might naturally lie up at the bottlenecks from the Red Sea and E anama canalangat convoys areso continuous that noticesotheir impending arrival is not Tikeiy to addvery much to the enemy's knowledge. Thegeneral feeling however.wa that this was aslightly exaggerated view and that a morecautious poricywoule woule be-advisableItwasalso insisted that base censorship to ana fromthecontinento Europe wasneeessaryrandmust corform to cinir censotship. A telegramintthissens isbeingsentoif isbeing sentoif.The-Americanshave -proposed-thetakingover theof the German Embassy in Dublin The effecteataoteerererencekeageourn-hisrdocuments eatalogue eatalogeerReference:k49t g96burnhistdocuments documentsand retire to a private house. Presumably weTHIS IS ACOPY THIS IS COPYORISINAtDE3 oNDEPA AR MEN UNDE SECNO37410F FHE RUBLIC RECORD PEor the Americans Be adaledt th themaintenance of the Embassys premises. Whethersimilar tactics will be employed elsewhere Idon't know but a wire from Eisenhower wentout-o on 3.5.45 to the combined Chieis of Staffindicating that his plans were not to informneutral governments of our intentions untilthe Surrender oi Germany was announced. Onthat day the allies woula iniorm neutralgovernments of our inteitions,inviting theto co-operate in taking over ail German ailomatic and consular offices and to partidipate in expioiting alT recoras,file etc.The allied rpersentatives: and representativesof neutral governments would proceea toGerman Embassies and order surrender of thepremises, their contents and their personnel:Allied officerswould not be armed,ano if forcewere ere-neededitshould needed it exercised by neutralauthorities: All important document's thuscapturedwou be distributedot to theallies and the neutra governments if desired.Neutral-governmnents-wouldpe-requesteearrest all German secret agents who might beuncoveredasaresult Ofthescrutinyofdocuments: German national's would be returned toGermanya and placedia at the thedisposalofzsH SHAEF.KREMER and his ismistresshave-been-capture mistress been encapturegin Denmark and are being brought to U.K1He willigg to 020I rang C. about the case of MEISSNER concerningwhomhad telephoned to Bird:MEISSNER has been in charge oi Abwehr activitiein Switzerlana ana has also operated in Lisbonand Angers. spoke as if the wholewar depended on his being brought to thiscountry: C.after making enquiries told me thata rather tentative approach had been made byMEISSNER through an S.I-S: D:A: He agreed withmatattagute atattaguteiRaferen tlahgeve some proof of hisTHIS IS A COPYORIGINALDOCUMENLRETAIN ORIGINAL RETAINEDINDEPARTMEN3THE PUBLC RECORDS3.11ACT 1958. mu Lo0obona fides welost att hold on him imadiatelyhewas he was brought to this contry under conditionsoffreedom as outlined byItseemed to me desirable that we should firstget a fairly compre ensive statement which wecould check and this had apparently alreadybeen asked for but not yet received.was evidently trying to rush us on therounds that ii the man did not come here heuld be grabbed by. the Americans. Later Iheard that the Swiss had Kicked him out andthat he had gone back to Germany.evidently thought thatthis was a disaster ofthe first magnitude. The chances are of coursethat MEISSNER will be picked, up in Germany anwe shall then have much better holdon him.Adam rang me to say that Swedishi fishing boatswere coming ntOBritish ports heMinistryof Food were anxious to get the Fish.Adam hadquite-rightly-refusedt to land.I said I thought that this ought to be maintainedOtherwis it wouldabe possible for aregular courier service to be set up betweenhere-andSwedenwhich would make kenonsense ofCensorship. Adam pointed out that the incidenmightbe a useful bargaining point for the FOin getting the Japs expelled from Stockholm:May 15thVickery has now got a request for Burton andwe are arranging his passage.Harier has had a request from Admiral Thomp-son for the publication-or spy stories. Hisdecision is that we cannot release any morethan has already been released concerning pro:ceedings which have been hela in camerawithout the Judge's authority. We might ofcourse be able to get this authority but itCalalopuetRelerenceekt4oc-ror-us-towritethestories. We have other things to do at the96T/tiAxepuejed en6operepOu ased pIW MOII Semnoted ITaya utengopmnous am AJessepou IT pue as2H PIW 0u? WOIIau HUATIJE SUeITIAID.. put ueueas usTMac TIBIO soueu eu? aneu pmnous am 38u? eTqersepsn o peuees 2I "LInunop sTua ut a8euosaduauruoad e ereutssesse n SIOIIOA owosAa aduenne he TO sotttTgISSOD ou? pue auta-sated ut suotestuesJo ISTUOZ UO ouow e utuepueu put Sutuues eas Ion qem TI pue Jeuteypueasuopun on SYOOIJIOH IO DA eu Jeute 709 0?DIIITO AIeuuxe ST e4 SHUTY e.u IOauo sn{ SI STUL pereTseaut ueeq oueneu sase Item II RtunopT sTU UT OInote Sutxtem ele soeOqeItop II pOSTOTTIOeq STTOM ear OM SIU WOT Tedv ueu oneBurunauos MOuYO etTouNV uoTBISTUUIpuesoos 9 on uetueauopreopee seMI TeAtie to AtIIOSJNO JeneMou peutuexe aqeneu ARUke.u Reu puedeotupo-uotretaredezeon08 On ney LOUL F paedaid AtmnToep eneu OMTUM AswJOhis wO eu UT TITIIO PTO eq seal sepmnous uoseat PITEA ou JJO.I AJOAtJen TeionuJOpardnopo-Auteuput pepoppheuoums750fans Usttug get ou 07 quenodut sueas Isueou-ouno-Aq STet-aur-uo_ype QSTTeIuuo peq metqor to FuetqoIou 108 pue AIn eneu TIeUS I pue WTUUT u UManate On ssatasn Atpetoasem TI iadedSuteaup Atoeu pue outa IO ensem e seM AJonIan Thunau JO potdnono-kuaue WOII Auop0a Sutungad spafans USItg TO dn Sut-OTuanou au aeun Les On pasnepSTUL puetezatms WIOJI Aunoo S IU on peet-ede Suteg sem OUM G8 pate uewom OTO ouosTO sepea dn HOOI O1 peyse ueaq peu au 4eu4pauretduop SHOOJIOH Aepon Sumeaw D eu VpesoTosip USIM 2ou pIp OMsautod esoua snC ueu ere1pu! snu pueTTOued-entaco: peDJOT aq uru OM setonsITau a tuans 01 weu? PTO? am II assodJOI Seroas awta on TIM ueu queuoutieTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCLMENIN DEPARTA AENTU3(4 OF THE PUFeLG343ACT 1958 VA 28was notification regarding lseamer but a timelag. oi a week or 10 aays existedrand veryoften the man had left before we heard anythiabout it. We suggested that the ports Shouidbe asked to telephone direct to ourselves ancS.B. I undertook to make the necessaryarrangements with H.0.TAR,Sclater,Hughes and Herbert discussed: withe the future of RSS. We alli agreed thatthere were 3 principle Servicesthatwe required from the organisation: (1) informationregarding any internationalzclandestine-network of a potential enemy or of a subversivekind affecting this country:: 2)satisfactorymeans for the detection of illicit wirelessfromth this-countrysesufficient-resourcesfor policing the ether by a cross-section:Isaid-that-before-the-ppoposed-meet ofthSecurity Committee I would tryato ascertainfron-SirHerbert-Creedy-whyit-had beencalled.May l6thI talked to Miss Clay about the case ofPRIVETSKY who has come within the orbit ofthe Marita oaganisation. Having read theile which has been handled by a ge d manypeople, I came to the. conc lusion that PRIVET-SKY was either a charlatan and a crook, aSoviet agent or a German agents. He ishowever the kind of person whose case shouldnot be Left in doubt. There is a greattendency for this to happen unless you getan energetic investigator:C.,Herbert,Cussen,Sinclair and E discusseda leakage case connectea with ZIGZAG. Througha girl in SIS we had heard ard-thataCol-Wardel thahad recently seen ZIGZAG in the company ofGatargue aaeguerelerentee:Vt4/19 Bvening-standard, towhom ZIBZAG had evidently related his story..uau pue Lew Atee yanoy? LeunQUOUaunese LTIdV s2Da. an6gtasauoteorut JO eonos urea sasam 3 at 00oaM QuM sauade eupeneasrm/d AutseautSI 31 ana eq Utucar sese you sdey-od SI loss STH ssOtIIo Ideas eenasIO ODupIIuoD eu peLofue aneu 01 sIeeddeeu uEnOuTe Tauuosted IIBAS ansL1ue euaIOWP ueno yTeA aua 01 PETUTI Attessepeu SIAgenens anooe PpeTmoux: esoum ueul ueitreaurue se peatosap St M/d uoteareq TBuSIs e 01pae Isuea sem au ueum VV:IT:4 tv 47 0n ZV6T ounWOJII soM Ut:J ou IO uothpos DI utetD e seM oumm/d e IO uoteSoetut ou?oMAOdar HCVHS Surseeur ue uses one TqTuAeNAressepeuII ypeq utu 138 pepge eet.Auotoos pumos pmnom I pres setqetteneaq u8tu GE: n 4eu utu persesans peu YOIATunop SIU? On ypeq sepeeyp IBHOEtodu OdutuThagmnoqpeutusdureh emens 9IM pextea I+Eer903031 snototdsns Butieaddeseouessumoetpau au nouTm-eueuo aeu uteds04 peITp 08 touueo au pue 2 twad are; a uen0ua-t LqunOp- a IOT IOTeuse ause UOAS.TTE PIN 08ouuep H auo Mou e JOJ Atdde uaun pue sesteyetVs-Utm met odssed TLII TTIM auVSo au UT uoum uototdsns Sutsnote anoUn-tm uteds On ypeq 0qRD-A ueo am aeuahem Auto au eq O1 sueas SIUT, -eprouveso PIA ESIA AISUBIA sroqep utnes UTuotaeedo-op S 1 ppeI utendo pup uoa Butusemo?umop 08 0a LTIA Sutxse'oqep anoge SITIWTTIAO 01 OTUM e perep I pue SIIEH AuuoI,Buturem euoue utuOnto put OVZDIZ aas qu9ru eu sdeued e4? puetTepLeM aas ptnous uassn aeu peproep sem Ihie3late May. In June the eneral informationwas that no invasion was to be expecteu untilAugust or Septemper. D.aay came as a surprise.Col.Mayer Detring of Ic picked Normandy as thelanaing-place as warly as August 1943 wenhe expounded this view in a training course.He persisted in this view but his was onlyone voice. Reports from agents and othersources caused doubt and confusion. A landingin southern France was thought possible inMarch 1944 and persistea after D day. A1anding in the Bay of Biscay between Bordeaux aand the Spanish order which was associatedwith Ppanish troop concentrations along thePyrenees ana the possibility OI a push throughSpain was also given certain amount Of cred-ence. Fear OI a landing in Hoiland causedthe evacuation of civilians from the coastalareas after D day and the floouing o1 theLowlands. There was a certain amount OI talkabouta landing in Norway and Denmark. Manoeu-vres and exercises in England were watcheawith apprehension. Huskey, th main exercise,caused particular nervousness, ana a specialmap.wa kept up to date by agents reportsand signal intelligence as well as inabilityto locate the British 5lst ana 52nd Divisions,which were looked or as crack troops. Perioasof radio silence were often considered apluff. Finally the atmosphere was so tensethateveryboay hope lor the arrival O1 D.uayto get it over. when it came it was takenfairly calmly at first. Rommel anu MayerDetring were poth in Berlin. At Iirst theattack was regardea as a feint and urtherlandings were expected of a moreserious kindelsewhere. The situation map oi Englandshowed only few units along the south westbut heavy concentrations in the southeast.(This is of S eciat interest owing to Garpo'spre-D.day build up of the Order 01 Battle.A good many o1 the unit in the southeastCatalogue ReferenCe.KVI4/196P/W continues that3ib3C. in C. West expectea an allied ar ve eastalong the Normanay coast comoinea with renewedLandings in the direction of Havre,Dieppeand Calais. This evaluation coupied with thefears of a landing in Hoilana kept the i5thGerman Army in the tortheast during thisperiod. Reinforcements were drawn From south-west France. The accuracy O1 intelligence onthe Order O1 Battle was considered a creditto the agent system. A Major Brink O1 Icwas concerned with deception and directedthe Abwehr agencies of sabotage and suover-sive activities. Some Oi his plans entailedconfusion through new divisional insigniawhich he personal originated. Misleauingsignal traic and simutatea movement oiheavy equipment to a division hitherto knownas regular iniantry organisations. A numberof agents reports started with the phrase:"Aceording to agents report from Lisbon" or"Madridm. In aadition reports were receiveddaily from the RSHA. These gave the agentsnumper as their origin ana specialiseu on-damage cause py V.weapons. P/W is certainthat agents were the only source o1 iniorma-tion on this matter. Reports alter April 1944usually bore the comment "Air reconnaissancewas not possible are to stron lighter derenceReports of V.damage were considered ais-appointing in so far as the results achievedA Signal Intelligence Section with 100 moni-tors and inter preters under General Gimmlerissued a 15-20 page report on intercepts daily,The ituation map was based primarily oninformation supplied by Frenueheere west.According to P/W there were special interro-gation units in the fiela. He learned Fromthe officer in charge that ii the enemy haalaunched an attack in which his intentionsor strength were not known and if no prisonervolunteered information, then one knowleage-Catalogue Reference:kV14/1g6selectea ana any317methods used to make him talk. This prisonerwas then to be shot.Pate last made contact on 2.5.45 at 1635 GMT.Bronx last wrote on 3.5.45 and received 2letters on 7.3.45. Rover last made contacton 1.5.45. Gelatine last wrote on 30.4.45and received her last letter on 23.3.45.According to a Jap B.J.datea 4th May, Alcazarde Velasco was then living somewhere nearthe German-Swiss Irontier ana trying to getinto Switserland. The Japs were doing theirbest to look after him on account oi "hisdevoted service". This is not without humoursince he double-erossed them by filling themup with junk.On the 7 th May the Spanish Govt. informed theGermans that the had been compellea to demandthe closing of the Embassyconsulates andoffices of the NSDAP in Madrid and the pro-vinees as from the 8th May. Personnel were notto leave their places OI residence untilthey received Further instructions.Wibroe came to discuss a note which he hadwritten on his conversations with the DanishUnderground Movement. As the FO haa notfound themselves able to make concrete sugges-tions ana as the various persoralities herewith whom the Danes had been asked to realwere not persona grata, things had ariitea andultimately the Danish Minister in Moscow anaanother Dane in StockhoLm had startea conver-sations with the Russians. There was asuggestion that active negotiations hadbeengoing on for a fairly close liaison.ChristmasMoller seems to have taken rather a prominenpart and is now persona non grata with theUndergrouna Movement. It likely that he willnot survive very long and his plaee may beCatalogue-Reference:kVI4/f96 Danish Minister in318Washington who was an underground workerhimself and is weil thought oi. Couplea withthis the occupation oi Bornholm, the Danishisland at the mouth o1 the Cattegat, may havemore than ordinary significance, particullarlysince the cable to Denmark has been cut and acivilian plane which went to the island hasnot returned.At the staff meeting today we discussed theIntelligence Officers who will be availablefrom the camps in the I.0.M. It was arrangthat Woolf was to see Kellar as he might besuitable for Mid East and that Piehler mightgo either to 21 AG,Controlcommission or 020.Strang is to come and see me, and also Piehler.There are in addition some sergeants whosequalifications I have asked for. It wasdeeided the nemoal Johnson shoula pe demob-ilised as soon as his age group was reached.It was agreed that Springoorn from the LRCshould go on loan to 21 A.G. and be put ontheir establishment ii necessary. Horroekssaid that there was no employment for Mrs.Linas-say who according to him creates troublewherever she. goes. I felt somewhat scepticalabout this.I gather from Hill ard David that the BOLSOMcase is developing satisfactorily so faralthough the interrogations have not yetbegun. Hill is anxious to get back to hisbusiness part-time.Hughes came to talk to me about a man namedJONSKI who had come up on the air from Czecho-slovakia, saying that he haa certain informa-tion relating to wireless DFing and also ask-ing for a message to be transmitted to hiswife, an Indian. He gave certain people asreferences whose bona fides had been checkedthrough IPI and he had also stated that heCatalogue ReferenCe.KV/4M196 patents the partic-319ulars of which'he gave: It turned out that hewas a wireless engineer o1 some standing.He was anxious to give his information to usand not to the Russians. all his messageswere en clair SO we had to be very cautiousin our replies.I saw Wooli from the I.O.M. He seemed to megood type and very keen to work for us. He hanas had considerable experience in the MidEast in the running of agents etc. I havearranged for him to see Kellar.At the D.G.S request I spoke to: CavendishBentinck aboutsthe proposal to bring KALTEN-BRUNNER to this country.s He did tidnotaseemvclearias to who KALTENBRUNNER was) but saw noobjection tothis beinghoused ato2oHisviewwas confirmed by Oliver HarveyEden's principalprivatesecretaryT then mabout-the-Jap-Embassies.an the Jap Embassies andLegations in neu'tral countries. remindedin abeyanceuntil Stage A as it was felt that orusefulpurposeicoul be served by kicking the Japsout of Sweden if the Germans would havertoemain.He-made-ranoee-of this and said thatye would raise the question at the:JIC.Finally I as ed him whether. the terms ofreference for Findlater had been decided. Hesaid that he had seen Findlater and that thelatter was quite clear that he had completescope to investigate whatever he like inMI5 and MI6 and this with the full agreementof C. and the DG. He was therefore startingwork next week.I went to see C. and showed him the noteCatargue Reference.KVI4/196that the best courseuento aneu 1400 sTueds au neua preS ST T Tspeeds aua LLO 96 Tot/ pquotold 26or0oprIpew 0 esauTt te 1e 0n queM OumI TIV uedIIQJI ainssaid on anp qTTAM Left STULe drusjosien 2noyat TM sereuep eua 01 prpewwOuI Sauti Ite ystueds IO SuTuado aua IOJButsseid are 2 On autuseM UT IjeS IOT SJTUO Outnewanounoq ea 01 am Out quoq ptuOE ou uoUTyOm ueea peu OUM Mied euou sem 0unq: yoeq 08 MOu pmnop pue poos OU eIeMAron your ayoy eno 9no.rq susudeuondbrun peu au PTOA H HHNNOHHNHIIVY anogeuryu poa ose T perrsies amb peureas GHyeom axau SuThens seM Ienetputd aeu pueepueroet TO su 2u noqe: O PTo If/Aqttuduty ousDoJqIm MOUS: 03 awr pose OHTueOTTtUats eTnbiSE urtoyuog TO uothedopoaun unou:o mBpu TM 0n PEOA aam sHueaTeuueumSsmno u UO pentie suerssnyBojeqsinou G anoqe yPPqnI potdnopo#TUO-OIPOBT-UP SOUHEDUPFaMnUOBEed-UeTSSnY ftuoominserut enuoereduetssny0en ed Totue faua se ypegnI TO uothednspo Aqyeuua Hoteas sn -lof snorueAtoreredsapueeg eneu sueuas a.u? 2eun Teemoy au poputueaH Fenuottoyut suoreseauophuruoraeutuop Ou peu eu unoute perseeutanmnb SeM aH surssny UIM suorreteIystued to TJoda SIDOqTM uu pemous ueu? ISesued u? EM PJIOM e eneu pmous Ipeasegins ohseouen sunIt on MOUY aa mnb noupip eu 49ua and uenouoa UrUM STUA mnoqe MOI euea peu you ou PTON Hquafe SSOou mnoqe nJodeJ au utu pemous sueua I ape 0nuey? 102 pue Aons aun urerdxe'sypezo 0uypeoudde uotu am oItymueew sapeuopaveuOamoAeapue pTnOM em 49u? pue uotpeptsuoaepu sem pnneureuye Iona eu ou eua ATde on eg pmom896NOLAS H3ONA INBALSGENMAU INSWA9OTHNISaAdoo SI SIHLTHISsIS A GPYORIGINAL DOCUMEKEE TAINEDNDERARTMENT UNDER Site32(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 mo Zonessurances thae they wilt not transport Axis.nationals or nationals of countries now occu-pied or formerly occupied by the Axis exceptwhen approved by the British.and US Embassiesin Madrid. This of course is not worth muchsince Axis nationals or Quislings may easilyobtain Spanish or S.American papers. TheChieis of Stafi also say that they. find itifficult to sustain a military objectionowing to the Spanish civil air service fromMadrid to Tangier whichis uncensored. Thereis a certain argument here but there is ofcourse no regular route on from Tangier.u unlesthe Spanish provide private or military air-craft. It seems to me that if we! maintainCensorship to SAmerica fore the next monthswe should maintain controls overithe overthenairifstoues airifstouesinsofarvasthis may: De possibie LastlyI am told by. Pakenham of SIS that there issome-question-of-a-joint-oceupation-orlangierby British and American forces untilsitsprevious-international-status-is-settledyeeTheiD.t.-talked-to-me-about-KALLalBReHeseemedavery arnoyed with TAR Orrasking thefield to send him back without houitpriorireferencto himself: I told him that I had seen Caven-ish Bentenck and had_spoken-to-oliverHarveyThe matter was clear from the FO. point ofview. I should be seeing MaxwelilaterI attended the J.I.C. when the question wasdiscussed as to how War it would be possibleto maintain some sort of nucleus of CSDIC.and 020 and its technical equipment for expan-sion in the event of war.THIS IS ACOPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS1958Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1962000pup SSO IO SITeITe 961/141 GI/tAqUOtloy popopaeoAa poTTerep-Semaufuesouog her ueAououepo3snbeJ eu? V suotsseroid Aq IoAmet es-thanq:g: UT 1-0 UT aLotduestaonsemceH's COH3 au eas On aueo SSOI IO uosypefato:DUTATEMOOSOWon yoed uTU axen oa panupm pue pueiss SS ayn Ut enpeeup uen Jodut ue TO pTOU 308 Aeu JI snrinsuOD OTNOM suerssny au? yurua 2ou pip eua9ua ptes AThueuTJe eueJ aH 1070 0a yoeqHnoua Sutea SIU UT ATNOTIITP ou Mes HHHNNQHHNLTIV noae TTemxew os on quem IApeepa Insuop oa peyse seM I SMOTA aneu uetuuoaow puoused put BuFosTe osTe pue St9 aururexeUTu ESOH ou parsesans I ATSutpropseTtO'sy Tsnfpeot aneu pmnom atioas LMpOTAd IemoId aua ut s9 penssy aq O2 aamsuoTTPLiand etoewuop pae TAOS FTETeuSutueouse STU3 pendeut I em de uTaEPmpume Taste mue g up H Sefpers ueemreaseq ueomr eq on seMMOtOd Tnpas TIeeao eu? aeum MOuy LeunLe tnoes MOePuOUA utpormnbass.em Put cRes TOu pinop Aoyn aeua MO'tAdue SuESsaidxe Ffreu U 01-TuuOD-ATun3eL/M au JO met eu - passnosip osTe OMUIM Teap on Sbfansaupeu au peu auo -ssetun peutenqo ag qQu pinopyotum buetiedxe teotpeud TO Jeeu e uonuEMHJIOM uoPHOeNUT eouts QUTuUpIaTO em eu UT uonu Aton Sutua ue atdoadesaua enta on eTarssod aq JOnemoy a ou pinomI TeM TO quene ey Ut JOddns sn 0ntooToettene aqptnom OUM suomepTITENb agenuetAessepeu u UTM SOOTITO enese IO Teaumuutenao e petas sdeuadqyru OM aeua pue0708 aP pue OHT auae you HIOM uotheSoueutUO perotdue peu eM WOuM etdoed utenepaim uonoa UT deey OIOSO Aa pensersns seM seam geua U%noun O Teuuosd spuese SUir323to help in deciding what part that organisastion should play in peace time. He haa beenmore concerned about the operational side O1their activities than the derensive side.I gave him my views at some leng th and after-waras lunched with him, Blum o1 oss and TAR.He was a little puzzlea as to how the FBIought to Iit into the general scheme OI things.I said that I thought that any intelligenceorganisation should at any rate in the homefield use the FBI as their executive arm. Atpresent Of course the FBI correspondstoourselves and to the police forces. I saidthat I thought that OSs should Work in theclosest cooperation with the FBI, knowingfull well of course that they were both atdaggers arawn.Michael Ryae came to talk to me about AloisMUELLNER, a German from Lourenco Marques whohaa been actively associatea with Germanactivities in S.Africa ane who was on theDrottingholm at Liverpool. There were otherGermans too who woud be going pack toGermany,incluuing WERTZ. Seeing that as theFO had given these people sate conauct, theonly thing that we could do was to pick themoff un Germany and have them sent back tothis country. This was o1 considerapleimportance since Lenton is row agitatingfor a comprehensive report on Germany activitiein .AIrica, presumaoly For the use oiSmuts in any forthcoming election. Ryuethought that ii we managed to lay our nanason o the right people we coula cover mostsecret sources by getting statements invoivingvan Rensberg,Pirow and Malan.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/196Dick rang up to ask me to het him have myviews about his Iuure. I have written tohim to say that apart from a short visitto see Findater Stewart I thought he couldremain on to cO-ordinate CI and the ControlCommission until the beginning O1 August aswe should not be allowed to ao any reorganisat- -tion until after Findlater had issue hisreport.I went to see Creedy and explain to himthe request of the J.I.C. that his committeemightreport on publications, official andcommercial, in peace time and what should infuture be kept secret. He said he would behaving a meeting next week at which thismatter could be raised.I also talked to him apout the suggestedmeeting of the Radio Security Committee. Hesaid that the issue had been forced upon himas G.P was asking for an increased grant atany rate until next January. As Creeay wasalready authorising a yearly payment ofup to E600,000 p.a. he thought that RSS. shouldmake sane statement about the position.Creedy said that quite Irankly he had not theslightest idea how ithe money was being spentand he felt as I did that hewas not likelyto get far if he got a statement from G.P.In fact the only way he could know whether hewas getting value for money would pe to appointan entirely independent and reliable personto go into the whole activities O1 RSS. Hethought however that this was a matter for Fin-later Stewart. I said that we proposea to saythat our requirements were (T) the detectionof illicit wireless. in this country (2) themonitoring of any potential enemy clanaestineservice and (3) the policing of a cross-sectiolo1 the ether to ensure that serious eakageCatalogueReferencepky(4/1ge325AS regaras the future of the organisation andthe best manner in which these tasis coula becarried out, we could not fairly say untilFindiater had issued his report. At the sametime I maae it quite cear that although wehad the highest regard for the worK aone bythediscrimination section under M.E. and thework amne by R.I.S., we were by no meanssatisfied with the management who controllednot only RSS but C's SLU communicationsand his communications between his agentsThey had been in the hapit of making use ofRSS Resources for their strictly MI8 functionswith the rsult that we never knew preciselywhat the position was. In fact we haa noconfidence in either G.P. or maltby.I dined with. Victor last night. He was fullof his experiences at Wiesbaden and With 12thArmy Group. He was instructing them in counte:-saootage work. He ana Stuart Hampshire whowas also there referred to the case o1 NEBEL@ OSTRICH. NEBEL was over-run and got back toParis. They both thought that he was anextremely sinister figure, and may well havedouble-crossed both the Germans and ourselves.Hewouldihowever always remain at heart aNazi and a thug. They both thought he oughtto be bumped off and under certain condi tionsseemed to be quite pre ared to do the jobthemselves.Stuart gave an acoount of Dick's visitto 21A.G., who were evidently somewhat in disgracefor having allowed Doenitz to broaacast.The fact was that the Germans having surren-dered refused toaallow British troops freemovement in their area, and persuaded 21 AGthat they were the only people with thenecessary administrative machinery to demob-ilise their forces. When Dich arrived toenquire about the whereabouts of HimmlerCatalogue Reference:KV/4/19632he found that the morale of the Germans wasquite high, that they were full of spit andpolish, heel-clicking ete. and were generallytaking up a rather arrogant attitude. Whenhe asked about Himmler he was tola that hehad been in the area but that he had been toldto get out ana go south as he was an embarrass-ment to the military authorities. Doenitzand Jodl did not know of his present whereapouts. Some Panzer General took a greatdelight in showing of his tanks and madehis latest models perform lor Dich' edicica-tion. This may pe a slightllibellous storybut I hope to get a full account from Dickin aue course.May 19thI went to see Newsam about the situation inPalestine and the possibility of terroristscoming to this country to assassinate the PMor some other high personage - I explainedto him that we were anxious to speed upthe information received at the ports aboutthe arrival of Palestinian seamen and thatwe wished in future to have notification ofall Jews arriving from Mid East whether seamenor civilians. He gave me a note to Perksand Prestige whom I subsequently saw atthe Old Bailey. Peris has laid on thenecessary arrangements. We Shai receivetelephone notification direct from the ports.Cavendish Bentinck rang me to say thatSAORZENY and his assistant had peen capturedand that SHAEF were proposing to seid themover here. I spoke to TAR about this andwarned him that beore anything happenea heought to notify the DG.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/196ORKGINALINDEPARTMENTUNDE SE@T323(4)OF THE PUBLIC RECORD PUBLICACT 1958Pakenham came to diseuss the ase ofHe thought that it would be betternot to make any approach to her here as shemight think that we weretrying toblackmailher into being an informant.. He agree d withme that it would-b be be'stforher immediatesuperior officer when saying goodbye to hertoexplainthat at-it-was-desirable-that-ishehould keep her mouh shut about the work thatshe-hadbeer -doing,asthere-were s.till bothGermans and Japs in Soain who would beanxiousto get-hold-of any information. theycould. He said he would clear this with C.and then O-over and see PID himself:I had some ta alk with Le Bosquet about extrac-ting information from P/Ws about Frede HeereI explained to him precisely what we wantedto know,namely how reports were received bythat organisation, how they were assessed, anwhether Y.backing played a large partrin thevalue attributed to any particular agentswork. Lastly any indication of whetherthe best agent! reports were coming fromand thair nature: He said that he had alreadhad a certain amount of information on thesepoints which he would et me haveLuke came to ask me whether he wouldybe ableto work part time in his business IsaidI thought So provided he courd continue hiswork with B.la. He is in no hurry to getaway:Ispoke-to -to-Melland-about-Columbine-andto toldhim the position.Although he could do valuablework in interrogating SS personnel therewas.immense difficulty in getting him on towl AG: If he were made a Britishofficer British officer hewould have to eat in the mess. If he were aCafatogue wastzatorthe-momentabaragainst his mployment on interrogation dutiesem, out, uemaveu IO quede Surpuens-SuoT epteHUV ae aupenaes TBA 96 Iotak owteod onbojeieoanoqe; au aas 0n oureo SIOH: pue duesAtsnonuers:o'd au? osoddo pmnousOm aeua LPOTP enmb epeUI TouaneJeuaru on dn Jenneu, au? ind on SursododaLam Aauneupue Aaun sepems au? on suotssoouooqueJg Ou pip OM II peoiqe atdoed poureauTno TO Lue yatm ButTeap ut paueyeam ag pInomspueu JTAu 2eua @utT au uryen am deaemsuop eu 2eu? pteS Hsyeam8-9oyeaTu 51U? peadetorue I tuunq TO pauntdep10ute suoupop ITau pue perepinbIt seMS94 Tiu op you popOM STUL durao euPBPINbIT pmop OM Teun OS opron enutauoppOustM pue 070F:O1 STTSTATAUepe'SO do AIPTTApeu: am suotapotiduop ssetpue tuasad pmOMSTL t steneuteUTO JTOT puerserites InoIOT Toues eu op On eneu pmnous om S19? opOn Fsueu pemomre OM IT eu With peuretdxete T suu-o HEeA quem, sapoms 9urAdsBouTeg OA posseuoors TuoD seu SE OUMurendep queypou gsIpemse HHWHHH suId TOoseo; da ou sue 0-oua TO ILPMASEGr Aewandeid- endeidutpea paAtIte Atares seu Out xIAegno 1 puas 0n SutsodoId oe Leur o AJoaS auauau? passeds see pue supaz.a 2ua Unm uononout 8utnes ut pepeppons H TusueInSNOL au anoqe TQON uyo on oHods Iyaoz AeWAThueuewad09 wTU get pTnoo eu punor enxeg IT uowusItFqease STU 01 peersueig aq Jete pmnom au4eu Aatitgtssod ou Utm ouappew LTeIN onwroqutids TO ueot JJOI osTe pue uaseuuedon ut UOISsIW HaVHS eouarm TO 2 ISIAou JIOJ TeAotdge SIU 40 ecur put ea ou? Mes ImandH$9.8BRE1dOOTHIS IS A COPYRIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED.IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC REOOHE3212e00Pakenham came to discuss the case ofHe thought that it would be ebetternot to make any approach to her here as shemight think that we were trying to o-blackailher into being an informant.. He agree d withme that it would be best for her immediatesuperior officer when saying gooabye to herto explain that it was desirable thatisheshould keep her mouh shut about the work thatshe had been doing,as there were still bothGermans and Japs in Soain who would beanxious to get hold of any information theycould. He said he would clear this. with C.and then go over and see PID himself.I had some tal with Le Bosquet about extrac-ting information from P/Ws about Fremde HeereI explained to him precisely what we wantedto now,namely how reports were received bythat organisation, how they were assessed, anwhether Y.backing played a large part in thevalue attributed to any particular agent'work. Lastly any indication of whetherthe best agent's reports were coming fromand thair nature. He said that he had alreadhad a certain amount of information on thesepoints which he would let me haveLuke came to ask me whether he would be ableto work part time in his business. I saidI thought SO provided he could continue hiswork with B.la. He is in no hurry to getaway.I spoke to Melland about Columbine and toldhim the position.AIthou he could do valuaplwork in interrogating SS personnel. therewas immense diiiiculty in getting him on towl AG. If he were made a British officer hewould have to eat in the mess. If he were aCatalegileiReferanee:k6s/196t /4/196 the moment-a-baagainst his employment on interrogation autie-328I saw the D.G. and got his approval for thevisit of Wibroe to SHAEF Mission in Copen-hagen, and also for the loan of Springbornto Niall Macdermott with the possibility thathe would later be transferred to his estab-lishment if Baxter found he could let him gopermanently.May 20thI spoke to John Noble about the JONSKItransmitter. He succeeded in getting intotouch with the Czechs and has assed themthe story. They are proposing to send it outto Bartik whoT has sarely arrived in Prague.May 21stWarre of the F.0. rang e-up-aboutthe-caseof Ernst BREMER, aSwedish merchant captainwho is-at-020 and has- confessed o-being-.aspy. The wedes want to talk to him. Iexplained to him that ii we allowed them todo this we should have to do the same samefo forour allies and for other neutrals. Thiswould present endless complications.: We hadcigidly-opo osed any visits to 20 and wishedto continue to do SO until we could liquidatethe camp. This wecould not do until thewas liquidated and their documents eithercaptured or burnt. I anticiapted this mighttake 6-8 weeks. He said that the ConsularDept. were taking the line that their handswould be weakened in dealing with.any of ourinterned people abroad if we did not grantconcessions to the Swedes, and that they wereproposing to put the matter up to higherauthority. I made it quite clear that weshould oppose the F.O.strenuously.Stamp and Forrest came to see me aboutPFETEFER naval attache at Ankara,a S tanaing agent OT theAbwehr, who wasIS ACOPYOORE RIGNNADOCEMENTF GOCEMENT RETAINEDDEPARTMENT UNDER SCTION323(4) OF PUBLIC RECORDSACT at 1958 the back ef the Ramrich case in America.Thisman and Gen.Wolfe, who was attache forall the German anServices: in BAs are on boardthe Drottingholm at Liverpoole They willprobably go on to Germany and then be sentback here. The question arises as to wherethey should be put. For Intelligence reasonsit is desirable for both to go to 020: Ipoke to Rawli about this. He was quitecontent and said that if we got into aiffi-culties.csDIc would act as long-stop'I spoke to Brock about the checks on theionistagencies here,in Jerusalem and USA:There is always a certain risk with etterchecks buthi seemedi.to me that in this caseit was one that should be takente ipJIC SHAEF has: produced ced-an-interestingnoteothe policy of the present leade'rs in Germanytunity Infuturethe-Germans of licking the s-willtake-everyoppor allies boots in ordertormake-us acknowledge-thatitheirbehaviou acknowledgerth tetheirbehaviouris correct. At the same timethey wi1as doeverything-they-can-to-hinderithe-russiansthus encouraging the Russians quick to besuspicious, intorthinkingth thatrthe the aliesare behind this German trickery- They willappeal to the allies whenever the Russians donot stick to the letter of the surrender agrement They will give the impression,whenever possible that the allies are protectingthe Germans, a westem race, from the barbar-ians of the east. Since Russians negotiatioare often ponderous and seldom speedy, theywill try to come to quick agreements with thalliesand then face the Russians with a faiCataloguepReferettceskiaprgold adrperfectlyscalculated campaign.i rIt springs moreover FromELOIAUOD urenuteu 02 peeautsue see MODSOWetaeTsoANA Ut (S) 961/3//2 pouoet pnbojpippue eFTOS Ut sauee 0TOS unoJu MOOSON UOIIperemsat ate sa40n uetaptsoanxpu tiedSS- -mg ueemeg suotheteH MOOSOW Aq umop pyetSE TSeastUTu SIe stut STmUIUOD ay?r 0915013581 pueMOTtod VV6T asnany ut :d:D ueteame ou?TO eea TUITO Teuep au? unoyn MODSOW WOIIsuoronsut oaIIp TO ewopino 0u SI etestngFTO 4on quod pueteued uesaid 9u? (z)puetod IOT nuewwenog TEuotsTAoid out ouepeqsersuoos se VE:8:L to UTtqnI o penou919our uoreqIT JO 9d TUOD TeuotenUSITOd 0u? woeoy powuos pue MODSOWO sequeu guTpeat STI rorsueto 0uaJeeutsuet6I ut MesJem UT pewroI c puetod IOLTounop Teuoten 9u IO TOuOD paure: 40otos (run aeu IoTESTUeO stu umnouy seM(S) ROttod utor tetAos TO SUPumISutse peorqe Sered STUUUOD TO uotperp ounO. IAoD etnoseu run Aa pesn TTtSOruron uan-uton aun JIO uesAs IotPoTuuop outasepuetoouerstueopTeoes'Touuosed orenbpeeueua 7226(c) Ev:S:ST to uorantosSTP pousttqndsT_tptM-paseon-uronutuonaun: ands TO SeTTAThe uado ou eu (T) seres us C Wdey?03 suonta sem LO anou ousppueTOose touss'P LOOSFGluo odesutsetut ue peonpoud see ouerTOMOd B019 ese opid ou utee TTIM Auewan suessnyaua SUTee xJeMINq e se Auewep Sutprmnqeout settle eua Surtoor Ag suetssny aun9SOput setiTe aua dteu aoreeue snu Auew-JeD SeITTe out Aa ueyea ueaa seu usTAOUsTognsurede eTnas au UT gbetd SOt pue Aemeelttds ueed MOU seu - Auewep Lonsap 01suepteuv-otau aua peDJOI aouts uotantasutpOyotm e SEM JEM run SUTsot JOT eTatsuod-sOI sem UDTUM Mhed IzeN OuLu :SMOTTOT se MOUSU huounaie ueuen out, enI? sem AIOSTUS TOIOTA 0anuoo OTATHA eu NOId 04 uoTEUTueop331It is carefully fostering a policy to drivea weage between Tito ana the British uovt.(6) In Austria the Soviet Govt. through thesame clandestine means maintains strict con-trol over the Committee of the AustrianFreedom section in Carinthia and Styria.A special emissary was sent to northernSlovenia in Oct.1944 With instructions lorthe formation of an Austrian bataltion withinthe Yugoslav National Army, ana ith theformation of a committee O1 the Freedom Front.the personnel of the Committee are all eithernominees of Moscow or non-communists appoint-ed locally after consultation between specia]Soviet agents for the area ana their controlin Moscow. The formation of a provisionalgovernment for Austria was laid down as amain plank in the prog ramme of the C.P.ofAustria which was printed at Slovene head-quarters about June 1944. Franz Honner,appointed minister ofthe nterior is one ofthe two special agents who have peen operatingin northern Slovenia under Soviet instruc-tiond, while Johan Koplenik,ministel thoutportfolio, was the Austrian representativeon the Comintern up to its alleged dissolutionin May 1943. The minister of Education,Ernst Fischer, was broaacasting regularlyon hustrian matters over the Moscow aadioip to April OI this year.The U.S. JIC has given alt estimate of Japaresedefensive capabilities. It is not assumethat ay landing wilt pe attempted on the homeislanas before Dec.1945. Meanwhile theJaps will do all they can to strengthen theirhome aefences. The Japanese ground streng thin Manchuria and Korea may be increased by thecreation of new units ana by witharawals fromChina. It is estimated that in Dec.1945Japanese ground strength in the main islanaCatalogue Reference:KV/4/196337would total about 2,000,000 men. It isimpossible for them to strengthen to any degreethe defences of all prospective landingplaces. They will only be able to concentrateon the most vulnerable areas ana many pointswill be found less well fortified than numer-ous island positions heretofore attacked.In the air it is estimated that the Japs willhave a maximum of 2,000 combat aircrait ofwhich 1,400 would be basea on the homeislands. The remaining streng th will belocated in Manchuria,Korea ana North China.Further development of suiciae attacksincluding the use of piloted bombs, isexpectea but many limiting factors may qualiiythe effectiveness of such weapons. Proauc-tion ana combat efficiency should be expectedto decline further. By Dec.1945 the Jap airforce will be capable of only one last allout and short-lived effort to repel invasionof the home islands. On the sea it ispossible that by Dec.1945 a few heavy andsome light naval units will have escapeddestruction but they should be eliminatedquickly if the attempt to oppose the landing.A maximum effort by the Navy will probablyconsist of harrassing tactics by a limitednumber of destroyers ana submarines andsuicide attacks by some surface craft andmiaget submarines.According to JIC SHAEF, the Germans remainapathetic ana docile towaras the allies. Nolarge scale security propiems are anticipatedin the immediate future. These are firstimpressions. Second impressions are moreserious. The German people are utteriyunrepentent and they are sunK in inconceivableignorance of the aeeas of their leaders anathe hatred with which Germany is regardeainurope. In happy indiiference o1 the plightof foreign workers and diplacea persons anaCatalogue Reference:KV/4/196333in arrogant indignation that Germany isheld responsible for the war and that she shounot suffer for her misdeeas. The averageGerman realises that Germany is militarilydefeated but he does not admit that she isconquered. Indeed many regard themselves asliberated from the horrors o1 war which wereimposed on them from above and for whichthey were in no way responsible. Chilarengive the V sign to our troops. At Duisbergand Essen US troops were received with cheers.uring 10 years o1 Nazi rule the Germans haveacquired the habit of shutting their eyes towhat went on in the next road. Many retendnever to have heard of concentration campsand SS atrocities abroad, ana they disow res-ponsibility for these things. In their eyesthe only crime Germany has committea isto lose the war. They feel agorievea whenforeign workers whom they have enslaved loottheir things and have to be fed py them.Men like the Bishop OI Munster who contempt-uously referred to all displaced persons asRussians, arrogantly demand that the alliesshould give Germany protection from thesepeope. Much of the above holas good Ior theeaucatea classes. They however are morprepared to stipulate apout the future. Theywide do alt in their power to poisor allied -Russian relations. They believe that theprinciples implicit in Nazism,such as theconception of Germany as the master race, willsurvive their defeat and that Germany willonce again emerge as a European power.The JIC, reporting on the Japanese strategyand capacity to resist, state that on resentevidence the new Cabinet may be prepared tolimit their ambitions in China and attemptto buy off Russia, but shows no immediateintention of trying to negotiate a compromisepeace with GtBritain and America, as theyCalalogte RetereYCeTKVY4/196 a peace could at334present be obtained. It was thought feasiblehowever that the defeatof Germany and theprospect of invasion by Russia might influencethe Japs to accept a peace tantamount tounconditiona- surrender though not necessarilySo described to the Japanese people, ratherthan see their entire country laid waste.They haveno delusions about the steadilydeteriorating situation of their countryThe predominating features in that situationare the threat of imminent invasion, thelikelihood of Russian invasion, themounting allied bombing oflensive, the sever-ance of the near from the outer zone, theiracute logistic aefects and the hopelessinadequacy of Japanese land,naval ana airforces and OI their war production.A SHAEF report on the mentality of the GermanGenerals is interesting. Since the invasionof France we have captured over 300 GermanField-Marshals,Generals ana Aamirals and fromtheir interrogations and behaviour it isclear that they are still the breeaing groundfor dangerous political ideas. They blameHitler For the army downiall but deny thatthey can be held responsible for carrying outNazi orders. Indeed they complain that theAnglo-Baxon co ption of International Lawwas unfair. This refusal to acknowleageresponsibility for Gernanyr crimes isnot due to mere stubbornness. Its roote liein a perverted morale sense. Success ifright, what does not suceeed is wrong. Itwas for example wrong to prosecute the Jewsbefore the war since they set the Ang.o-Americans against Germany. It would have beerright to postpone the anti-Jewish campaignand begin it after Germany had won the war.It was wrong to bomb England in 1940. Ifthey had reiraned Gt.Britain would theybelieve have joined Hitler in the war againstCatalogue Referehce:kV94/4196 treat Russian and3387Polish P/Ws like cattle since now they willtreat Germans in the same way. It was wrongto declare war against the USA anaRussianbecause they were together stronger thanGermany. That it is wrong to exterminate arace or massacre prisoners haraly ever occursto them. The only hoDDor they feel forGerman crimes is that they themselves by somemonstrous injustice may be considered by theallies to be implicated. This completeamorality is combined with the most punctil-ious regard for the formalities oi life.They are obsessed with their oath to theirsupreme commander Hitler and the word Ehreis seldom absent from their lips. The wordof course does not mean what is in generalfair and honourabie but on the contrary whatis of advantage bb Germany and can convenientlbe used to justify any blackguaruiy act.They plan to watch for the moment when sooneror later political events will prompt themto seize the op ortunity to rebuila theGermanArmy. Even the anti-Nazi Generals applaudNazism for having re-created the German Army.They mphasise that they are professionalsoldiers , practically comrades in arms withUS and British officer, who understand theirposition. They eonveniently forget that theyare imbued with a love of war for its own sakeand consider it as. the finest means of demor-strating that they are the master race.Both the reports I have quoted on Germansgenerally and on the Generais seem to confirmeverything that Vansittart has said.Harry has arawn my attention to the problemof German scientists, of whom there are about60 in a special camp. Theyare to be broughtover here perioaically to see fellow-scientistand industrialists. Meanwhile their documentshave all Been examined and theyare beingcarefully questioned. Harry thinks there isCatafogeferreference:kVr4/196 I think is true331because all scientists speak the same languageand let their professional interests get thebetter of them. This sometimes resultsin their giving away more than they get.I doubt however whether there is very muchthan can be done to stop than. The otherdanger is the desire of profit seekers tomake use of any development for commercialpurposes. The Americans will undouotealy obta:a good deal of information which they willpass to interested parties in the US. Theultimate disposal o1 these Germanscientistpresents a very aitficult problem. If theyare to remain in internment they will be lostto the scientific world. If on the other handthey are to be grabbed by the allied govts.they with be a thorn in our side like LACHMANNwas in the next war. I have said that inpeace time we shoula concentrate on the proteetion ofscientific developments or inventionsinvolving some entirely new principleor process and also on the application oi suchprinciples and processes to war industries,and for this purpose we should have the ser-vices of someone in the scientific worlato keep in constant touch with scientificdevelopments in all its branches. If thenanything like radar is brewing we could takeimmediate steps to institute the necessarysafeguards. Once equipment has passed theexperimental stage and is issued to theservices there is very little to be aone toprevent the information becoing availableto any interested foreign power.May 22ndI attended the meeting O1 the SE today todiscuss the proposal o1 the combined Chiefsof Staff that a Spanish air route should beopened from Madrid to the Canaries withoutcensorship at uib. The feeling of themeetingCatalogue Reference:KV/4/196337was that the arguments put forward by theChiefs of Staff were not really valid. Firstlany assurances by the Spanish Govt. that weshould be allowed to vet axis personnel orpeople from formerly-occupied territory wa'sreally worthless. It did not incude neutralsand even of it had it was always open to thewar criminals to purchase papers from someother country. *he other argument aboutthere already being in existence an air lineFrom Madrid to Tangier was equally invalidas there was no regular means of onwardtraasport except through French territory.Apart from this/etastic arrangement suggestedby the Chieis of Staff would be contrary toCensorship policy until A + 90 and would clear.-ly lead to demands for the opening o1 shippingroutes and for the running o1 the air linefrom Foynces to Lisbon. This is another casewhere if you pull away a brick from thegeneral security structure you are likelyto bring down the whole house.I saw Wibroe who is leaving for openhagenon Thursday. At Cis request I have arrangedfor him to have a talk with Section 9.Hughes brought Graham of RSS to see me.Heis taking Gilbert nyle's place and willthereafter be the sole rerainii-g member ofR.I.S. At present RSS are concentrating verylargely on general search and on the analysesand classification of all signals they pickup. This should prove very valuable in thefuture.D.G. has got all excited about the possibilitof Tominy Harris going with Garbo as far asthe USA. He has been given a note on thesubjeet which he will consider.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/196eu ISUTRRE yoeup96T/Ayipuerojodon! aua pue on6opprep athurUSITIH eu? 01 sTwJed Ixe IAoo 01 Fursododsem eu aeua ptns H sepefans USTATIH JOI52 Tied Ixe eua anoqe au On HTe? 01 auto wrepyPIZ ABWISIT yoetg au 0n seseo HgI stU JO MeIe ppe pmnous SIITOH aeu ST uorsTpep sTUAoBe1uop 03 uoTsens Auto UL peasee-urou enem am a2u peaJpap 2y JATMoq SIUIOT SutupeaJ put dew eu dn SUTITOJ TO e1e4 Smneded e UT MOU ST OUM DA BUr siseq %T eBut OTOU on YIOM Ienou em se ueunaie snOto-eTTeT ATeneTduoo e esInoo TO SI STUT peddasSutea oTdoed Om? fTuo pue sepedn TO efeueo-Iod TTPuIS e FuTtAeu Auto note JInas tensnStU pip SMOOJJIOH pesenoJ sum year setSuteau BMeS JeBPUT! 8 peprpep ueeqpeu UOtm sappfans USTATIE IOI sTued Ixenoge LotTod 0u 194 uesepun I tueseIda ou seM I uprum a Lepon Butheeu SD au Vauo poose e1mnb kept eu Unoua I pres I sdo TOFeuyoeH antasans eTaTssod e se sasa89ns eHata 0a squem Jeueupn TY ina IossonSe se utu PeHIt aneu pInom pue Jeweut IYdeep HIT DTNOM H "IPM au Jeare 08pmnous SJAOTIIO eotTod OTO eu It aeu? sHuTuH Ideas SIU note Ou aes auto JeaunH'sueuusiTqense Teneuon ITdde you seop SUTTnJ Mou ur sewouJTeu 0n saueumnpop Sutyea ueum suoraneo-aid Lessepou aua Suryen IO TTTATSuOdsAJeua UOJI S0-N entosqe 1ou pip SIUA eu? Aeson pestape Them aq UTu au uanoun ITeuts e ino Furpues uT 2u pres I sTeuoTeuSIXV JOT ndeoxe penoueJI aq pmnous ueq au 4244sesodoId H SPOTIIO Teaeu TO Lotdue aua utsqueaes orseuop uStesonoqe dn Sue INAVge339Black List and that this would reduce thetotal number of references from P. &c P.0.by about two thirds Even if therefore thenumber of applications to proceed to thecontinent and S.America were doubled theRegistry would still have Less to ao thanthey were doing now. We shall thereforecontinue to vet British subjects going tothe continent and America ana shaii therebyconform with the censorship regulations untilA.+ 90.I saw Piehler from the I.O.M. I ao not thinkhe is suitable foro2o but he Shoua be verygood as a worker under Noakes in 21 AG.He knows Noa: es already. I have written toMacDermott.Tommy and I saw the DG about plans for Garbo.The DG seems quite amenable to the suggestionthat Tormy should go with Garbo but thinksthat they had letter go by sea as an airpassage might be consideredpeculiar seeingthe difficulties that there are about priorities.I saw Athony and Kembal Jahnstone and arrangefor Mitchell to carry the liaison with Orangewith Johnston leaves., since a gooa real of thstuff affects F.3. Kembal Johnson thankedme for the letter I sent him some time ago andexpressed the view that I was quite right inthe advice I had given him.May 24thVesey told the 12 o'clock meetiig about thecase of a woman called MOLKENTELLER, formerlyof Amt 6 in Berilin and captured in the fieldby the Americans. She said that while inBerlin she haa been the recipient O1 photo-Catalogue Reference:KV/4/196340graphs received from Ankara relating toinformation obtained from the British Embassy.She said that the Germans had recruited theEmbassy chauffeur and through him the Ambassa-dor's valet, a Turk. The Ambassador thoughtthis man suitable (a) because he spoke noEnglish and (b) because he had a good voice.The valet was given a Leica camera by theGermans and photographed all the aocunents hecould lay his hands on. In fact he photo-graphed some when the Ambassador was inthe next room playing the piano. He thoughtthis a good plan as he haa the necessarywarning as soon as the piano stopped. Thedocuments that he photographed were of consia-erable importance tney ineludea some relatingto the time and place of the Teheran Confer-ence, to the proceedings at the conference,to plans for the attack on Rhodes, and toother Balkan plans (which had in Fact appearedon the ISOS).bastly there was a documentfrom the FO or SIS warning the Ambassadorthat there was a leakage of information fromthe Embassy. The effect of this a st doeumenthad been that the valet was instructed tocease operations for a week. He recommencedafter this period. He finally left in thesummer of 1944 and is now believed to be inGermany. He started operations in the autumnof 1943. I do not think that any incidentduring the whole war has causea me SO muchpleasure. C.too his highly delightea. TheD.G. is rubbing his hanas. Herpert attendeda meeting in Codringt ton's room with a repre-sentative of SIS. Coarington was ratherinclined to treat the whole inciaent light-heartedly and made a very bad impression onHerbert. This is perhaps the most glaringexample of the inefriciency of the F.O.Secur-ity organisation and the futility of sendingout people li e Johnny Dashwood to investigatecases of this kindCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1963ulAt the staff meeting toaay it was aaggesteathat I shouru take on College. ana Postonas Leaders. I Should probably put Postoninto R.Bird's section and College in withAnthony. As regards the F.E. I said thatthe only people that I knew who could replaceAir would be either Kirby Green or Russell.If Kirby-Greer went Strang or the I.0.M. mighbe a possible substitute as he Knew the areaand spoke Spanish well.T had a meeting with TAR,JC,Marriott and Lukeabout the future of Harry Tate. The dilfi-culty is that he is Know to all his friendsand in his business as Harry Williamson andhe cannot without our assistance obtain thenecessary documentation to travei abroaaexcept in his own name. JC was therefore infavour of getting him naturalised. He thoughtthat we should have a better hoa on him.I pointed out we should have no hold on himat all if he is a British subject whereas i1he remained a Dane we should always be apleto deport him. It seemed to me that anypoayhad. the right to cai himself anything heliked and that we should try ana get Tateregistered as a Dane and in the name of HarryWilliamson. I Spoke later to Markbreiterwho thought this was quite feasible. I1 Tatewants to travel and he would pe well aavisedto remain here for the next New yeas we Ccould probably arrange matters with theDanish authorities. II he went to them nowthey might institute er-quiries and it mightbe found that Harry haa been carrying outactive work for the Nazis before he camehere. II he went back on a visit,which heappears to pe anxious to do,he might wellbe picked up ana put on trial. We coula aonothing for him except say something inmitigation.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/1963urI spent an hour with Curry on Chapter 4of his book maning various suggestions. Iadvised him to cut out certain controversialbits and to coniine himself purely to factualstatements. As the DG had given him theopening he could in his concluaing paras.express his opinion on whether the machinehad beer aaequate in all respects to carryingout the job.May 25thI told Anthony that I was proposing to givehim Colleage as a learner. He seemed quiteplease about this but would like to have aword with Noble first.I had a long conversation with Tommy aboutthe necessary cover for Garbo. Mills hassuggestea a commercial cover but as Garbois described as an author this will not quitedo. we have thought of possibly gettingWalter Bell to give him a letter IromLungs Travel Agency and we thought alsoof providing him with a banker's letter.At the daily meeting I raised the question ofwatching the interest of Dominions andColonies in Germany. It was possible that agood many aocuments might be found. Ithought that these documents coula comehere and we could distribute them to ourlinks. I asied Roland Bira to make enquiriesith EDS.Baxter said that he had got two Danes who hadbeen operating a wireless set on trawlerson behalf of the Germans and had made aconfession. I decided that they should goto the ratory Schools pending deportation.There seemed no point in sending them to020. I also decided that a man calledAlbert BENGRAS, a Frenchman who haa beeenCatalogue Reference:KV/4/196343responsible for PPF activities in the briage-head should/tome back from France and go to020. The French wanted to send him herebecause he was going totalk about their agentGILBERT. If he did SO it would have tope explained to a large number of peoplethat any action against GILBERT was undesir-able. This might well blow the case. I saidthat T did not think that we shoula takethis case on asit really concerned Frenchinternat politics. I as eu TAR therefore tospeak to the French again and without givingoffence persuade them to aeal with the casethemselves. we aecidea that with F.0.authority we should pick off the Drottning-holm Erich PFEIFFER, Gen.WOLF from B.A..Bruo WOLFE from Turkey ana Alois MUELLERwho has a good deal of knowleage about SouthAfrica. The other two know the whole of theB.A. set-up.D.G. told me today that he was writing toStrong about Dick whom he thought Shouldreturn. He agreed with me that Dick couldremain until the beginning of August. Ishowed him a copy OI Dick's letter.Dick Butler tells me that Findlater Stewartis reading various documents relating to theoffice before he starts his enquiries nextweek.Cimperman came in to see me. He wantedmy assistance in getting access to War Roominformation pparently Gen.Donovan hasbarred his entry to the War room. He isnevertheless trying to fix up a liaison inorder to ensure that such documents as corcerhim reach the FBI. II he fails I said Iwould see what Roland Bird could ao For him.He showed me a telegram 1rom Ladd instructinghim to give every assistance with regara toCatalogue Reference:KVI4/19633Garbo. He also showed me a telegram Iromthe FBI expressing anxiety about the releaseof 20 prisoners who had been operating inS.America or in the Peninsula. I told himthat we already had this matter very muchin mind and that at the moment we were onlygetting rid of allied nationals. We wouldcertainly/take any steps with regard to theothers without giving them the op ortunityof expressing their views. A telegram fromthe FBI also as ed whether it would bepossible to hand over any of the D.Americcases to the .American authorities. I saiathat we would have to look into each eachas the matter might be a somewhat delicateone.I talked to Stamp and Miss Stiebel aboutgetting allied nationals cleared out of 020.This is a matter which has been causingStephens anxiety. The prisoners are begin-ning to want to wright etters to Ambassadorsand to lawyers, and to their relations.Before long we shall have a good real oftrouble with habeas corpus proceedings.The sooner we can get ria OI these peopletherefore the better. Miss Stiebel tellsme that the French are practically all gone,that a good many of the Belgians have goneand that the Dutch and Norwegians will pegoing in the course of the next 2-3 weeksC.rang me up to say that he had heard fromBriages that the King was going over to theChannel Islands on the 6th June to knightthe bailieif of Jersey, one COUNTANCHE, anathe bailiff of Guernsey, CAREY. He wonueredwhether these people were all right andsuggested that possibly we might sena someoneover. I consulted Stopford who tola me thatthe C.I.s were southern command area, anathat he himself had in fact been over thereduring the weekend The I.B.stali wereCatalogue Reference:KV/4/196SUOT B aeua sem ea 96U/tIAaRuRS pntauprepueeg peu emneounu aua MOU UMOUY eneu pmnomoglue aueum Tnagnop ST 41 paueddeu tou STUpeH MRwUeG Ut utiseopeouq JO.I suewen eu?0a ueAt SeTTITBI eu on anp ueeq eneu 01sues sIUA TTE ut epunnq Ltuo out 'meInDJeITupe ue peu suetep au? UnOuTe 'seeTITApue SUMO ut saeeis au? anoge FutsTem youeOM sJetpTos uemen put SeTOL USIITJIg putpenntes utea pue oueo IIeAS ut anoqe SutAtpaam SJIAOTITO uBuIeD eu Jenemou ssepoIdaua FuTana UOTUseI pIdeI oue ATJep.Io SOUaua UT ano pATJIeo seM anneouew atoumUTJ Atpenanopun sum eu stua UI seates-meu? suewen out Aq ATUTOtITa put ATpIdeJsoU euop aq pmnop senOI eseu TO Sutwue-SIO pue uomesitIqomep eua 12u? peproap AuowAtuenddy yewea pue pueTtOH uT senJOJueuen 0ua JO Jepueuns aua TO quoppe ueou aH op 01 penpedxe SI eu LTesTooudgeum ano DUTI 0n yoea auto see H -UnTSTeEput puPTToH UT satun A uoTDeS au IO aReyouI MOU SI OUM JOwPH sTJUO u IM PJIOM e peu I2ISIA S Fury eu eoeq eseu enatdtooetatssod aa ou TTIM 41 4eu Jeuid repeuueea aneu suoTRSTseAUT IeuinJ TIAun she-oBBup es a IO Jeute uTUX 0 pestape-ITSOU eq pmom SUTY eu 12u4 sesptg ITe TTIMOut :O enods Ltuenbesans I esyeam C JOZ ayen Atqeqoud TTIM and debt JO euoosdn paeeto ea TTEM STUA IIV doaeOqettoo ese squertqeuut TeDoT run Aq pepuega SI Outeupupinon senuederes eua anoge peBTJTAtauaaxe item Resaf eafep paweu Ten eOn uoTBJTp ueuen au Ut sTIeS SIU peWuTJeneu 0n peues au Uotum UT 'saUTT auoudete? IOButino aun anoae JeTNoTEd UT euo "sseidrun UT setotne Teenes UeIIm peu AeeoFeueo bue eypueinoo anoge seupeads oISTFOmeOSTIIOW IO aunoope to ATuAedde SUIteeJ-TTT TO Teap poor e sEM aeuL 'TTOM ATeueJixeof JITeUA Surop pue pp BUTJOMrhe3delay in the demobilisation of these forceswould have imposed an unnecessary burden onhis own troops and would have delayed theirdemobilisation. SHAEF apparently take adifferent view and orderea the arrest ofall the Generals which took place the otherday.The news has eome through that Himmler commit-ted suicide under circumstances which areperhaps excusable and even desirapile. Hisdeath will certainly save everyone agreat deal of trouble.I saw Stuart Hampshire for a moment. He hasbeen at 12th AG brieing the interrogatorsof Kaltenbrunner. He was not ahtowed to see K.neither has Victor been allowed to see Sior-zeny. Victor orcourse is hopping mad. TheAmericans are pathetically ignorant but feelthat as the man was captured in their zonethey have got to put up a show. They arequite pr epared to accept assistance in thematter of briefing which has been freelygivens They have tried miking Sroreny andKaltenbrunner together but both of them areclearly well aware of what is going on. Verylittle has been extracted from KaltenbrumnerSO far. He is taking the line that he isreally a lawyer and politician, that he didnot know anything about the atrocitiescommitted under the orders of MULLER. He hasgiven a certain amount of political informa-tion which is true but is not being drawinto talking about the SD or about the planningof the underground movement. In aue coursehe is go come back here when we shall berather put on our mettle.The JIC are onsidering the establishment ofan organisation to deal with scientific andtechnical inteliig ence in the postwar p riod.Catalogue Reference.kvi4/196 an interesting memo3on this subject. One para strikes me asbeing eminently sound: he says "The funda-mental difficulty of intelligence work isthat input is by sources ana output is bysubjeet. A change-over has thus to occurinside the intelligence machine, which there-fore has to act as far as possible as a singleperfect human mindy absorbing, remembering,criticising and correlating different typesof information, and then giving expression tothe result. No card index can ao ityalthoughindices are useful adjuncts. The larger theorganisation the less cal it resemble a singlemind. An intelligence organisation shouldtherefore consist of as small a number asossible of individuals with abilities asgreat as possible". "Ideally' he says "thecollection and collation of informationshould be the responsibility of a commonhead.The DG gave a dinner for Trygvie Lie, theNorwegian Foreign Minister, to which Nagel wasaso invited. Lie had jus t returned from SanFrancisco. He told me that he had an agree-ment with Molotov that the Russians would clearout of Northern Norway as soon as we and theAmericans left the south. Meanwhile theywere exercising a very rigid control over theIrontier between their zone and the rest ofNorway. He is evidently somewhat apprehensiveas to what the Russian's ultimate intentionsmay be, and has very much in his mind theirdesire for a warm Atlantic port. Nagel,withwhom I also spoke, has similar apprehensions.He told me that some time ago he approachedthe Russians with a view to getting agentsthrough Russian territory into northem Norway.They agreed to this pr ovided they could beallowed to put agents into the south. Theostensible purpose was of course to get iniorma-tion about German activities. In actual lactCatalogue Reference:KV/4/196Nagel knows from at least one of the Sovietagents who subsequently came into his handsthat the Russians were less interested inthe Germans than in political intrigue amongthe Norwegians,particularly members of theC.P. Meanwhile it seems that from publicannouncements the Russians will ultimatelyevacuate Bornholm but on what conditions wewe do not know. I thinktheir intentions thereand in Denmark were definitely aggressive andcalled off as a matter of pruaence or theywere apprehensive lest we should have theintentio of getting bases on the continentwhich would alect their exit from the Baltic.There had of course been tal of this among theDanish Undergrouna Movement and the informa-tion may well have heaked Dads to the RussiansThe Russians have always been opposea to theidea of a European bloc and have alreaayto some extent drive a weage between itby making a treaty with France. Their reasonmay well be that they are in oppositionto any move which might give us continentalbases and impede their exit to the Atlanticeither f m the Baltie or the mediterranean.As regards Germany their declared policyof magnanimity is interesting ana evidentlyput out to contrast strongly with our non-fraternisation regulations. It looks ratheras if they were out to win over the Germansand that ultimately this situation inaydevelop into a struggle between ourseives andthe Russians to get Germany into our respectivspheres of influence. This may again all bedue to apprehension on the part of theRussians.May 26 thStamp came to see me about the passengers onthe Drottninghalm. I haa had some conversa-tions with Dunn of the F.O. Apparently whenCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1963y9the list was originally submitted to SIS theysaid they were not interested. On beingprompted by us however they declared consider-able interest in a number of characters.This led to a change of arrangement andtothe F.0. feeling compelled to take thesecharacters off in this country instead ofafter their arrival in Germany. The positionwas complicated by the Swedes saying thatthey would not sail to Copenhagen owing tomines and must go direet to "othenberg. Finallythe F.O.decided to take 6 of the principlemembers oi the GIS off the boat and hand therover to us. This aroused a great dealoitrouble with the Swiss but as Dunn said theycould no longer be a protecting power, anathe whole business was no longer a game of-cricket but a rat-hunt.Tommy Harris came to talk to me about Garpo.He has now arranged that he will be providedwith letters foom the Courtauld Institute in-dicating that he is maxing a stuay oI theinfluence of Ppanish art on D.Americar coun-tries. Anthony will be giving him some lecturebefore he goes and he wiil carry with himplenty of literature and photographs.Stopford came to see me about certain informa-tion that he had obtained from his agentsindicating that two of the pilots of ABAmight possibly be working for the Germans.He seemed to think that they might have beenresponsible for the leakages. He had approach-ed Michael Ryde and offered him the dossierbut Ryde had said he would not be able tofind time to go through it. He had passedcopies to Aembal Johnston from whom he hadgot no reaction. He had approached JohnNoble who had said he would be pleased toCatalogue ReferenCe:KV/4/196350look at the papers but had never turned up.I said I thought there was something wrongand I would look into the whole matter, whichwas of coursecomplicated by the act that K.Jwas in the country and not under me. Themistake was of course having Swedish and Swissaffairs in E.Division. Apart from this ofcourse K.J.dislikes Stopford,and Stopforddislikes Biunt. Also Stopford himseli sufersfrom a slight superiority complex which irri-tates everybody. I told Stopford that hewas inclined to be cagey, that I had hadno idea he was going to the Channel Is. theother day, that he never came to see me morethan once a month and that he never came tomy meetings. He said that he was coming nowto the meetings but that he had been preventeaon one or two occasions owing to other busines:and that apart from that he did not like tobother me. I said that everybody else bothereame and I somehow managed to put up withit.I told Hunter that he could make a tentativeapproach to Hackney, who he thinks would makea good No.2 in B.6.We have made another approach to the JICabout the liquidation of the ap Embassiesin neutral territory.May 28thI saw Poston and told him that I would likehim to sit with Bird ana pick up whateverhe could. He could meanwhile do whatever oddjobs he had for the country by going dowthere once a week.I talked to Stopiord about the advisabilityof sending d'Egville as RSLO to the ChannelIs. I said I thought he might perhaps workwith the IB Staff for a short time and estab-lish suitable contacts in the islands. ICatalogue Reference:KV/4/1963S(did not however think that there was a easefor a permanent RSLO in the Channel Is.inpeace time. He agreed.J.C. came to talk to me about a letter hehad received from Gwyer. H-D is apparentlyleaving. He was asked to sign on for anotheryear but refused on grounds that he was tooold. He said however that he was perieetlyprepared to sign on for a year or more to doa specific job in Austria. He did not ho everwish to lay himself open to being posted toto the eastern front at his age. Basil Creanis apparently trying to get out and Gwyerhimself is not anxious to stay as he does notfeel that he will be persona grata with thenew head of C.I. Gibson who incidentallyappears to be unsuitable for the job. I havewritten a personal letter to Dick about allthis.Bridges rang up to thank me about my letterabout the bailiffs in Jersey and Guernsey. Hewanted to know if he could show it to maxwell.I said there was no objection.Vivian rang me to say that the archives ofthe German Embpassy in Lisbor were beingex mined but that a need haa arisen Ior guardsin case the International Police migh tryto pinch some documents. I have sent a wirebo Kirby Green to see whether any of theCounter-Sabotage Squad would be suitable forsuch a job.Wethered came to ask me whether he would haveany Chance of permanent employment here afterhe had finished his WOrK with the ControlCommission. I said that it all depended onthe enquiry but that I was hopeful that te remight be something.Luke is takingCatalogue Reterencover to aris on FridaFrench.357May 29thI attended the JIC today when we discussedthe Joint Intelligence Bureau on which apaper had peen written. This Bureau is reallyfor the purpose of studying certain specificmatters relating to topographic and economicconditions abroad. The Bureau would receiveintelligence from existing depts but wouldhave the right to collect overt intellig enceof the Kind colleated by NID. It would beunder the JIC From whom it would reeeiveits general policy lines. The matter is tobe put up to theChieis of staff.We also discussed a proposed interrogationcentre for various people like NiemoilerandSchushnigg who have been released from intern-ment. The general view was that it would beundesirable to bring these people pack toWashing ton and that some sort oi centreshould be established under HAEF. There isno question of dealing with C.I.personnel.I lunched with Harola Scott. He is I thinkpleased about getting his new job though herealises that it is going to be pretty tough.He said that he could not have very wellrefused it as for years he had been tellingthe H.0. that they ought to appoint aCivil Servant as Commissioner of Policerather than a Service man. I gave him abrief Sketch of what we had been doing andwarned him not to listen to stories whichhad been rather maliciously put out by Kendalwho really knew nothing about our work. I toldhim how excellent Burt had been ana said thatI hoped that if the suggestion came up thathe should run Special Branch he would in factbe anything given the about job. this I but as ed merey him not to walt to say intilthe matter came before him. I then told himCatalogue Reference:KV/4/196383something about our Black Market activitiesand explained how we had come into the whole -business. I said that we had given informatito the Yard about corruption in the police buthat I- -did not--think that Aendal had -reallygot dow to the job: I told him partiarlarlyabout the case of Ch.Insp.Greeno. He seemed tehave-heard something-.o this aready.. I ma deit quite clear that we as a dept. did not wisn any way to a ear in the fole oi a GestapoTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958. May 2000Scott Lthink appreciated this point..It has I gather eenraecided by the DG thatwe willliquidate our Security ontrol Oificelin the autumn of this year, and hand over tommigration: It was wisely decided I thinkthat it would not be worth while taking on newpersonnel to replace those demobilised Sincethe job-ofan SCO would - be much noredifficuland delicate and inexperienced people wouldbe certain to put their feet in it. Any benefithat we might derive would be more than out-weighed by the odium we should incur ifthingswent wrong.I spoke for 22 hours with Findlater Stewartand Drew. Findlaterseemed worrleaabout theCatalogue Refevenceik/at1ge tions on the subversiveside: He had in mind that somebody like