The National Archives(c) crown copyrightCatalogue Reference:k :KV/4/185Image Reference:761%6ssome chaplains who would submit to voluntaryinternment in Germany for the duration ofthe war and that the Nazis would reciprocate.We are saying that provided the Nazis areprepared to use pastors who are already inthis country we are prepared to accept themas internees. If we do this we shall have tosegregate WEHRHAHN who is notoriously peo-Nazi. The others are fairly harmless. Wedo not however wish to have any more Gestapoagents disguised as pastors.The Home Office are still sending us enemyaliens from abroad. They are so-calledrefugees who sueceeded in getting into neutralcountries just before the war. We regardthese people with the utmost suspicion sinceS.I.S. have ascertained that the Gestapo areputting a "J" on the passports of agents whothey want to get into this country.NOVEMBER 27thCol.Mcleod is very worried about a suggestionthat he has had from H.O. that he shouldprovide a list of all internees for trans-mission to the German Govt. He thinks thisundersirable and he is prepared for 8 show-dowOur view is that we do not wish to let theGermans know if we have accidentally inter.ned one of their agents. Probably the bestapproach is to say that since the Germanshave a complete list of all German subjectsin this country they will be able to ascertainwho are at large. They will assume that thesepeople are working for the British Govt. andpersecute their relatiohs in Germany.I telephoned to Dulanty who is trying toarrange for Archer to come over to discussa nurnber of problems including the coastCatalogue Reference:KV/4/185watching organisation.Passport Control are asking for a policy aboutXmas travel. They anticipate that a largenumber of children of alien origin will wantto travel between this country and the conti-nent. Our view is that they should not beallowed to travel on the grounds that H.M. S1.1ships might be more profitably employed inconvoying trade vessels, but to conform tothe present tone of the war on the Home Frontwe are saying that owing to themagnetic minesand submarines we think that the childrenshould be prevented from travelling on humani-tarian grounds.I accompanied D.S.S. to a meeting at3 p.m. in Lord Hankey's room at the Treasury,to discuss the possible setting-up of anorganisation by S.I.S. in Eire. D.N.I.,Salde and Commander Stenford represented theAdmiralty, Menzies and Vivian S.I.S.Stevenson Dominions Office and Elliott C.I.D.D.N.I. pressed for an organisation onthe lines that S.I.S. had one in othercountries and that Eire was a serious gapin the organisation. He was dissatisfied withthe information that he was getting from theEire Government and he did not feel that anyconfidence could be placed in their coastwatehing service, ever wiaionyfwe gave themtechnical assistance. Vivian pointed outthat even if he set up an organisation hewould have to draw on indigenous materialwhich would have all the inherent defectsof the Irish, in SO far as exaggerated andinaccurate gossip was concerned. It wouldbe impossible to import British subjects.If a coast watehing service was to be set upit would have to be equipped with wirelessCatalogue Reference:KVI4/185($7AND FOR IT TO BE REALLY EFFECTIVE MORE THAN1,000 people would have to be employed. Inhis view the matter would be bound to come tothe knowledge of the Eire Authorities withina few weeks.Lord Hankey then asked D.N.I. what it wasproposed to do when the information wasobtained, since the nearest Fleet bases wereat Belfast and Weymouth. It was quite cleamthat only by a stroke of luck could any-thing be done to deal with the submarinesunless it was proposed to have a continuouspatrol in which case the coast watching ser-vice would not be SO vital. D.N.I. said thata permanent patrol would be an expensive anddifficult matter. Vivian has compromised bysuggesting that he may be able to extend hisexisting organisation in a very small waywithout running any great risk of detection,but this would only give general informationof the kind that he was already supplying.It was agreed therefore that he should beauthorised to. go ahead and that the completeS.U.S. coastal watching service with wire-less should be dropped. As an alternative tothis steps could be taken to get Col.Archerover, improve his existing methods of communi-cation an give him any technical assistanthat was possible.NOVEMBER 28thT.A.R. isworried about the large numbers ofreports coming in,particularlyfror the AirMinistry, to the effect that lights have beenseen flashing at various parts of the country.I have suggested that as a policy the AirMinistry should encourage their units toreport these matters direet to the local policeCatalogue Reference:KV/4/18588at the same time submitting a copy toStammers for transmission to us. We in themeantime communicate with C.C.S asking themto let us have particulars of their investi-gations in any cases where the matter is notsatisfactorily cleared up or points toillegal activities.A Board Meeting was held today. D.S.S. saidthat Lord Hankey had discussed with him thellegations that the Germans were broaacastinginformation of a confidential kind. Wehad apparently reported that out of 55 casesinvestigated, only 7 seemed to disclose thatanything of the kind was going on. Harkerexplained that it was a curious fact thatwhenever a report was made it always relatedto some local matter. For example we nevergot a report from Edinburgh abou't any activi-ties in Hants. This might of course be duethe fact that people were only interested intheir local affairs, but it seemed moreprobable that the roadcasts were not comingfrom Germany but from somebody in this countrytuning in on the German wavelength. In themeantime the whole situation had been compli-cated by the fact that the B.B.C. were notcovering the whole ground and that M.I.8.c hadundertaken to do this work.Lord Hankey said that Winston was still agi-tating for information about leakage ofinformation We now have every C.C. and S.00.working on the problem and possibly we shallend by finding the solution. The fact remainshowever that in the vast majority of casesthe stories are not founded on fact.I raised the question of the control ofinformation received through the telephonecensorship on Eire. It was agreed that theCatalogue Reference:KV/4/185189police should control any action taken ifpossible after r eference: to ourselves. Itwill be necessary to get this positionestablished with the Admiralty, whose localrepresentatives a re inclined to incite C.C.Sto go off the deep end. I also raised thequestion of dealing with certain suspectfirms under D.R.55(4) It was agreed thatthis matter should be one in the first instancfof the C.I.D. and that D.S.S. would hand thedocuments personally to Bridges.Adam spoke about the suggested committeefor formulating a policy on travel. Ten dayshave now elapsed and we are no further than wewere before.D.D.S. was asked to make representations toMaxwell.We have applied for an internment order forMargot Erna EISFELD, a domestic servant whois acting in a suspicious mamner. She hadbeen before the committee and been exemptedfrom internment and restrictions.Applications have begun to come in fromemployers who wish to make use of the servicesof aliens in restricted occupations.A section has been set up for dealing wi ththis matter.The Deuxieme Bureau have informed us thatthe Germans are sending agents over withHungarian passports.Maxwell has written a long letter complainingabout the slowness in the proceedings of theAdvisory Committee. The complaint is thatM.I.5 are not presenting the cases quicklyenough. Pilcher has provided an excellentCatalogue tRefererce.ksv/arigement that we arec 70 7placing the Home Secretary in an indefensibleposition. The fact is that a great many caseshave been dealt with and that we aregiving thecommittee 12 cases a week, the maximum vithwhich they can cope being 15.There is a good deal of dissension betweenMonarchists and Communists at the AustrianCentre, the secretary of which is Miss KIOLMAR.It seems that Count STACHWITZ, representativeof the monarchist section has resigned.We have had forwarded to us by the H.0. along letter from WEISBLATTIS solicitors.We origiraly refused WEISBLATT a isa,mainlyon information we received from the 28me Bureauthat they regarded him as highly suspect.It now seems that the Bureau de Circulationhas drawn on the files of the 2eme Bureauand reported to WEISBLATT that M.1.5. are atthe back of the refusal. It is pointed outthat WEISBLATT is regarded very highly bya mamber of the French Govt. and that he hasa permit which allows him to visit any milit-ary area. We are taking this matter up withthe 2eme Bureau through S.I.S. Cooperationwill be impossible unless they can give us aguarantee that in future the 2eme Bureau donot pass our information to unauthorised peoplNOVEMBER 29thAs regards the Russo-German case of .R.BROWN,I have suggested that Jane should see all theapplications for employment in restrictedoccupations coming from the Reading area.Maxwell has turned down the proposition tohold a World Youth Congress in this country.In his minute he says "I think the line totake is that we have no objection to theCongress as such but in a state of war it isCatalogue Reference:KV/4/185obviously necessary to exercise specially closecontrol on all visits by foreigners. Everyapplication has to be carefully enquired intowith the result that more work is placedon the heavily burdened security service.Therefore the policy of the Govt. must beonly to grant facilities to internationalconferences if there are specially stronggrounds for holding such conferences andsubject to consideration of F.O. views.It is perhaps too much to hope that thisindicates a change of heart in the Home OfficeThe old system of D.Notices is still goingon. I am taking the matter up.We have intercepted two D.Notices going tothe International Graphic. The editor is amember of the B.U.F., pro-Nazi and generallysuspect. D.S.S. is bringing this to thenotice of Admiral Usborne in the Ministry ofInformation,NOVEMBER 30thRussia has invaded Finland in true Nazi style.Air Ministry Intelligence reports show thatthe Heinkel 111 carries self-sealingpetrol tanks. If they are penetrated bybullets the hole closes up.It has been decided that Maude should become0.C. leakages of information. The idea isthat we should collate all information denotinleakage of informationMenzies has been appointed head of S.I.S. butthere is no news yet about his econd-in-command. A certain amount of pressure isbeing brought to bear with a view. to theCatalogue Reference:KV/4/185/ 72appointment of someone from the Navy. It isto be hoped that this will not sueceed, andthat V.V. will get the post, which in anycase is a purely nominal one.A German balloon has been picked up in CoudenBay.The examination shows that it probablyh as a ceiling of something over 6,000 ft. buttests of the wire indicate that it wouldprobably not be flown in a high wind.the Germans pparently use kites instead forrough weather.There are reports that the German Air Forceare violating Belgian and Swiss neutrality.As a result of a conference of B.SectionsJock Whyte is inclined to think that a womancalled KRAFT is probably identical with thewoman who is paying SNOW. She has drawn 225on three occasions from her account roughlyon the dates on which Snow was paid. She livesin the Southampton district and she also dealsat Selfridges. Two girls at Selfridges haveseen her photograph and are inclined to thinkthat she is the woman who changed the treasurynotes for a 25 note, but they are not verysure.S.I.S. report that Polish officers are beingemployed by the Germans and are being sentto Kovno and Riga to apply for a visa forEngland and France in order that they mayjoin the Polish Legion.DECEMBER lstSpoke to V.V. and suggested that he should meetU.35, who could tell him a good deal aboutthe Passport Control office at the hague andof certain suspicions he had about a leakage ofinformation from that office.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/185193A report has come in from the SCo Harwichabout Verey lights seen in the vicinityon the dates that the German aeroplanes laidmines in the harbour. The instructions tothe anti-aircraft units seemed to have beenvery remarkable. On the first occasionthey had orders that unless the enemy aircraftwas acting in a hostile manner they werenot to open fire. One begins to wonder whethe]we are really are at war at all. The localnaval authorities were informed of theincident and destroyers were ordered to takea special course on eaving the harbour.HMSGypsy did not apparently follow this coursevery accurately and was blown up.I have suggested the following action regardingthe lights: Simpson who is dealing with thematter will get into touch with the Air Minist-ry and find out whether their Observer Corpscan a ssist by getting a bearing on theselights. They can then establish the exactlocality and get the police to carry out obser-vation. At the moment it does not seem to beanybody's business and it is by no means cer-tain what these lights are. Simpson isgoing down to Harwich to see the SCO andinstitute enquiries.We are being bothered a great deal by PoliSisrefugees whose applications are being supportedby Balinski of the Polish Embassy. In somecases it is even doubtful whether these peoplewill b able to support themselves.I have suggested to sections that they shouldkeep a small card-index undery counties of anysuspeets they come across. This will helpthem to identify the wanted people whose namesare circulated in the M.I.5.Gazette.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/185174I have had a long di scussion with Maudeabout getting out a memo on the wholesituation as it affects this office. It ismy intention to deal with tribunals, vettingand travel, and show that unless there is aconsiderable tightening up there may be verygrave results when the war really begins.An article on saving appeared in the Timeson the 14th Nov. under the signature of May-nard Keynes. A resume of this article wasin the Frankfurter Zeitung on the 7th Nov.This is apparently due to the fact that news-papers have a practice of showing their galley.proofs to neutral journalists. The articlemight have been one which needed everecensor-ship, in which case the information ofimportance might have leaked to Germany. Maudeis taking this up wi th a friend of his on theTimes.DECEMBER 2ndSpecial material shows that Maiski sent a con-fidential document to the Persian Minister inwhich he speaks vaguely of a secret Soviet-Iran agreement on certain points. Maiski hastold the Iran Minister here that he willshortly receive instructions on the applica-tion of this proposed agreement to thiscountry.A man called WHINFIELD, member of the BUF, hasbeen arrested in Switzerland. He is alreadysuspected by us of being an intermediary inthe transmi ssion of funds from Germany, to thebut BUF. his His mother father corresponds disapproves with of him his activities through a MMrs.Elam who runs the Anti-Vivisection Society.S.B. have an informant who regards the activi-ties of Mrs. Elam with the gravest suspicion.Catalogue She appears Reference:KV/4/185t to half a dozen BUFemployees. She has recently received adonation of 210,000. It is thought possiblethat she may be the intermediary for thetransmissio of funds.S.B. do not think that there are sufficientgrounds at the moment for obtaining a searchwarrant.ABSHAGEN'S landlady has reported that he leftbehind a large number of documents. We arhaving these examined.S.Africa have reported that STANECK, previousmentioned, has arrived there and was refusedleave to land. They are concerned, and rightlySO that we should have given him an exitpermit in view of the report that they hadpreviously submittedto us. They have warnePanganyika,Kenya ete. and it seems likelythat Mr. STANECK will remain on board his shipuntil it is torpedoed.Two Polish NCO'S are in touch with a mannamed AZEVITCH and another called WENZEL,who have all the appearance of being Sovietagents. We are h ving these men kept underobservation.The U.S.Navy Dept. have informed us thatthe German-American Bund has moved to Mexicocity whence it intends to organise sabotagein the U.S.A.On the 25th Nov. out of a total of 62,000Germans and 12,000 Austrians, 31,003 had beenexempted by tribunals from all estrictions,6,258 were on restrictions and 1,009 hadbeen declared stateless and placed in thecategory of ordinary aliens. 35,000 enemyaliens are still to go before the tribunals.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/185ORIGINAL DOCUMEN16IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4 OF THEBALORELOBGSIt seems therefore thet9there will be a cate-gory numbering some 10,000 concerning whom thtribunals have certain reservations. We aresuggesting that these should be interned as Ecategory.Sutcliffe Speakman &c Co. ho-make 80% of theactivated carbon for gas masks, report thaton the 19th NOv. a German plane circledrather pointedly over their factory at LeighLanes and then made off. They say that thecompany which is producing the remaining 20%of activated carbon was under German controland direction and was obviously aware of whatthey were doing. The visit of the aeroplanemay W ell have been due to facts which havecome to the novledge of the German-controllefirm.DECEIBER 3rdRecent 515 reports indicate the followingGermans fear apathy and the Gestapo arerecommending action in the west as a cure.Conditions in German Poland are chaotic.They are being handled ruthlessly. Germanfirms are instructed to buy gold in China.AB Musso does not want to come inGermany'sside because of the church, the King and thePeeling of the Italian people. Discussionsbetween Japan, Russia and Germany are saidto have been going on in Berlin. They relatto spheres of influence in China. It isthought that if Terauchi succeeds the presenPrime Minister in Japan the non-agsressionpact between Russia and Japan may result.The present cabinet favour a policy of conciiation towards the democracies. Yugo-Slaviais apprehensive about the French plans forthe restoration of the Hapsburgs and a Danu-Catatogue gueReference:KV/4/85 dislike both Russiaand italy but will oe forced to go with ItalL 97if this idea persists. An agreement betweenRoumania and Bulgaria is reported. It relatesto territorial concessions in the Dobrudja.The Germans seem to be dropping their Ukrainia:connections. The latestreport fromEire implies that the situation is very graveas 80% of the Army are said to be prO-IRA.A peesibte attack by the IRA on the Northsometime between December and March is thoughtpossible.A man called MILLBANK, a member of theBUF, has reported to SB that a MiSS DorieKnowles has asked him to communicate certaininformation to Germany relating to explosivesbeing manufactured by the firm in which sheworks. Both the girl and Millbank have beeninterviewed and we a re suggesting to SB thather house should be searched. She is only 17but none the less sophisticated and a confirm-ed liar. Her mother, who is of German origin,is in a mental home.Special material indicates that Afghanistanhas now joined the Moslem bloc. There wasapparently an abhortive rising in Afghanistansome time ago to restore Amanullah, Thecountry generally is rather disturbed. TheAfghan Minister thinks he is better off inLondon than in Kabul.There are signs that Turkey and Italy arecoming together.On Nov.llth Italian and Spanish Govts.apparently protested to Berlin about a possibleviolation of Dutch and Belgian territory.Watson Watts: apparatus appears to be workingvery successfully at Scapa where masts havebeen erected. The guara on these masts isCalaloguetrieferencetkv4/185lso that we have an198improvedt Asdic system of detecting enemysea-craft at long distancesDECEMBER 4th31 DEand NSDAP women have been repatriatedfrom Holloway Jail today. There has beenno exchange for the feeble reason that theGermans say that our women in Germany havebeen interned for technical offences such asbreaches of currency regulations. Thesituation here reached a crisis because the H..0. have never faced up to an nternment campfor women. The Germans resented the fact thattheir women were in prison and said they wouldimprison our women, hence the hasty departureof the ladies from Holloway without any quidpro quo.It appears from a Chinese B.J. that StaffordCripps is being sent on a special mission toChina by HMG. He is going via India and willreport on the economic and military situation.DNI has asked us for a report on the GermanConsul in Dublin. It has not been made clearto us why this information is required. I aminclined to think that it is a move in thecampaign for the setting up of an SIS organ-isation in Eire. DNI probably want to say tothe First Lord that our information, whichwe receivedfrom the Ministry of Defence, isinadequate.DECEMBER 5thI had 20 minutes with Dick Casey at his hotel.I gave him as much information on the generalsituation as I could and drew his specialattention to the penetration of our rearma.-ment industry by German firms, particularlyCatalogue Reference:KV/4/18599machine tool makers. He said that the samething had happened to some extent in AustraliaMost factories which he had visited had oneor two German machines. The Australiansapparently had difficulty in obtaining othermachines and found the German ones extremelyefficient. I pointed out the possibilitiesof espionage through S ervicing etc. but saidthat probably since the outbreak of war thissituation might have cleared up throughinternment, although this was very farfrom being the case here.I then a sked Casey for his impressions. Hesaid he had seen almost everybody here butthat between ourselves he had gained theimpression that we had no very definite plan.People seemed to know what they would do ifthe Germans adopted a certain course, butthe whole tendeney was to wait on events andnot take the initiative. I said that this wasvery much my own impression and that theresults of this policy or lack of policypermeated our office and many others. Itwasin fact extremely difficult for us to operatein the present atmosphere.Casey had to hurry back by air owing to theCabinet crisis, and was leaving in 2 days 17He told me confidentially that he might sh2ruiybe appointed the First Australian Minister toWashington. He was not very keen about thisbut I gather that it was in no way a reflectioron the work he had been doing as Minister ofSupply. The probability is that there is noother suitable person for the job,which as inthe case of Bruce, the ex-premier, is one ofconsiderable importance.After seeing Casey I went on to see Borum. Hehad some information to impart and also wishedCatalogue Reference:KV/4/185to tell me about the new passport regulations.The Americans are calling in all passports onthe lst Jan. for validation. It will benecessary for the holders to present themselveat the nearest consul with 2 new photographs.The passport will be endorsed by the validat-ing officer and will be limited to countries twhich it is essential that the individualshould travel. The validating officer willput his thumb print on the side of the endorsehent and also on the new photograph as aguarantee against the removal and changing ofphotographs which has been extensively pracetised in the past.We had a board m ceting today. Barnest letterwas discussed and it was decided that weshould Dut up our views to the W.O. in supportof internment of Category B, i.e. aliens withroots in Germany. D.S.S. had a suggestion thawe might have some kind of organisation forpicking up information in pubs in certainareas. This is to be further discussed.D.D.S. explained that the Permits Committeewas still hanging fire and that Cooper seemedto be a little suspicious as to its intentionsD.N.I. has sent over a report and memo withsuggestions which are to be discussed withArcher when he comes over.SIS reports show that Italy is trying to cashin on the Moslem fear of Russia. She hopesto be champion of Islam and aims at beingsupreme in the Mediterranean at the closeof the war. Her propaganda is to take theline of a fascist-Moselm alliance againstBolshevism.The Yugoslav M.A. in Berlin is of the opinionthat the a ttack on the west has been avoidedand that Germany is concentrating on threatsCatalogue Reference:KV/4/185noto neutrals. Hungary is the danger spot andshe may be forced to allow the passage oftroops through her country to Roumania. TheGerman General Staff think that the war willend in a stalemate and are in favour of anearly peace. The Germans would have to agreeto terrs somewhat on the following lines:Restoration of Bohemia,Moravia and Slovakia.An independent Poland less the German parts.A new Polish State jointly guaranteed bythe Powers. Its eastern frontiers to bediscussed between the Western Powers and theUSSR. Lastly, an agreement to a plan fordisarmament. The Germans will not considerany question of Austrian independence or aHapsburg restoration. It is estima ted thatabout 80% of the population are still behindthe Fuehrer though they may dislike otherparty leaders.DECEMBER 6thI attended a meeting at the Home Officewith D.D.S. in Mr. Osbert Peake's room.Maxwell,an Cooper, were also present.Cooper had told D.D.S. that Eleanor Rathbonewas coming to see Osbert Peake with a requestthat all refugees who had been placed onrestrictions by the tribunals as enemy alieshould in future be treated like ordinaryaliens, or at any rate should have facilitiesfor appealing. It was thought desirabletherefore that Peake should know something ofour views before seeing Miss Rathbone.D.D.S. explained that SO far from releasingthem from restrictions it was our viewthat all those in category B., of whom thetribunals obviously had certain doubts,should be interned. By the time the tribunalshave finished their work the number shouldCatalogue Reference:KV/4/185207be roughly 10,000. Peake did not think thatwe could refuse the right of appeal nlthesecases but had it mind that he might possiblytell Miss Rathbone that the right of appealmight not perhaps operate in the sense Whichshe imagined. We explained that we viewedwith considerable apprehension the largenumbers of people who had been left at large,particularly those who were not refugees andwho had their roots in Germany. It seems thatthe tribunals and even the Advisory Commit-tee had failed to appreciate that a Germanwho had been a member of the Nazi Party had tobe regarded as a potential danger. Iinstanced various examples such as the caseof Otto BODE. The real point at issue was todecide what was going to be done with Cat.B.people as soon as the tribunals had finishedtheir work. We felt that they would have tobe sifted in some way or another and thatinternment of whole categories would beadvisable. D.D.S. drew attention to theletter that we had received from Barnes M.Pthrough the W.0. and said that the viewsexpressed more or less coincided with ourown. We had put up a reply to the S. of S.for War and felt bound to say some thing tothis effect. We wish however if possible toact in conformity with I.0.policy. PersonalI feel that we should take a different lineregarding this matter and should say thatthe internment ofenemy aliens was a questionwhich vitally affected the Service Deptsand that we could not trim our sails to suitH.O.views. We should therefore have toregister our very frank opinion to theService Depts.Before the meeting broke up I asked if I couldsay a few words about the whole position aswe saye it when confronted with the task ofCatalogue Reference:KV/4/185catching spies. We had between 60 and 70,000enemy aliens who would work themselves into avariety of occupations. There seemed littleprospeet of getting the groundscleared inorder that we might be able to get down to thepeople who really mattered. This question wasclosely ound up with that of travel and ofvetting peoe for various purposes. Unlesstravel was very much restricted and morepeople interned we could not feel that therewas much prospeet of carrying out investi-gations successfully. As regards vettingI pointed out that the wheels of this officewere clogged by having to decide such questionsas whether an enemy alien should have a permitto export parcels without censorship. Theremedy in our view was to deal with wholecate ories of people instead of having every in-dividual case referred to us on its merits.I thought that Maxwell and Peake realised thatthere were difficulties, but I doubt verymuch whether they will take any steps tosolve them in our sense. Maxwell suggestedthat as a preliminary to dealing with thequestion of travel he would call for a returnof people travelling daily which would showththeir nationality and their business.D.N.L. has written to the Home Secretary aboutVon TESCHKOW. D.S.S. has seen him and hasshowrt him a copy of the evidence that weput before the tribunal. D.N.I. asked whetherhe should appear in person on her behalf.D.S.S. said that this was not really a matterfor him to decide, but his private advice wouldbe to leave the matter alone and let the casetake its course before the Advisory Committee.The case of Mrs. KRAFT has developed in avery interesting way. An intercepted lettershowed that she was going to see W.H.MULLER,Catalogue Reference:KV/4/185a somewhat suspect travel and forwardingagents. Stopford got hold of the two girlsfrom Selfridges and identified her on herarrival at the station in London. They pickedher up again outside MULLEF &c Co. and arequite convinced that she was the woman whochanged the notes into fivers which weresubsequently sent to "Snow". After leavingMULLER she visited a steamship company apparen-tly with the intention of proceeding to Fijiwhere it is alleged her husband, who died in1921, has property. The question as towhether she should or should not have apermit is at present under discussien.Another interesting fact has come to light.Mrs. KRAFT has been in communication withSwan &c Edgars regarding the despateh ofcertain articles of clothing to her nieceEditha DARGLE in Copenhagen. MrS.KRAFTwa s anxious to pack and despatch the goodsherself under the export permit granted toSwan &c Eagar. The firm replied that theywould have to send the goods themselves directfrom the shop. The inference is that Mrs. K.may wish to pack certain messages or corres-pondence in the clothes. We are trying toget Swan &c Edgar to write her a letter sayingthat they have reconsidered their decisioneand find that they can acquiesce in herrequest.Dick is sending his informant out with U.35to Belgium. She is to communicate therewith the local German authorities and offerher services to theGerman Govt. as an employeein the Censorship here. If she does not geta satisfactory answer she may proceed toHolland and re-establish her old contacts.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/185A man called HITCHCOCK of the A.E.U. wishesto travel to Toulon with a party of 5 otherengineers to erect a wireless mast for theFrench Govt. This man is a member of theC.P. Cooper, to whom I spoke, would nottake the responsibility for the refusal of apermit, and wishes to r efer the whole matterto the S. of S. D.S.S. is discussing thiswith Maxwell and is trying to obtain a ruling.We had a similar case affecting Forrest ofthe News Chronicle a short time ago.Forrest is now applying to go to Sweden andFinland. The question is, should Communistsbe allowed to travel since their journeyscannot possibly assist the efficient prosecu-tion of the war. They must in fact beregarded as S spies. It will be interesting tosee if the H.O. face up to this question,2which may be a difficult one to defend in theHouse.Dulanty has telephoned to say that Archer isgoing round every inlet with the Naval Attacheand that he will not be back for 10 days.Dulanty wishes us to submit any cases that wehave to him. I said tha t they were mostlymatters which needed discussion but we wouldsee what we could do. I also mentioned that IN.I.D. wanted to see Archer probably inconnection with submarine activities on thewest coast and the CoastWatching System.Dulanty' answer has been passed to D.N.I.and also to Lord Hankey. I gather that whenArcher returns and a report has been receivedfrom our N.A.,Eden is to press for a visitby Archer to this country.Dorrie Knowles, the 17-year-old girl vitha German mother, is being very difficult.She still intends to engage in espionageCataloguietReference:kVi4/1es Germany if she is76given a chance. It seems likely that we shallhave to intern her under 18b. D.S.S. isdiscussing the case with Maxwell.Cooper told me today that the German JewishAid Committee and other Refugee Committeesare now asking the British Govt. for funds.The matter is being considered by the Chance-llor of the Exehequer. I always knew it wouldcome to this.DECEMBER 7thS.I.S. material shows that the Germans arecontemplating a move in Eastern Europe.All Germans are now to stay in Roumania astheir services may be required locally.It had formerly been decided to repatriatethem. Hungary is to be punished for herintrigues with other powers and may beincorporated in the Reich. The Germansappear to be having difficulties in gettingraw materials from Russia. Their tradenegotiations have been unsatisfactory.A saying is going round in Belgrade thatRPrince Paul is pro-British, the Govt.pro-German, the General Staff pro-French and thepeople pro-Russian.Halifax has had Maisky on the mat aboutFinland. Maisky evidently feels hisposition very acutely, particularly since itwas he who signed the Russo-Finnish Non-Aggression Pact when he was Minister atHelsinki.One V.S. GITLOV or JITLOFF, travelling onan American passport, has passed through thiscountry. He came from Prague Yvia Germanyand Ostend and is en route for U.S.A. Thereare strong grounds for thinking that he is aGerman cum Russian sabotage agent.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/185Dunn, the chairman of one of the Londontribunals, is very annoyed about the caseof Dr. WITMAN. Lord Newton made a protestabout WITMAN'S internment in the House ofLords. WITMAN came before the savisoryCommittee and was released. Dunnhas writtento Kendal saying that while he does not inany way wish to question the decision of theAdvisory Committee he would like to pointout that nobody asked him to produce theevidence on which he ordered WITMANSinternment.We have interned one ALSLEBEN a Britishsubject of German origin who was associatedwith DRESSING brothers.A youth under 16 arrived here from Eire witha perfect arsenal of bombs. D.P.P. says thatin the present state of the law the most thisboy can get is a month's detention.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/185DECEMBER 8thThere have been interesting developmentsin the WHINFIELD case. It has been foundthat Mrs ELAM, through whom WHINFIELDreceived his correspondence from hismother, has a special account into whichshe paid E4000 in E1 notes at the time ofthe first crisis and E5000 in E1 notes justbefore the outbreak of war. This accountShows outgoing payments to one FINLAY, whomay well be Archie FINLAY who was verymuch concerned with secret B.U.F. financebefore the war and was employed as acourier for this purpose between London,Rome and Berlin.SNOW has to go to Antwerp to meet a friend.He is also to be contacted by someone herewho will give a pass-word.D.D.S. tells me that the Home Office havenow agreed that not only enemy aliens butordinary aliens in protected areas shallbe sifted and only allowed to remain onhaving their Identity Books stamped by thelocal Chief of Police. The Home Officehave also decided to set up new DistrictTribunals to deal with cases of peopleunder Category B. who have been placed onrestrictions. This is evidently theresult of our meeting with Maxwell andPeake the other day. The Tribunals are tohave fresh instructions and it will be upto us to see that they are on the rightlines.Our old friend Jonas LIED of the AluminiumUnion Ltd. has applied for an exit permitto Norway in order that he may visit hisfarm. This seems a little curious sinceCatalogue Reference:KV/4/185wahis farm must be buried deep in snow. Weshall probably have to let him go as he isbacked by the Norwegian Legation.I have had long discussions today with Curryand Stopford about office organisation. Ihave a strong feeling that although we havea few good cases going, we are mainly siftinginformation which reaches us with the kindassistance of the general public. There isvery little attempt to use imaginationor to make a real drive to collect agentsWe are of course up againstmany difficulties, not the least of which istrying to follow people in the black-out,but the present means for investigationwhich are at our disposal seem to be verymeagre and when we come to the provinces weare often completely up against it. Stopfordis getting out a statement on the SNOW caseand its ramifications which are gettingsteadily wider. When we have got this wemay be alte to make a better picture andalso some new ideas as to how to proceed.We are still without a death penalty. TheHome Office is now trying to get all casesdealt with by a Jury.I.P.I. consider the Indian position veryserious but feel that it may be saved by theRussian menace which is rallying the Moslemelements throughout the world. There isevidently considerable activity going onamong Left Wing elements in India. This fitsin with reports received from S.I.S. thatRussia has designs on India.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/185210DECEMBER 9thI discussed with Curry and Godfrey thequestion of sabotage. It would seem usefulif Godfrey could have a talk with the peoplein S.I.S. who have been concerned withactivities of this sort. They might haveideas about preventive methods and preventivemeasures. In the meantime I have written tothe Americans and the Canadians asking themto let us have details of their experiences.D.S.S. has taken up the question of exitpermits for Communists with Maxwell. Maxwellhas decided that in future known members ofthe Communist Party should not travel abroad.He makes a reservation though in the case ofjournalists. These cases should, he thinks,be dealt with on their merits. He was toldabout the case of FORREST and has suggestedthat he should be given his permit but thatthe Swedes and Finns should be warned. Icannot help feeling that this will end introuble since FORREST might not be tonishedthat the French should know something abouthim, but when he finds that the Finns and theSwedes are also acquainted with his past hemay regard the whole thing as a somewhatcurious coincidence.D.S.S. tells me that Curry's secretmemorandum on the MERCEDES and other similarcases has been passed by Bridges of theC.I.D. to Maxwell. Maxwell, contrary toexpectation, has been very lavish in hiscompliments. He said that he thought Curry'report one of the most aaeefully prepareddocuments that he had seen and he evidentlyappeared impressed with the contents. He isgoing to disuss the cases with the Board ofCatalogue Trade Reference:KV/4/185S.I.S. have ascertained that Michael MASON,who was arrested by the Government of Eire,was in fact acting for the D.N.I. He was inprison for a few days and interrogated byArcher. The incident is extremely unfortunatealthough N.I.D. have rather tried to makelight of it.GOWER, the Communist, has lost his depositin the by-election. The aetion of sabetageagainst Finland was probably responsible.One HEATH, a taxi driver, who has acted f orthe Germans, is being prosecuted forespionage and it is thought that he may getquitealongsentence.Ihavesuggestedthatwe might possibly intern him under 18B with aview to making use of his services in S ome wayor another.S.I.S. told me that one Kurt FELSENTHAL hasbeen arrested by the Belgians. When challengehe produced a British passport in the name ofGeoffrey Benedict DAUNCEY and stated that hewas working for the British Government. S.I.Sascertained that there was a passport in thisname and are proposing to inform the Belgians.I have suggested that we might say to theBelgians that as this man has stated thathe is working for the British, and has aBritish passport, he should be put on a shipand sent over here. We could then sort himout. Nobody knows anything about him underhis British or German name and it seemslikely that he is a German spy. He may beuseful as a bargaining counter.The Belgianshave a perfect case if the Germans complainsince they could say that they thought theman was spying for the British and had himdeported.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/185a(yTHIS IS A COPYDECEMBER 1 OtGINALD OPIGINALDOOUMENT.RE.TAINEDIN DEPARTMENT. SECTIONWinchester.3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC BECORDSACT 1958. enlDECEMBERI discussed the case of WHINFIELD with Dickwho has seen him since his arrival here.WHINFIELD has made a statement mentioninga number of people. There is no doubt thathe has been in touch with at least one Gestapoagent and that the Germans are trying toentaggle him in some way or another.It wasdecided that it would be better to keep himin isolation for as long as possible and inthe meantime institute enquiries about hiscontacts and the people associated with MrsELAM. IT will then be for considerationwhether we should not get a search warranton Mrs ELAM' S premises.I had a long talk with Slade this morningabout Eire. He said that N.I.D. had neverreally contemplated an extensive watchingservice. All they wanted was to have somecheck on Archer' coast-watching organisatiorI told him that I had read his memorandumfor discussion with Archer and that I thoughtthat certain things in it might give offenceto the Irish. He said that the exact formin which it was to be presented to the Irishwas still a matter of discussion. From atalk I had subsequently with Menzies heevidently shares our view.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/185q3D.S.S. has shown Hollis's notes on WillieGALLACHER and Captain Alan RAMSAY to SirHorace Wilson, who is going to. show them tothe P.M. in connection with the secretsession of the House. These notes emphasisethe fact that if anything is said of areally secret nature it is almost acertainty that the information will reachboth the Germans and the Russians. SirHorace Wilson is going to transmit theinformation to the P.M. with a View tohis warning his colleagues.D.S.S. has shown our note on LAWRENCE &WISHART to the S, of S. for War, in whichwe aavocate that the refusal of a permit toLAWRENCE & WISHART to export literatureshould be upheld. S. of S. is quiteprepared to take the responsibility and toanswer any questions in the House.DECEMBER 12thI have had another discussion with Curryabout sabotage and the suggestion has beenput forward that we might usefully collabor-ate with Crocker. We have a case wherecertain shipping firms here and in Canadashould obviously be warned againsta German shipping agency in America whoare suspected of engaging in sabotage. Itseems likely that Lloyas must have given veryclose consideration to this whole problemand doubtless Crocker will know all about it.We had a board meeting this morning. Themain topic of discussion was the RegistryEfforts are being made to split up files asfar as is reasonably possible. It is hopedin this way to prevent at any rate SubjectCatalogye atalngyRefere Rferenge etting held up in one214section while other people are clamouring todeal with kindred problems.D.D.S. mentioned the new Tribunals which areto advise on Category B. cases. I have beenasked to draft the instructions for theseTribunals. If we wait for the Home Office todraft them they are c.ertain to be in anentirely. contrary sense.Lamund LUX, who has a German father and twoGerman brothers has been discovered as aninspector of Armj, Navy and Air Forcecanteens at Salisbury under NAAFI. It seemsthat we are only vetting people for NAAFI ifthey go abroad with the B.E.F. Eamund is aBritish subject.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINE[ DOCUMENTIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.0 2ooThe case has arisen of a Pole who has beensome months here and in August went to Eire.The Eire Government did not discover that hewas there until October when they ordered himto leave. On arrival at Liverpool he wasrefused leave to land and sent back. TheHigh Commissioner has now complained aboutthe incident on the grounds that as this manwas resident for a short period in thiscountry we should take him back, which nodoubt, in order to avoid unpleasantness, weshall ultimately have to do. The real answerto the High Commissioner, of course, would bethat if Eire wishes to be regarded as anindependent country and accepts an alien, sheCatalogue Reference:KV/4/185must keep him or deport him back to hiscountry of origin and that the mere fact ofhis making a protest to us in the form thathe has made it is tantamount to an admissionthat Eire remains within the British Common-wealth of Nations.Bridges of the C.I.D. has returned to usthe case of MERCEDES and MARKMANN, statingthat he hae discussed the matter withMaxwell and that we should submit thematter to him. I have spoken to D.S.S.and we are going to send it to Maxwell andalso to the three services. This will enablethe service departments to bring pressure tobear on the Home Office if there is anyreluctance to take action.The latest figures from the Advisory Committeeshow that 75% of those who have come beforeit have been released.The Naval AttacheMadrid has t elephoned tosay that on information received from thePortugese Police arms are being shipped toEire. N.I.D. are taking the matter up withthe Dominions.DECEMBER 13thin the German Legation in Dublinis now sending to theinLondon torn up pieces of paper which arealleged to come from the German Minister'sconfidential waste. We have the originalspieced together and they are not uninteres-ting though somewhat inconclusive. Theyshow connections with the I.R.A. and givedetails of individuals who are dining andlunching with the Minister. These do notCatalogdeRefecencekV1t85 may get somethingmore concrete later.276Dunlop of the Treaties Department of the F.0.rang me up today asking whether we could veta man called DONES who is now a shirt-makerin Soho. In the last war he is reported tohave been employed at Gibraltar on cypherwork. The Foreign Office obtained his namefrom some National Register and wish toemploy him on highly confidential work in thecypher department. I explained to Dunlopthat our information would probably benegative and e xpressed the view that inemployment of this sort he might feel itadvisable to have something positive. Hetold me he wanted 12 men and I suggested thatit might be possible to get 12 reliablepeople, possibly ex-officers. He jumped atthe idea and we are doing what we can. It isincredible, however, that after the KINGcase the Foreign Office should not havelearned their lesson better than this.The WHINFIELD case is getting really hot.Further examination of banking accounts showsthat Mrs ELAM passed money to Archie FINLAY,who passed it to the B.U.F. We have alsodiscovered that Mrs ELAM has paid E150 inBank of England notes into her specialaccount. These notes are said to have someform of cypher on the back. We are gettingthe original notes and are having themtraced. We may in this way ascertain thatMrs ELAM' money comes from foreign sources.Hale suggested that we should get our stoolpigeon up to the camp at the BromptonOratory and that when he has collected datato allow him to give evidence before theAdvisory Committee both about cases where theyhave ordered a release and also about thosewhich are to come before them. It may wellCatalogue Reference:KV/4/185217be a shock to them to find that they havebeen making some serious mistakes.DECEMBER 14thS.I.S. material: The Yugoslavs are in acleft stick. The Italians want them tostart an anti-Bolshevik erusade which thepeople won't stand and owing to the stale-mate in the West, there is a feeling thatthere will be no alternative but tobargain with Germany. Prince Paul seemsto be very worried about talk of aHapsburg restoration.Mussolini has had another anti-Britishoutburst, not in public, but among his ownsupporters.IT seems that we have succeeded incracking the German naval cyphers betweenBerlin and Tokio and Berlin and Madrid.There are now 22,000 Russians in Esthonia.The Soviet Government have asked theEsthonians to increase their army.Russian troops in Esthonia appear to beof poor quality. The Germans have avery poor opinion of them.There is a certain amount of Communistpropaganda going on in Roumania by meansof leaflets. There was an illicitwireless station but this has beendetected by the Roumanian authorities andhas closed down.The Shah is reported to be leaning towardsRussia rather than Turkey as he feels thatthis is the only way that he can ipatainneutrality.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/18The case of HILDERSHEIM has beensubmitted to the Home Office with arequest for internment under 18(B). Thiswas the man who returned from Germany inthe early stages of the War and calmlyinformed Cookie that in the last War hehad been assisting the Germans to makesubmarines in his capacity of navalarchitect. Cookie asked him whether herealised that in SO doing he had committedhigh treason.There has een an interesting developmentin the case of von TRESHKOW. D.N.I.rather tactlessly sent a solicitorcalled EICHOLZ to see the Home Officeand request that the lady should bereleased. Maxwell appears to have taken adeep breath and said that in view of herconnections in the past with Naziactivities, he would not recommend to theHome Secretary that she should be givenleave to appeal to the Advisory ommittee,and she would therefore remain ininternment for the duration of the war.The decision is a perfeetly sound one,but the inconsistency of it is remarkable.Tar has spoken to me about lights. Hehas arranged with Stammers that theObserver Corps will take cross-bearingson any lights in the same way that they dowith aircraft. They will reportimmediately to the local Police that weare instructing C.Cs. that in any suchcases where there are reasonably groundsfor suspecting that the lights have beenshown for some illegal purpose, we shouldbe informed. They are also compiling amap showing where lights have been seen.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1852There are certain cases in the ThamesEstuary which give grounds for strongsuspicion.Heinz BRACK, a school master who wasinterned early in the war, states thathe is not appealing to the AdvisoryCommittee as he thinks his parents wouldbe victimised if it became known to theNazis that he was at large.I spoke to D.D.S. today about thesuggested Travel Committee which was tolay down certain rules about the movementsnot only of enemy aliens but ordinaryaliens and British subjects. He told methat the Committee had now been side-tracked by Maxwell who had ordered Cooperto work something out with Stafford whichwould have the effect of restrictingtravel. The first fruits of thesedeliberations are shown in a telephoneconversation from Stafford saying thatin the case of STRAUSS, an enemy alien whohas twice been turned down by us fortravel, Cooper takes the view that as hehas passed the Tribunal and been classifiedC, he should be treated on the same basisas any other alien. This I find isalso Maxwell's ruling. It seems to meentirely wrong that any alien, whateverCategory he may have been placed in by theTribunal, should be allowed to travelunless it can be shown that his journey isin the national interest.On the 7th December Tilea, the RoumanianMinister, had a conversation with Halifax.The Roumanians are very anxious to get usand the French to extend our guaranteeagainst aggression by Germany toCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1852aggression by Soviet Russia. Roumania seemsto be counting on Italian support in theevent of Russian aggression and it seemsthat a mutual assistance pact with Turkeyis also under consideration. Roumania thinksthat action by ourselves and the French nowis imperative and would have a considerableeffect in bringing in Italy on the side ofthe Allies. Roumania could put 22 millionmen in the field and possibly Turkey couldsupply another half million. Tilea stressedthe importance of not allowing Roumania's oiland gold to fall into the hands of theGermans. As regards the oil, he said thatit was a fallacy to think that lack ofrefineries had made this matter unimportant.This was a difficulty which could be got overby transporting the oil elsewhere forrefining purposes.Out of 76 enemy aliens examined in the Isleof Wight, only one has been interned.DECEMBER 15thThe WHINFIELD case is still developing.Sneath has produced the draft of aninformation to be sworn before a nagistrate.Harker has shown this to the D. of P.P., whothinks that it would be sufficient to obtaina search warrant on the premises of Mrs ELAMand the Anti-Vivisection Society. Harkertook the information on to Maxwell explainingthe possible implications, namely that docu-ments would be found which might necessitateprecautions against the B.U.F. Maxwell isgoing to consult the Home Secretary. In themeantime Special Branch are trying to tracethe notes paid into Mrs ELAM'S account. Itthey are of foreign origin it would seemCatalogue Reference:KV/4/185that we have a case for dealing with thewhole of the B.U.F. This, 1 think, wouldbe preferable to entering Mrs ELAM'Spremises and then finding that raidselsewhere would be necessary to start theprosecution against the B.U.F. It would bemuch better, in my view, if the Governmentmade up their minds to make a clean sweepof the organisation, since the effect ofraiding Mrs ELAM can only drive themall underground, and if at some futuredate they have to be dealt with, we shall2not have such good data to work on.I am told that KUCKENMEISTER has turnedup and been interned.DECEMBER 16thMcLeod of A.G.3. has rung me up to saythat 41 seamen are to be sent back onWednesday. They are all said to be underthe age of 18, and having been taken offthe high seas, should go back unless theyhave technical qualifications. The HomeOffice take the view that it would be wiseto get rid of these people since Germanyalready have a large number of unemployedseamen and if they stay here we shallonly have to feed them. I have spokento Craig, who has asked the Home Officeto let him have a list of these peopleand their qualifications. If any of themhave knowledge of engines or wirelesstelegraphy he is going to recommend thatthey should be held.Maude is still investigating the leakagein the case of H.M.S. "Belfast". So farthey have not been able to trace anytelegrams to Eire or from Eire to U.S.A.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/185making mention of this incident. As aresult of his investigations, however, itdoes seem that leakage from Eire is a veryeasy matter if a journalist establishesgood relations with some member of one ofthe cable companies, who can easily get thenews out to the Azores or to the Continentvia the route from Cork to Havre, which issupposed to be used only for transitcables from the U.S.A. or the Continent.The Advisory Committee have submitted to usthe case of one BISCHOFF whom they proposeto release. This is normally the procedureadopted and gives us the opportunity offurnishing any additional particulars orobservations on the shorthand notes. Inour reply the phrase slipped through thatthis man' release would make folly ofSecurity." This seems to have got theCommittee on the raw and Norman Birketthas sent in a raspbery which in effectimplies that the Committee would not bebullied by M.I.5. Birkett, in his letter,has laid himself open to quite a goodreply, but it is thought better to leavethings as they are. Pilcher has had a talkwith him and he is perfectly friendly. Itseems, however, that the Committee wererather nettled by a previous incident.Maude had written to the Police aboutanother individual whom we wished to haveinterned, and in SO dding had said some-thing slightly derogatory of the Committee'swork. The Police report had eventuallybeen furnished and unfortunately also acopy of Maude's letter.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/185DECEMBER 17thHad a long discussion with Curry and othersregarding office organisation and lack ofpolicy in the matter of tribunals, travel ete.which is clogging the wheels of the office.It is very fficult to know exactly in whatform to put this up to the Cabinet.The broad facts are that certain regulati-ions were laid down by C.I.D. committees beforethe war which were not adhered to, and thatthe policy both with regard to traveland internment has given rise to a serioussituation. Large numbers of enemy aliens areat large and they have freedom of movement.The result is that 4/5ths of the office areengaged in controlling these movements in oneway or another and that only 1/5th or evenless are pursuing the proper function ofMI5,namely to investigate espionage. Unlesstherefore proper restrictions are imposed itwollvi be impossible for us to employ the staffon this more important work and to driveespionage into channels where it will bemore easily deected.From special material, the French seemto take the view that it is up to theItalians to deal with the Russians if theyattempt to invade the Balkans. Ali Khan, theAfghan Minister, is in touch with KORJ ofthe Russian Embassy and finds him at times"a useful friend".The representatives of Iran and Irag arerather concerned about this, although theyseem also to be dabbling in Russian affairs.In the meantime KORJ is communicating withthe Turks or is at least anxious to see them.Ira, Egypt and Turkey are in consultationCatalogue Reference:KV/4/185THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION43.(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 11958.prilood 1958.0 Iodwith the Italian Embassy, probably on thequestion of Russian aggression. In themeantime the. Egyptian Minister has got tohear of meetings between the representatives08 Iran ana Afghan and the Russians andhad dropped the discussions on Moslem unity.Iran and Afghanistan were rather worriedabout this and got into touch with him.He said that frankly he knew of their talkssith Maisky and a hurried visit to Paris. ThEere much astonished that he should knowabout this and expressed their willingness togive him a full explanation.Relations between the Turks and Egyptians seemto be good. They have informed the Egyptiansthat they re.sending a member of TurkishGovt. to Teheran,B Bagdad and Kabul to cement.unity. The Turkish Minister has expressedthe view that London is full of agents and"the British contr-espionage like all elsethat is being done is too gentlet.The Afghan Minister thinks that Amanullahwhose restoration is being contemplated,is in the pay of the Russians and Germans.The Finnish Minister has told the W.0. thatthe Finns are well equipped for fighting invooded country. They fell trees to makeobstacles for the Russian tanks and then whenthe Russians get out of the tanks to removethe obstacles they are shot down and thetanks destroyed. The Russians are poorlyclad, young and inexperienced, but theirequipment is good. The report about Italianaeroplanes being sent to Finland is incorrect.Air Ministry Intelligence report states thatCataloguerReferenceskve4/18s epressed and tosome extent disillusioned. The Dornierbombers relied on speed to outdistance theenemy and neglectea armaments. It has nowbeen found that they are not fast enough andcannot defend themselves.DECEMBER 18thmethod has been discovered by whichnews is being got out of this country toAmerican A number of cables are sent thrdifferent offices. The last word in eachcable makes a connected sentence.Scafford has rung up to say that there arehundreds of aliens pressing for permits togo to the continent. for Xmas. Stafford saysthat he cannot possibly refer all thesecases and that he thinks the only thing todo is to use his discretion. I have spokento D.S.S. and expressed the view that it isquite fantastic that aliens should betravelling for pleasure in this way and urgedhim to speak to Maxwell. This he has doneand the result is that Maxwell has said thathe will send for Stafford. I don' think wecan hope for much resultMrs. ELAM'S premises at the offices of theAnti -Vivisection Society and at her homehave been raided. A considerable amount ofBUF literature s-been obtained includinglong lists of members. These were containedin two deed boxes. In the meantime the noteswhich she paid into her bank have been tracedto two people with German-sounding names.They are to be interrogated under 80a. A larenumber of documents has been taken away buthave not ye been thoroughly examined.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/18on Eire shows that the release27of 50-odd IRA prisoners whose internmentwas held to be ultra vires, has caused aserious situation. The Govt. may lodge anappeal and if that fails they may introducefurther legislation in the Dail. In themeantime the IRA is said to be fairly active.The German Minister is bringing constantpressure to bear on the Govt.of Eire tomaintain its neutrality. In this connectionJhe projected black-out has been called off.The Germans are now broadcasting twice dailyin Gaelic.An S.I.S. report said to come from a Reichs-wehr source of fair reliability, says thatthe Govt. now aims at rejeeting the formeracceptance of the economic and politicaldivision of S.E.Europe with Russia and at arevival of the axis offering a German-Italiandivision of interest in the Balkans. Thethrowing over of Russia is due to the alignmenof Italian policy in the Balkans with thatof Turkey and the Allies and the consequentmenace of an economic stranglehold on theReich. This policy brings Goering andRibbentrop together. Germany therefore intendto strengthen her military position in theSouth and S.E.Europe, and to bring economypressure to bear on Roumania. Russia'sneutrality and Italy's active support is tobe sought because Italian neutrality andRussian active cooperation have proved tobe unattainable. There is to be no attack inthe west but ruthless sea warfare and airraids on places of strategic importance whichwill not invite reprisals.DECEMBER 19thN.I.D. have sent over Capt.Griggs of theCatalogue Reference:KV/4/185Coast Watching Service's report on his visitwith Archer to the West Coast of Ireland.it seems that the personnel and their equipmenare far better than was expected. Thevisit was a surprise one as Archer himselfwas anxious to get a clear picture of whatwas: going on. The stations have binocularsand a good field of view but their accommo-dation leaves a certain amount to be desired.They have bicyeles but cannot despatch amessage under about 20 minutes to an hoursas they have to use the local post office.It seems that if wireless transmittingapparatus was supplied the service might bean efficient one.Hankey ie now. C onsidering the report andthe ways and means of getting Col.Archerover here to discuss it. I have said thatI think this will probably come best fromEden.The Belfast leakage question is rathercritical. D.S.S. wishes to inform Winstonand also Gn.French and Admiral Salmond.The question is how far this can be donewithout compromising Maude's friend.We have taken out a telephone check on DaviDARRAH of the Chicago Tribune who has beenboasting about getting uncensored informatiorout of the country. It may be that he has beausing the same methods as the New York Times.Dick has seen a man called HESSPERS who isa friend of HOLTERMANN. HESSPERS had anextremely interesting story about the pene-tration of our organisation in Holland byagents of the Gestapo disguised as represen-tatives of various anti-Nazi political bodies.In particular he mentioned one MORZ and aCatalogue Reference:KVI4/185228man called FISHER. Both these people hadbeen planted on Stevens and HESSPERS goes Sofar as to suggest that Best himself may havebeen the real nigger in the wood pile. Besthad apparently been in fairly low waterand it was noticeable that after he becameassociated with FISHER that he seemed to bevery well in funds.The French have arrested a man called KEUSTERShom they believe to be a German spy. Anexamination ofhis documents shows that he isconnected with GRAFFENRIED VILLARS whom theFrench believe is also implicated. Theyoriginally asked us to have this man arrestedbut when we told thera that we must see theevidence, they sent over Bonnefusse whoarrived today. The evidence against GRAFFEN-RIED does not seem to be very strong but theeffect of the French uniform on the H.0. hasbeen considerable. Cooper has undertakento put forward a recommendatior to the S. ofS. that GRAFFENRIED should be deported viaFrance.S.I.S. have a report on the visit of NuniPasha the Iran Minister to Egypt. Egypt haveapparently refused to sign the Saadabad Pactfor mutual assistance between Iran, Irag,Afghanistan and Egypt. Egypt does not wish tobe drawn into hostilities should any of thesecountries be invaded by Russia. If thisreport is true it does not seem that thedeliberations here between the various minis-ters concerned are likely to lead to Moslemunity in So far as Egypt is concerned, inspite of the fact that the Egyptian Ministerhas been the prime mover in the discussions.DECEMBER 20thCatatogue Referenceheld today.D.I saidthat he had attended a meeting yesterdayat the H.O. at which Maxwell,Stafford andCooper were present. This meeting had beencalled as a result of our protest aboutforeigners being allowed to travel to thecontinent for the Xmas holidays. Maxwellhad decided that travel permits for thispurpose were to be refused, and that a cornmitt-ee should be set up forthwith to considerall aspects of the travel question.I had lunch with Crocker today when wediscussed the possibility of his coming into reorganise the of fice here and to let usknow as a result of the knowledge he acquires,in what way he can help us with his machineryoutside. I mentioned the matter to Harker andButler who both agree that there was much tobe gained. Harker thinks however that itmay be dif fficult to get over the question ofCroeker not actually being a member of thepermanent staff and a whole time worker. Wemight be open to criticism if we said thathe had access to all our documents and was atthe same time carrying on his practice as asolicitor. Personally I think that it isessential that we should find a way round thisdifficulty since the opportunity is far toogood to be missed.Dick's informant has just returned and Snowhas also arrived back with some veryinteresting information.Maude has collected all the documents inthe Belfast case and has an appointment withDaniels, the head of the New York Times,tomorrow.Catalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/185THIS IS COPY2303ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTIENT UNDER SECTION3 (4 OF THE EPUBLIC REODECEMBER 30thACT-1958 0oodReturned from leave.A French communist named HERZOG arrived todayfrom Halifax on the San Diago. The FrenchNaval Authorities had passed a request throrNID that he should not be allowed to land inthis country. We took him off at Gravesend ansent him to Newhaven whence he will proceedDto Dieppe tonight.A regulation is now in force by;which peopleare not allowed to purchase vital parts ofwireless sets without a permit. These partsinclude high-powered valves which might be use(in the composition of transmitting sets. Thequestion of vetting has arisen and as thePost Office are receiving applications fromevery quarter, particularly cinema proprietorswho break a valve in the course of a performan-ce and urgently require one to replace it.I have suggested that the Post office shouldissue a fairly comprehensive form of applica-tion and judge the case as far as possibleon the basis of the reply received. Onlyexceptional cases should be referred here.Ultimately I think they might reach a stagewhere they could issue general permits topplicants whose bona fides have become moreless established.I had a word withabout codes. At pre-sent nobody seems to be tackling the problem se-iously. Col.Worledge is by way of dealingwith love codes and today John Maude discoveredtwo ladies in the Censorship who have been giveletters in code and told to play with them.They have not got the time nor the knowledgeto do so. There is also the question offlower codes. My own feeling is that eitherCatalogue Reference:KVI4/185THISISORIGINAL DOCUMENT ETAINEDNDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION23(4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958the C. &c C.S. or ourselves Should estabtishan organisation to deal with the queation.It would need somebody at the head of it whohas the right kind of mind.for the work.will put the matter toV.VSpecial material shows that we are notencouraging Sweden to go to war. The Swedesare uncertain whether the Germans contemplateany attack but feel that they could probablyhold them off a bit. They think itpossible that Germany might try to estab-lish bases in the south SO as to get controlof the Balkas but do not think that theywould attack the iron mines in the north asthey might meet with more formidableopposition.Dick's friend has had a successful visitto Belgium and succeeded in getting takenon again in work which may prove veryinteresting to us.Some time. ago, before the outbreak Of warwe got a report from T.Ireland about a girlcalled Dorothy Hannen who had been employedby Harland Shortt's, who left rather hurried-ly. She had subsequently established conetact with one Oscar STEINLE. Nothing trans-pired from enquiries made then. Her land-lady now hands over a parcel containingplans of an A.A.gun which were addressed toDorothy Hannen.DECEMBER 31stStephens is interested in the case of a Mrs.TITFORD. Some time ago a Mr. TITFORD ad-vertised for employment and received a letterfrom a woman called Margaret OTTO who wasCataloguenRelererice.kv4prssia Correspondenceensued and TITFORD eventually went over andTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION2323 (4 OF THE PUBLICRECORDSACT 1958 2000and married the girl in Bratislava. She wasvery insistent that she should have a Britishpasspor t of her own and that her name shouldnot be included on his passport. She seemedto have considerable funds at her disposal.She returned with her husband to Englandana subsequently deserted him. TITFORD thenreported the facts to the police since itseemed that from the girl's side the marriagebed been merely one of convenience. Onewho has three convictions againsthim and is working as a police informant,has now stated that he picked up .TITFORDin Piccadilly and that she took him backto her flat for which she pays 27 a week.disclosed that he was now employedas a driver by the W.0. Mrs. TITFORD becamevery interested and asked him to produce hispapers which he did. She then suggested thathe might like to earn big money and thathe could do this if he would come with herto Lausanne to meet hercprincipals. Beforehe goes he is to meet somebody from the POlishEmbassy. Mrs. TITFORD has explained that shehas numerous other contacts and that she willrequireto act as courier between thiscountry, ountry,Basle,Lausanne le,Lausanne and Zurich. rS.ITFORD has been convicted 3 times as a. prosti-uter and has been run by a Jew called KAHNwith whom she now seems to have severed rela-tions.DARRAH of the Chicago Tribune has been downto Penzance. It has been suggested that hemay be getting information out through theWestern Union office. Enquiry shows thattelegrams can be handed in at Penzance butthat they should be referred back to theLondon office before despatch. If howeverDARRAH had a friend in the local office thereCatapoguerefereee:kw4plssould not evade censor-Ship.2,3Archie Craig A.D.N.I. is apparently tojoin S.I.S. in the near future. It is notquite clear what his status will be.Permits to. export goods and printed matterby post granted by MC2 of the Postal &c Tele-phone censorship. We do not vet these casesas a general rule but are in future to passthe names of any suspect firms which come toour notice to B.12 for atransmission to MC2JANUARY lst 1940I have had a talk with V.V: about codes.Iexplained to him our difficulties. He isgoing to speak to Dennison and see whetherhe has any useful suggestions or can put upanyone suitable to take the hatter in hand.Cookie is going to GHQ in 10 days time togive advice in matters affecting contre-espionage. Col. .Templer who is in charge ofthese matters at 'GHQ seems to be rather atsea and is anxious for assistance. Obviouslythings are not working altogether satisfactor-ily as Bonnefous when he was over here theother day asked rather pointedly whetherCol.Templer had ever dealt with C.E.mattersbefore. The answer is probably in thenegative.The question of Unity Mitford has been raised.It is reported that she has come out of Ger-many accompanied by some Hungarian andarrived in Switzerland, that she is in aserious condition and that her mother andsister Barbara have gone over to fetch her.B.8a have brought me the case of one RIZZAa British subject of Italian origin in Scot-lealaloyhe Referenee:k6/4st that he knows234a great deal about the Ark Royal, where sheis, how much she is damaged, etc. and that hehas even attempted to take photographs. Hefurther stated to an informant that he hasways and means of getting photographs outof the country to Italya and thence to Ger-many. The local C.C. has asked what actionshould be taken.D.4 have submitted a note about visas policywhich is gradually sorting itself out. Enemyalien refugees are not being admitted exceptin very special cases. Poles are not beingadmitted except for diplomatic reasons. We donot quite see eye to eye with the H.O. as towhat constitutes diplomatic reasons but thispoint is under discussion. Domestic servantsare not being admitted except those who havebeen employed for some years in the U.K. andwho left or were on holiday when war brokeout. Students who have started advancedsourses in U.K. are being admitted to com-plete their studies. Journalists are beingadmitted provided they have clear records. Iam not quite sure whether this is altogetherwise. The Vice Consul of St.Malo has beenauthorised to grant visas to French citizensresident in the Channel Islands to returnas necessary. H.O. have agreed that visasshall not be granted to aliens who havevisited Germany since the war or who are knowto contempkate visiting Germany, A scheme ofaller-retour visas is under discussion andwill prove a great help by enabling businessmen to pay short visits to this countrywithout having exit permits.I have been making enquiries about MinleyHall Intelligence Course. There are apparent-ly two courses per year, 40 students attendingeach course. Cambridge professors will lec-ture to them on the racial,geographic andCatalogue Reference:KV/4/185239economic situation in eastern Europe. Then stStaff College instructors and other expertswill take them in Intelligence work generally.Although a lot of the subject matter will beconfidential it will not necessarily be secretOnly the few who show outstanding brilliancewill be posted to intelligence duties duringthe war. The others will be earmarked to besent out after the war with Military lissionsand SO on in the hope that they will knowsomething about the characteristics, creedsand idiosyncrasies of the country they goto. They will therefore be of some use toour Govt. and General Staff in an advisorycapacity. We are vetting these people andthose we do not feel altogether certain aboutwill nes bemarked "Not to be employed withoutfurther reference to M.I.5". The only personturned down SO far is Peter RODD.Con has spoken to me about sabotage in Govt.Establishments. He does not think that wehavethe necessary staff to deal with thesematters and he thinks that the responsibilityshould be definitely ours.Saw Cowgill today. He said that from morerecent reports they had had from the Dutchit seemed highly probable that Stevens waseither shot dead at the frontier or elsevery seriously wounded.JANUARY 2ndTI had a discussion today with Dick andStephens about exchange of prisoners. Inthe absence of data it is difficult toarrive at a sound policy. If the Tribunalscarried out their work property we shouldhave a list not only of those who want togo back to Germany but of those who oughtCatalogueReference:KV/4/185236As far as our own people are concernedwe only have a vague statement that 117 areinterned and that there were roughly 1500others at large, many of whom may have theirroots in Germany. We do not know how manyof them wish to return to this country.Personally I should not feel anxious to haveany of them back here except the 117 interneesSince it seems highly probable that the Germanwill recruit some useful agents from amongthe remainder.French Special Material indicates that somesort of tentative peace feelers may be comingfrom Italy.Our S.C.0. has drawn attention to the ratherunsatisfactory state of affairs at FleetwoodDocks where alien seamen are wandering aboutand taking notes. Particular suspicionattaches to Icelandic seamen. It appears thatthe Post Office are now sending mails toIceland by trawler.Maude has gone to Inverness to look into thecase of RIZZA.The Americans are prosecuting Bookniga forfailing to register as a foreign agency.Potemkin has protested and the Americans havereplied that they do not discriminateagainst any country but merely take proceed-ings wherever an infringement has taken place.We have a copy of their letter and are goingto consider whether we could not possiblyinclude it in our D.R. It might give us auseful handle. It is interesting to note thatthe Americans are taking a strong line withthe Soviet Govt.An S.I.S. report from a reliable sourseCatalogue Reference:KV/4/18537states that the High Command have advisedHitler that a successful war in the west isimpossible. They say that unless sea andair warfare is likely to be decisive orother plans are contemplated it would bewell for Germany to work for an armistice.Air Ministry Intelligence shows that daylightraids on Heligoland Bight on 14 and 18 Dec.met with strong opposition from Messerschmi-a1091s and l10's. The latter are said tobe very fast and very manoeuvrable. Theycarry cannon but it is not certain etherthey have rear guns. For the first 6 monthsof 1939 Germany's aircraft output was esti-mated at about 900 per month, There areindications of expansion since the war.On the Finnish front Russian bombing isreported to be inaccurate and only 1/3 ofthe bombs explode. The Russians seem to beshort of trained pilots. The Finns haveput up an outstanding performance with Britishcraft, mainly Bristols.On D.S.S.'s instructions E telephoned toMaxwell about Unity Mitford suggesting thatboth she and her mother and si ster should bethoroughly searched on arrival, the searchin the case of Unity only to take placeif the M.0. was of opinion that she was ina fit state. Maxwell seemed somewhat relac-tant to sanction this at first but finallyagreed to the course suggested. I told himthat before any action was taken I would lethim know what the M.0.'s opinion was.After further discussion of this case withS.L. we came to the conclusion that Unityreally ought to be interned under 18b, andafter speaking to D.S.S. I arranged to go andsee Maxwell between 7-8 p.m. tonight.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/185238I told him about the proposal and said thatif we had been dealing with Miss Smith orMiss Joyce the probability was that we shouldnot be arguing the case, and that an orderunder 18b would be made. He was silent atthis point but later in the argument saidthat he doubted whether if the lady had beenMiss Smith or Miss Joyce we should take anyaction. He pleaded that we had done nothingin the case of members of the Anglo-GermanFellowship or indeed in that of Carroll of theLink. I said that I did not feel that therewas any analogy. Unity Mitford had been inclose and intimate contact wi th the Fuehrerand his supporters for several years and wasan ardent and open supporter of the Naziregime. She had remained behind after theoutbreakio1 war and her action came perilouslynear to high t reason. Her parents had beenassociated with the Anglo-German Fellowship another kindred movements and had obviouslysupported her in her ideas about Hitler.We had no evidence at all in support of thepress allegations that she was in a seriousstate of health and it might well be that shewas being brought in on a stretcher in orderto avoid publicity and unpleasantness to herfamily. If I were asked whether I thoughttheodas were strongly in favour of something5being ound on her or her parents I should notbe prepared to risk my money but in actualfact on the evidence available I had notany right to suppose that she would not becarrying something. In fact in normalcircumstances she was just the kind of. personwho would be crazy enough to do SO. Neitherwas it out of the picture that her mother andsister might aid and abet hery. I still thoughttherefore that she should be served with anorder under 18b and that Lady Redesdale andBarbara Mitford should be searched disereetlytaloguereterence:KVI4/18523939Maxwell was very reluctant to agree to thisand thought that we should possibly makeourselves ridiculous, but before I left hadagreed to the search of all three and hadsuggested that possibly an order under 18amight be served on Unity, instructing her toreport to the police. He tried to see SirJohn Anderson but this was not possible ashe had left. He waid that he would telephoneto me the Home Secretary's decision in themorning.JANUARY 3rd.Maxwell rang up today about Unity. He saidthat the Home Secretary was in entire agree-ment with his view and had decided thatnothing should be done. Nobody was to besearched and no order was to be served.I reminded Maxwell once more that since Unitywas such a public figure there might beconsiderable criticism if she sere left atlarge. He said that this aspect of thecase had been considered. I informed A.D.S.Dof the position and instructions were givento Ferguson to telephone to Jelfe at Folkes-tone. A.D.S.D. has also informed D.M.I. ofthe Home Secretary's decision in order thathe might be aware thatthe action takenat the ports was not the responsibilityof M.I.5. D.M.I. seemed very annoyed. Itwas gathered that he was proposing to takethe matter up with the F.O.The Eire telephone checks indicate that bagsbetween Dublin and the High ommissionerhave been going astray. ThiSy is rather disqui-eting as they must often contain lettersbetween ourselves and Archer.Catalogue Gilfillan Reference:KV/4/1 reports that one HEINIG @ HENKEL @240KILSBY of Gorey,Co.Wexford, is in touch withKarl PETERSON of the D.N.B. and is also writinto a Mrs. MAHON at Leatherhead whose house issituated near an Air Ministry Establishment.MrS.MAHON who is obviously the wife of thewellknow Communist has had a mysterious tele-gram signed BRAMLEY asking her to reportprogress. BRAMLEY is Alice BRAMLEY the well-known Communist who in the past has dealt inexplosives.Another interesting case is that of RyderHILLIARD concerning whom an anonymous letter Wwas addressed to Mr. Lamar Hardy the DistrictAttorney in charge of the American e spionagecase about a year ago. An entirely indepen-dent report has been received about this manand his mistress. He may be just a crank.If he is a spy he is obviously a very badone. He seems to be writing letters in secretink but has not a ttempted to disguise thefact in conversation with a local innpro-prietor. Major Ally is going down to seethis man.Unity has arrived and is reported to havesat up and smiled at the 1.0. There was agood deal of fuss about troops with fixedbayonets who are alleged to have been sentdown to deal with the situation. In actualfact there were no troops except the normalguard consisting of about 3 men. The pressare extremely annoyed that they were notallowed on to the quay and there seem to bethe makings of a general row about the wholesituation as soon as Parliament meets.JANUARY 4thMaude has returned from Inverness and hasdone a first-class piece of work, in the caseCatalogue gueReference:KV/4/185zu'It is a great pity that we have not got thenecessary personnel to deal with more caseson these lines. Having extracted from NIDafter a good deal of trouble the necessarydata about the position of H.M.ships, Maudetravelled on the night train to Inverness.He fell in with an N.0. en route who gave himfar more precise details about the locationof H.M. I.ships than he had been able to extractfrom the Admiralty. After seeing the C.C.he decided to go and see RIZZA himself,posing as a journalist. He started by saythat he had heard that RIZZA had a consideriblknowledge of the West Coast and that as hewas looking for a house there he thought hemight be able to help him. RIZZA seemedflattered and it took only about a quarter ofan hour to get on to the subject of photographsRIZZA trotted out the whole story that hehad given to the commercial traveller. Heeven went further and d described exactly howhe managed to get the photographs out of thecountry through a friend of his called Primo,an Italian, who has since been identified bythe C.C. He sent the photographs to Italy,and to avoid detection the exposed spool isrolled back to no.l and carried in a camera.We are now considering what further actioncan be taken. It may perhaps be advisableto allow RIZZA'S friend to leave and catchhim at the port. It seems unlikely that eith-er of them are doing more than making moneyout of uncensored photographs.We have applied under 18b for the internmentof Maria LINK, a Pole. Her sister is alreadyinterned and her brother is a ymember of theBUF. Maria was employed by the Anglo-GermanChamber of Commerce up to the outbreak of war.She has lived a onsiderable time in GermanyCatalogue Reference:KV/4/185Zuand has been in Close relations with bothBene and Karlowa.I have arranged with Tudor that we shallreceive the Situation Reports which indicatethe general feeling in the country. Theseare compiled from reports received from CCs.Three new officers have joined B.Branch,Dixon who arrived a few days ago and willNork with Sinclair, Martin who will be attachedto Curry and Philip who will assist Denholm-Young.The notorious Stanek is back with us again.He has been on the high seas for some monthsand is now apparently stateless. He has beentechnically refused leave to land but I expeetthat ultimately we shall have to keep him.There have been interesting Developments inthe case of a German called UNLAND wholeft here with his British born wife on the28th August for Eire. When he went to Eirehe gave his own firm, Ferrum Ltd. as areference to a man from whom he wanted to renta house. The Curistor Office Agency whichwas acting as agency for the Ferrum Co.opened the letter and saw that UNLAND hadgiven himself as reference for himself and in-formed the police and then S.B. went into itand put in a report. Subsequent enquiry andthe imposition of H.O.W.s both by ourselvesand Archer leaves little doubt that UNLAND isacting as a german agent. He correspondsregularly with the Dansk Import &e Export Co.of Copenhagen through a box number. Theletters are obviously in code. Archer hasgiven us copies of all of them and althoughthey are not signed by UNLAND he tells usthat he has established the fact that it isCatalogue Reference:KV/4/185243UNLAND who posts them.CROCKER is going up to Rosyth with hisinvestigator on Friday night. He is goingto investigate the work done on the OrmigDuplicator there since there is just apossibility that there may have been aleakage of information which led to the RoyalOak disaster.I saw Leggett today and discussedwith him the Daily Worker's attitude aboutFinland and also the leaflet which is beingcirculated with a view to preventing ship-ments of arms to Finland. On this particularsubject Leggett is of opinion that theCommunists are doing themselves more harmthan good and that the ordinary working-manfinds recent Russian behaviour extremelydifficult to swallow. He would not thereforerecommend staging a prosecution on theseparticular leaflets. This does not mean inthe least that he does not consider both theDaily Worker and the leaflet extremely ob-jectionable. He feels that it would be anexcellent thing if anprosecution could bestaged under D.R. when a suitable occasionarrises. He would recommend deferring anyaction of this kind until the libel actionhas been settled. Apparently Labour leadersconsider this action a great joke and arefull out to get the Daily Worker intodifficulties. Their view, and also that ofLeggett and the Minister of Labour is thatthe Daily Worker has gone beyond the boundsof ordinary decency and it is really rathera disgrace that it should be allowed tocontinue to publish such misleading news.Leggett is emphatically of the opinion thatit should not be exported. He says that inCatalogue any action Reference:KV/4/185 we care take against the Daily244Worker we can be sure of the fill backingnot only of the T.U. leaders but also theMinister of Labour himself who feels veryhotly on the whole subject.JANUARY 5th1918 internment figures are as follows:45,405 enemy aliens, of which 35,189 weremales. 10,749 of these males were at largeand 24,440 interned. There were also in thecountry but apparently not interned 10,415females and 11,278 British born women marrieto enemy aliens.Maisky has made a protest to the F.0. aboutthe internment of DOSTCHENKO pending deportation. When the latter was arrested nothingof importance was found at his house, but hehad on him details regarding some mechanismfor catapulting aeroplanes from warships.The indications are that he was to try andfind out about these matters. The caseagainst him is not considered strong enoughto warrant a prosecution under the OfficialSecrets Act but he is to be interrogatedin prison pending his deportation.rcher tells me that a case has come to lightwhere a woman in a train overheard an N.0.and two civilians discussing the new devicefor picking up magnetic mines. The matterhas been checked up and there is no doubt thatwhat the woman heard was highly secret. She hhas given a description of the people concerneand I think we shall be able to identify them.The Netherlands Govt. have stated in theirHouse in answer to a question that they havedemanded full satisfaction from the GermanCatalogue Reference:KV/4/185This page is blank.Catalogue Reference:kV/4/185usGovt. for the violation of Dutch t erritoryat Venb on Nov.9th including the return ofthe Dutch chauffeur and the return of thebody of the Netherlands officer who, accordingto eye witnesses, met his death in the attack.The General Manager of Armstrong Siadeleyhas written to Archer about aliens employedin machine tool firms. He says "Many of thefirms with whom we deal have a large numberof staff of foreign origin and unless youclean this up itis impossible to preventinformation falling into their hands in regird3to the parts and the number of them required.From this information they can very quicklyput together the output contemplated."Special material indicates that according toGripenberg the Finnish Minister,HM has ad-vised Norway and Sweden to assist Finlanddireetly and indirectly and promised that ifthey get into difficulties discussions asto assistance will take place.Air Ministry report indicates that accordingto the Finns the Russians are very short ofaviation spirit.JANUARY 6thHoreb has gone and many rumours are afloatIt is said that he has got up against thesoldiers and committed himself in all sortsof directions to political friends withoutprior reference to the Staff.I discussed today the Elam case with Sneath.We did not find a great deal at the Anti-Vivisection offices outside hard indecesshowing the leaders and deputy-leaders through-out the country and BUF men employed astaxi drivers. There was also a letter fromCatalogue Reference:KV/4/185u6Mosley to Mrs. .ELAM more or less giving her apower of attorney in certain matters. Therehas however been an interesting developmentin the tracing of the Bank of England notes.Several of them finally reached one GUSH, whois Mrs. E's solicitor. He was interviewedtoday by Maxwell Knight and Maude, when hestated that these notes were repayment fora loan by him to IrS.Elam. The latter hadasked for the money in order to pay certaindebts incurred in Germany. The questionof Mrs. ELAM'S internment under 18b is underconsideration.One OTTOOLE of Siemens Schuckert in Berlinhas arrived here en route for Eire where heintends to spend a short holiday. This raisedthe whole question as to whether as a Britishsubject we could refuse him leave to go backto Germany or even prosecute him for attempt-ing to do SO. I am going to try and get aruling out of the H.0. but this will probablybe very difficult.The Eire Govt. evidently rather worried aboutthe conscription of Eire subjeets who haveresided here for 2 years or more. As usualthey want toheat their cake and aatra it.Ne discovered the other day that one RYKENSof Unilevers had special facilities from theF.O. to travel between this ountry andHolland.. We informed the F.0. and asked themthe nature of their liaison since RYKENS hadcome to notice in a rather unfavourable lightin conneetion wit the GOERTZ case. F.0.have now sent us over their files: They saythat RYKENS has been a go-between the F.O. andthe German F.0. since 1938 and that on Oct.191939 he was asked through a representative ofthe firm in Holland to go to Berlin to meetCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1852u72Blessing of the Reichsbank who had receivedthe request from Dr. Keppler Under Secretaryof State in the German F.O. No indication wasgiven as to the subject for discussion. RYKENSagreed to go but the meeting was postponed andeventually Blessing came to Holland. Blessingsaid that most people were behind th Fuehrerbut that there was a cleavage in the Party.Both the extremists and moderates wanted peace,the former hoping that Hitler could achievethis end by diplomatic means while the lattwho included Goering, thought that Hitlermust go. Peace terms could be discussed onthe basis of an independent Poland and Czechosl-ovakia and the retention of Danzig. It wasthought however that arrangements could bemade for the Poles to have an outlet to thesea. RYKENS told the F.O. that one ABS ofthe Deutsches Bank had been in Holland recentlyand had said much the same thing except thatPoland and Czechoslovakia would have to bedemilitarised. RYKENS however intimated thatrationing in Germany had been tightened upand that the country could continue the warfor at least another 18 months. It was alsoclear from the files that RYKENS himself hasapparently been in touch with Kanaris of theGerman S.S. F.O. minutes indicated thatCadogan thought these overtures were notseriously intended. The F.O. seem verysceptical about our doubts concerning RYKENSand I think therefore that we ought to givethem the full picture of Unilevers as weknow it. Personall I feel very doubtful ab-out the whole lot and RYKENS in particular.JANUARY thAway from the office.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/185JANUARY 8thThe minutes of the Committee at the H.O.who dealt with the Mercedes case and othershave now been received. The indications arethat nobody thinks anything can be done unlesswe get definite information against theindividuals concerned. In the meantime Winstohas written to Anderson urging that actionshould be taken on the lines suggested by M.I.5, namely under DR.55 sed.4. I have drafteda letter for the Generalis signature toMaxwell saying that from correspondencereceived it would appear that the matter hadreached an impasse and urging strongly thatsomething should be done to formulate a newregulation under DR if 55 is not consideredadequate. I also pointed out that by thenature of these cases the chances of gettingdefinite information regarding the individualsare extremely remote.Haywood has had a word with Humphrey Nobleone of our nominees in the Cypher Dept. atthe F.0. He paints a deplorable picture oflaxity and inefficieney, which is more orless cofirmed by a talk which I have had withArthur Pollen. The staff at present consistsof certain of the old members plus someCivil Service clerks and the people we haverecommended. There seems to be very littlesystem or organisatior and the telegramswhich are of a highly confidential nature,seem to float in from nowhere and pass out nanaked to some destination unknown. Theonly real precaution seems to be that thecode books are counted at lunch time and inthe evening when the night staff take over.It is proposed that the temporary peopleshould eventually be replaced by clerks whoare described as coming from the Post OfficeCatalogue Reference:KV/4/185wuaSection. I gather that these people havebeen trying to get into the Cypher Dept. fora long time. Presumably they are members ofthe Civil Service Clerical Association runby .J.Brown. If SO it is a poor look-outfor security.I have given all the papers regarding thewider aspeets of sabotage to B. who is goingto consider then with a view to a decisionbeing made as to who is to handle thematter.The TITFORD case is beooming very interesting.Our informant has been given two photographsof an individual by whom he is to be approa-ched in Bath. He is to obtain the plansfrom this man which are to be got out of thecountry. MrS.TITFORD has given him the sumof 25 and more is to follow. One of thephotographs shows the individual in questionin civilian attire and the other in Germanuniform.Peter KERRIGAN, speaking at a meeting of theExecutive Committee of the C.P., urged thenecessity of doing something to count eractthe bad effect of Soviet policy againstFinland. He said the: re was not chance ofgetting action to stop transit of arms byBritish workers unless they could be made tcrealise that the Soviet policy was in theirinterests. In nticipation of the suppressiorof the Party it is now to be organised on anindustrial basis as opposed to a districtbasis. In other words there is to be areturn to the old shop stewards movement.A report on Unity Mitford has now beenreceived from the SCO. Apparently there wereno signsdof a bullet wound. Adam takes theCatalogue Reference:KVI4/185view that the Home Secretary has no authorityto order that she should not be searched sincethese powers are vested in the militaryauthorities and hotti the Home Office.JANUARY 9thMaude has received a letter from his friendRIZZA who intimates that he is hoping to getsome good snaps of British warships, whichare leaving the area today. Maude communica-ted with the C.C.Inverness and instructed himto keep observation in conjunction with thelocal SNO. If RIZZA is seen tonbe takingphotographs he is to be arrested.There was a Board Meeting today at which Iraised the following points:The position and status of Eire subjects. Iquoted the case of O'TOOLE who arrived herestating that he was in the employ of SiemsnSchuckert in Berlin and was coming to spenda short holiday in Ireland before resuminghis work. It seems desirable that some sortof ruling should be given on the question ofwhether this man as a British subject hascommitt high treason or an offence underDR. if he applies to return to Germany.In any case it is obviously undesirable thatsuch people should be travelling between thiscountry and Berlin.I also mentioned the question of setting upsome organisatior to deal with code messages.The meeting felt that it was desirable thatthis should be done either by yourselves orSIS, after consultation with the Censorship.I mentioned that there were serious gaps inour organisation insofar as (a) watchers,Catalogue Reference:KV/4/185(b) agents suitable for planting on suspectsand (c) officers Nith initiative who could besent out on special missions, were concerned.It seems to me that if these Board Meetingsare to be of any real value the decisionsshould be recorded and somebody should bemade responsible for carrying them out.It would then be possible at the next meetingto ascertain what had been done. At presentwe seem to have discussions at which peopleair their grievances, but very little seemsto be done to put them right, since every-body thinks that somebody else is going totake the necessary action.Clayton has asked that when cases arise wherethe internment of an enemy alien is desiredin spite of the fact that he has been allowedhis li berty by a tribunal, prior referenceshould be made to the H.O. stating the fullfacts. Clayton tells me that he is intouch with a man called HUBER of the SwissLegation who is handling the question ofthe epatriation of Germans and Austrians hereHuber confided in him very confidentiallythat he and his colleagues had the impressionthat the Germans were trying to get evidenceto show that they were not carrying out theirobligations as representatives of Germany.He said that in several cases they hadghm the impression that questions were be.asked for a specific purpose in order thattheir reactions might be noted. He has somemysterious communication from Rimela PLATZ whois one of our original internees and Huber isvery anxious to know what we think of her.Clayton thinks that Huber is quite genuine butthere is always the possibilityy that he maybe double-crossing us. I haveif therefore,asked Clayton to find out the exact natureof the communication from PLATZ. It may bethat wecan usefully develop the onnectionCatalogueReferenceikv4lalabon.282JANUARY lOthOne Thomas ANDREWS of the R.A.F. Blackpoolwas picked up casually by a man whose namesubsequently transpired to be Arthur WillisLOWE. Lowe asked a number of indiscreetquestions, gave Andrews drinks and money,and arranged to meet him again on severaloccasions. The local police are handling thecase and we have asked them to find out agood deal more about Lowe and the people withwhom he associates. It seems that at one timehenwas employed in the Ministry of Transport.Our informant in the TITFORD case has extrac-ted from the lady the name of one of herprincipals. This man is one de WOHL. We haveconsiderable records of him asche is alreadysuspeet. Infonmant has been told to get holdof an officer's uniform which he has doneand he is to proceed to Bath tonight.For some reason or other this case seems tohang fire.We have had some baa news about Snow. Heasked whether the man previously referred towas going to get into contact with him.The reply came that no contact would beestablished at present. There is a slightimpression that the Germans may not beover-confident about Snow and somethingmay have gone wrong.Stopford has got hold of a letter addressedto BRUNCK from the Guaranty Trust Co. in whichit is stated that an account will be openedfor $45,000 in New York for Brunck's wife.Our records show that according to Padghamall the payments to Schulzer-Burnett fromCatalogue Catalogueeference.KVH4/f85.an and have in the past253been made through Brunck. The check onBrunck has produced a letter from Ned Reidwho evidently knows Brunck very intimately.I am going to ask NCO if he has got a lineon the Guaranty Trust and failing that I amtrying the Americans. In the meantimeI shall ask Ned what he knows of Brunck.Padgham may also be able to tell us whetherBrunck was the conscious or unconsciousagent of Schulzep Barnett.An interesting case has come to light ofa woman named FICKE who has written twoletters to a man named WARNER, who sent themto the W.O. FICKE described herself as aGerman anti-Nazi who wished to increase hercircles of friends. In her secnond lettershe asked him rather indiscreet questions abouthis work with regard to the manufacture ofaircraft. Our files show that FICKE has forsome time been a Close friend of one ALBISTONa civilian employee of the R.A.F. whospecialises in wireless and was formerly atCranwell. ALBISTON had already a roused oursuspicions for a number of reasons. He hadfrequently visited Germany, was interested inphotography, had a German wife, and hadendeavoured to bluff his way into the expermental station at Farnborough. In Julylast he was reported to have attempted totake photographs of Swindon Aerodrome fromthe train. Maude is taking over this case.I spoke to the General today about our boardmeetings. He has agreed to having theresolutions recorded and to have them r eadover at subsequent meetings in order to seewhat has been done in the meantime. He willalso arrange with somebody present to beresponsible for carrying out whatever decisionCatalogue REference:KVI4/1852s4Arthur Pollen came to see me this morning.He is very disturbed because he noticed thatone of the eypher officers at the F.0.before leaving was putting papers into anattache case. One of them had the appearanceof being a cypher message. He is going totry and identify this man and to keep somesort of watch on him.the contents ofV.V. whom I saw last night says that/a tele-gram between the F.0. and Stockholm were inthe posidsion of Goering within 3 days. Thematter came to light through Goering making arather stupid demarche to the Swedish Ministerin Berlin which made it quite clear that thecontents of our telegram had come to bisknowledge. Local enguiry shows that theposition in Oslo and Stockholm with regardto the cyphering and de-cyphering of telegramsis nearly as bad as it is in London.V.V. also told me that the mails which weredropped in the sea when the Imperial Airwaysplane was fired on in the vicinity of HongKong or Shanghai some little time ago, weresubsequently recovered by the Japanese. Theycontained the decodes of a number of Japanesetelegrams. The Japs returned the ordinarymails but with blinks and squeaks retainedthe telegrams.The W.0. are considering taking over the PolisIntelligence organisation which is ready madein Afghanistan. I should feel this might beunwise.With a view to supplying doublercross agentswith information commands have been asked tosend in reports on local information or rumourwhich they, as ordinary membe S of the public,can pick up from observation or from,Catalogue Reference.k4/185. ing, this informa on2562it will be supplied for transmission to theenemy. It is hoped that once confidence isestabllished in this way it will be possibleto mislead the enemy at t a critical time. Inaddition it is fel t t that the reports willprovide M.I. with some picture of the extentof leakage that mgy be going oh.A censorship letter states that the Italiansare frantically fortifying the Brenner.S.I.S. reports show that the German Gener-al Staff are worried about Finland. Theyfeel that aRussian victory will make theSoviet more truculent in the Balkans and inSeandinavia. On the other hand a Russiandefeat would make the smaller nations lessinclined to be subservient to Germany.The plan of German intervention in Sweden istherefore under consideration. Germany isparticularly anxious about safeguarding hersupplies of iron ore.The official attitude in Italy is to propiti-ate Berlin but to keep the independent themeto the forefront and as regards the Alliesto give no indication that Italy has anyintention of departing from her policy of"sacred egoism". Above all, others playingthe diplomatic game must be kept guessing.Special material shows that the Persians arearming as quickly as they can. They appearto b e getting Hurricanes and other materialfrom this country. Up till fairly recentlythey have been subjected to considerablepressure both by Moscow and Berlin with theresult that the Moslem allianee looks likebecoming a reality.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/185257JANUARY 12thE have discussed wi th K. the question ofCrocker being allowed to overhaul the officemachinery. K. seems to be agreeable to thesuggestion and wishes to discuss it furtherwith Harker. I pointed out that once Crockerreally had the hang of the organisation hemight be able to give us considerably morehelp than he is giving at present. K. did notseem to think that the fact that Crocker wouldstill be practising as a solicitor in controlof his firm would constitute any seriousobjection to the course suggested.LACHMANNS case has been heard by the AdvisoryCommittee, at which Archie Boyle gave evidenceHe will remain in internment. KUCHENMEISTER'Scase will be coming up shortly. We receivedan application the other day by his managingdirector BARRNDWhO wished to see him in theinternment camp.There has been a case of sabotage in the officeSomebody has hammered out the nozzles of twoof our hose-pipes with a heavy hammer. Theforeman brought them to Cusack and left themoutside the cell for a few moments. When hecame back the nozzles had disappeared. Thishas raised the question of the freedom ofmovement accorded to workmen of all deserip-tions who wander in and out of everybody'soffice.Turner has been appointed head of .Branchin the capacity of liaison officer betweenB. and D and D.D.S. in all matters affectingHome Office policy.Hollis attended a meeting at the H.0. yester-day regarding the control over the export ofCatalogue Reference:KV/4/185newspapers. Trade and technical journalswill be dealt with by the censorship. Noth-ing will be allowed to be published in thiscountry which cannot safely be exported.With regard to publications of a propagandisttype,both newspapers and pamphlets, it wasdecided that it would be impracticable tomake the censorship world-wide. A Black Listwill therefore be issued and it will be madeillegal to export from this country anypiblication ppearing on this list. Thiswould be almost completely effective forcensorship countries and reasonably effectiveas regards bulk shipments to non-censorablecountries. A Committee is to be formed toadvise on the publications which should beplaced on the Black List. There will bepenalties for anyone sending Black-Listedpublications abroad.A interesting report from India on themethods that they have employed in dealingwith enemy aliens including Nazis, refugeesand Jews.At the outbreak ofwar they interned all thesecategories. They then appointed an Interro-gation Committee under Sir Malcolm Darling,to whom was attached Mr.Wood of the IndianPolice.The opinion of the Committee is that if theyhad not taken the step of interning all enemyaliens and concentrating them in one placethey would never have been able to segregatethe good from the bad. The action takenincurred a certain amount of criticism atfirst, but the Committee are satisfied thatthere is no general resentment among therefugees. The result of their investigationsSO far shows that there are a considerablenumber of extremely dangerous and implacablyCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1852S7hostile aliens and all these are by no meansconfined to those Party leaders who attractedthe most attention in peace-time. Theyhowever consider that the domination exercisedby t he ardent Nazis even now in the intern-ment camp is SO terroristic that the verygreatest caution must be observed in substi-tuting release under restriction for intern-ment in the case of even those who declaredthemselves to be antiNazi or Non-Nazi.Dr. URCHS the Nazi leader has ordered realAryans to apply for release as non-Nazisbecause they "will be more useful outside.'A German R.C.priest who spoke against theNazis in the camp was severely beaten upand told Sir M.Darling that he had stalkedtigers with the Deputy Commissioner ofHoshangabad but had never had his nerve SOshaken.Two Czech members of the Interrogation Com-mittee who have been dealing with the casesof refugees are frightened at the prospectof interrogations of the Nazis because theythink that their relations in Bohemia andMoravia may be persecuted.300 interrogations have been carried out as aresult of which clues to the connectionsof Germans and Indians in hostile activitiesand to the ramifications and nature of Germanplans for causing trouble in India have beendiscovered. Meticulous investigations havehardly yet started.309 enemy aliens in the refugee class havebeen released, 100 of them are thought tobe genuinely pro-British, but the others it isfelt should be subjected to control. 23 Jewsand refugees are still held as seriouslyCatalogue Bgue-Refefence:kvi4/185krel Reference that after ie furtheryoovoenquiries about half this number will have tobe kept permanently independent. D.I.B.remark that this is a much higher proportionof suspects in this category than had beenexpected or than pre-war information gave anyindication of. The three worst examples inthe refugee category are (1) a Jew who wasa German air ace L during the Gt.War anda prisoner of war with the French from 1918to 1920. He has since travelled all overthe Middle East, Central Asia and Russia.He received training as an IntelligenceAgent in Germany before going to Indiarecently, where he was first employed bySiemens and then by Tata's; (2) a Jew whowas a German spy in Italy during the Gt.Warand came to India in July 1939; (3) an Austrianclaiming to be a Czech and at times othernationalities, came to India as a destituterefugee in 1938, possessed 5 passports,mostlstolen or dishonestly bought, and otherwisean extremely compromising history. Has abrother interned as an Austrian.D.S.S. spoke to me today about Crocker comingin to overhaul the office machinery. He isopposed to the idea on the grounds that theemployment of a practising solicitor mightmake him open to criticism. I told D.S.3.that I was sorry that no way round this ddifficulty could be found as I was convincedthat if Crocker became thoroughly acquainteowith the work of all sections of this officehe could help us a great deal more than heis doing at present. The probability isthat he would see a number of gaps whichcould easily be filled. I then asked D.S.S.if he would consider appointihg somebodyelse to overhaul the office machinery asI felt that something of the kind was sorelyneeded. He said that he would consider thisCatalogue and suggested Reference:kV/4/185 Reference: might help. My26 (own feeling is that if there was anotheroutery about leakage of information itmight well result in an enquiry into theactivities of M.I.5 and that we shouldtherefore be well-advised to see that our housis thoroughly in order. This is far frombeing the case at present. We have nopolicy or guiding principles on which to work,the internal organisation seems bad, and verylittle has been achieved in the way of inves-tigation.There has been a lot of fuss and a lot oftime wasted about the case of the woman vonARNHEIM concerning whom representations havebeen made to the H.O. The facts are that vonARNHEIM, who is married to a German nowunder arrest by the French for suspectedespionage in Tunis, has been living in sinwith a prominent member of the Stock Ex-change Committee, by whom she has had achild. She has continued to maintain touchwith her husband, who is getting financialhelp from an extremely suspect firm inHolland with ramifications in this country.We informed the H.O. about this and askedthat pending further enquiries the woman'sappeal should be delayed. We were told thatunless we gave further details H.O. wouldprobably give an order for her release.This seems to me quite fantastic. D.S.S. issupporting the case and I don't think theH.O. will dare to release the woman withoutprior reference to him.Markbreiter spoke to me today about the D.A.F.man ZULAUF who is imprisoned in Guernseybecause there is no internment camp. I haveagreed to the man being released under res-triction, since the alternative is to sendhim over here when he will undoubtedly be setCatalogue Reference:KV/4/185z.2at liberty.Matthews Aliens Branch tells me that beforeXmas he was badgered by the H.0. for detailsabout two internees whom Lady Astor desiredto spend Xmas with her at Clevedon. It seemsextraordinary that such a request should bemade and even more extraordinary that itshould not be met with a curt refusal. It ishowever symbolic of the present atmosphere.Dick has built up what seems to be quite agood organisatior for collecting facts aboutindividuals connected with the various emigregroups:- These are as follows:ISK Internationale Sozialistischer KampfbundProudhon St.Simon NELSON)Right branch of the S.PD, rejecting economicsocialism, therefore economically liberal,but maintaining the Marxist conception ofhistory. Represented in London and Paris.Leader : EICHLER,London, about 50.Periodical: Sozialistische Warte (SocialistLook-Out).Volkesozialisten. Economically liberal, infavour of social reform and the corporate statesimilar to the Jungdo-Staatspartei.Leaders: JAGER (former Communist,later withSTRASSER in Prague) and BREHM, about 30, boC -sellerfrom ULm, now monitor at the B.B.C.Zukunftskreis. Socialist not Marxist, ratherright wing SPD. MUNZENBERG,SCHULTZ etc.Munzenbergeruppe In Paris. rather Left WingSPD not interested in class warfare and reallyto co-operate with Right Wing groups.Miles, Neubeginner.I Paris; radical Marxist,catalogae Referencesip4a8s and Communists.263Bundische Jugend. ederal,national,pro-sociareform,democratic.Leader: EBELING, about 40, formerly leader ofthe Jungnationalen Bund,chiefly in W.GermanyPeriodical: Kamaradschaft.Katholische Jugend Christian,national demo-cratic ratic,pro-social reform,in allignment withthe Christian T.U.SLeader: HESPERS, about 30, at present inHolland,brother of the leader of ND. Collab-orator in "Kameradschaft"SPOADE Social Democrats.HQ in ParisVOGEL BREITSCHEIDT) In London HOLTERMANNand SANDER.Widerstand 'Nikisoh in prison in Germany) .National, socilaist, conservative.Workers,peasants, intellectuals. In London:Prof.H HugoFISCHER,Leipzig.Trade Unions GOTTFURCHT,K KRESSMANN.Bekenntniskirch BUSINGRIEGEF (C. of E.Cttee)HILDEBRANDT and some other pastors.Freedom Party Progressive Democrats.AugusWEBER, WESTFAL.Demuth Committee Geheimrat DEMUTH,M MENDE.Das Neue Tagebuch SCHWARZSCHILD in Paris.STRASSE in Paris.RAUSCHNING.BRUNING TREVIRANUS in AmericaCommunists. Inside Nazi Germany Free GermanCatalogue League Reference:kVi4/18s KVI4/185uS.U.S. report shows that there has been apress truce between Turkey and Germany. TheTurks have nevertheless raided the local GermanClub in Ankara.JANUARY 13thA new D.M.I. called ol.POPOVIC has beenappointed in Yugoslavia. He is said to bemore European-minded than the ajority ofYugoslav officers. He has told our M.A.that German e SO ionage in Yugoslavia Smainly run by SCHILLER, the German Asst.M.A.who disbursed 21,200 during the month ofNovember. According to Col.Popovic the Yugo-slavians have arranged matters SO that abouthalf the amount paid to German agents duringthe month is actually received by the Yugo-slav D.M.I. who spends it on the veterans ofthe last Gt.War, unless some of it sticks tohis own fingers. He disseminates falseinformation to the German agents through hisown people who come back to him and pay himthe money they have received. Col.Popovicsays that there abe 150 German agents in thecountry who are left to themselves providedthey do not overstep the mark. In the eventof a war Col.Popovic has assured our M.A.that they will immediately be arrested,have their throats cut and be thrown intothe old well in the old Turkish fortress whichlies at the junetion of the Save and theDanube. Such are Balkan methods.On Jan.8th Halifax told the Belgian Ministerthat we had certain information from Italianand other secret sources that the projectfor the invasion of Holland and Belgium hadnot been abandoned and might take place inFeb. The Belgians apparently had similarCatalogue Reference:KVI4/185THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENTIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEC2653 (4 OF THE PUBLIGRECORDSACT 1958.0reports. Halifax suggested that a aeclara-tion of support to Holland whseh might stren-gthen the hands of the Generals in Germany,who were opposed to the Western Front ventureThe Belsians appear to be short of A.A.gunsand have asked for our assistance.Had a discussion with B. about the office,nternalcorganisation a nd also our lack ofmeans of investigation. The principaleficiencies are watchers, free-lance officersand people of G.S.0. (1) status who can takeover major problems.Goafrey has produced quite a useful noteabout the sabotage problem. He seems to thinkthat he will need at least two assistantsif the matter is to be tackled thoroughly.JANUARY 14thA message was received during the night to theffect that one Joseph Arthur HILL, aircrafts.man stationed at Henlow,I Beds. had reportedthat he had met a lady in London and returnedwith her to her flat where she had in thecourse of conversation asked him about thelocation of secret aerodromes, for whichinformation she was apparently prepared to payT.-.n. has told me of another case of aprostitute,Stella CLEVELAND, who seems to beintimate with a number of R.A.F.OfficerS.Cases of this sort seem to be on the increaseand suggest that as has been previouslyreported the Germans are getting a lot ofinformation through contacts established wit thofficers. In addition to these two cases wehave the TITFORD case, if this is in fact abona fide one. Some doubts have now beenCatafogue CatarogueReference.KV/49r8s intercepted telephoneconversations is not apparently playing straig166A telegram from Cairo has come in today tosay that on the initiative of the EgyptianGovt. 52 Germans were arrested yesterday(in addition to those already interned) as areprisal for 54 Egyptians interned in Germany.This is undoubtealy the way to deal with thesituation. The total number of Germansinterned in Egypt is now 92.S.I.S. reports show that the Germans areopenly carrying out preparatory measuresBaltic ports for possible action againstScandinavia. The re-constructed SwedishGovt. has undertaken (a) to continue topursue the policy of neutrality and (b) tocease rendering help to Finland should theU.S.S.R. formally declare war. Ribbentropis working for quick isolation - politicaland military - of Sweden and for the detach-ment of Norway. Having one this Germany mayintervene militarily in Sweden. The GermanHigh Command feel that a military decision isbecoming a matter of some urgency as largenumbers of French troops are being relievedthrough the increase of French defences in theWest and will form a formidable fightingforce in the Near East. In German HighCommand circles there is a report of Sovietpreparations for action against Afghanistan.Balbo,Grandi, Ciano ,Badoglio and the Kingare said to form an oppositio against Musso-lini in SO far as his warlike anti-Britishviews are concerned. At a recent meeting of tthe Fascist Grand Council,Musso was stillsayingthatEnglandwasthearch-enemy,butit seems that he had to compromise to someextent as he cannot now sway the FascistCouncil as formerly.Feelers are being put out in Rome towardsCatalegue ReferencerkV/4/185rat Polish-German77peace. Special.Material shows that bothJugo-slavia and Italy are buying aeroplanesfrom this country. Denmark are very nervousabout a German attack on Sweden which.mi mighttake place via Denmark. The F.0. seems tohave made some kind of approach to Norwayabout the possible necessity of occupyingNorwegian ports in case the Russians orGermans attempt to get a footing on thetlantic.JANUARY 15thTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 19582000I showed him the letter about BRUNCK'S wifeopening an account for 15,000 dollars withthe Guaranty Trust in New York. He apparentlyhas good neilatioms with this bank and willmake the necessary approach.Newsam called in today. He has just returnedto H.0. from one of the Regional Commissionersffices. He was. very full of himself and atpresent he is going to take over all mattersof H.O. policy which affect M.I.5. Heseems to have some idea that we were not altoegether satisfied with what the H. O. .were doing,and he probably came dova to find out whatthe trouble was. We left him in no doubtthat the present policy or lack of it wasseriously hampering our work; He tried todefend the Home Secretary by saying that aslong as the war vas in its present state hehad to be answerable to the House in theCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1852ordinary peace-time manner. It was nottherefore possible Lorshim to takecaction.in many cases where we might think it desir-able. I pointed out as politely as I couldthat we were after all in the middle of anextremely serious war and that it was surelyup to the Home Secretary to give the publica lead in these matters and to explain tothem that certain precautions had to betaken in the national interest although tmight be unpleasant for those oncerned.Newsam then said that he had travelled allover his area with a special pass which gavehim access to military information of onekind or another and that he could not see thatthe Germans would benefit in any way from theinformation of which he was now in possession.Harker replied that he could tell him confi-dentially that the Germans had asked forcertain information, that somebody had beensent out to get it as an ordinary citizen, andthat after it had been suitably doctored ithad been passed to the Germans who had paidus handsomely for it.He then said thathe thought it would be extremely difficultfor the Germans to get any information out ofthe country. We told him that there weremany ways, and that perhaps illicit wirelgwas perhaps the most effective. He repliethat the Post Office had been raking theether for years and would be bound to detectanything the kind. I told him that if thePost Office had said anything of the kind theyhad led him very much up the garden, sincethe present position was that nobody could saywith any degree of certainty whatever thatthere were not a large number of activetransmitters in this country and in Eire.I feel that Master Newsam will need enlighten-CatatogueRefeteaceikV48e to be of any use tous.26969A letter has reached us today from Gilfillanstating that the HQ of the IRA in Dublinissued an order on the 8th Jan to its branchesto the effect that from a foreign agency, whichGilfillan believes to be PETERSON of the DNB,they had been informed that a big movementto engage Ireland's enemy was to take placesoon. Intelligence officers were to be warnedto be ready to play their part in operations.We have circulated this to S.B.,S I.S.,H.0and the Fighting Services.A German aeroplane came down in Belgium theother day With certain pap ers found on thepilot indicating projected attack by theGermans on Belgium and Holland. It looksrather as if this may have been part of thescheme for the war of nerves.Metro-Vickers are making two 40-knot destroyerfor the Russians and want another Russianinspector to be allowed in their works.They already have 5. Secret and confidentialwork is going on at Metro-Vickers for theAdmiralty and Air Ministry. We are suggestingto the F.O. that we might well in presentcircumstances get rid of the Russians and takeover the destroyers.Karl Julius DERENBERG , and E. STEINER, bothcategory C. enemy aliens, want to travel onthe continent on business. We have refusedexit permits.Air Ministry Intelligence shows that 77 Russiaraeroplanes surrendered on the Finnish frontand are now being used by the Finns againstthe Russians. It is also stated that 70% ofRussian oil supplies come from Baku, whichis within 350 miles of the Irag frontier.It seems that Russian agriculture is nowveryCatalogue Reference:KV/4/185170much dependent on oil supplies. It followstherefore that Russia through mechanisationhas rendered herself very vulnerable in thisrespect.Archer has raised the question of extending thexisting powers for keeping aliens out ofrestricted occupations to cover firms whichmake machine tools. Reports have come in fromtwo sources indicating the immense amountof knowledge which has to be supplied tosuch firms in the ordinary course of business.JANUARY 16thThe D.O. have now informed us about the lossof Eire bags. Three of these are apparentlymissing, one from the Govt. of Eire to theHigh Commissioner, another from the Govt. ofEire to the D.O. and a third from Sir JohnMaffey to the D.O. I am taking this upand suggesting that we should have an officialcourier otherwise cooperation with Archerwill be a very difficult matter.We had a Board Meeting today. D.D.S. explainedthat the new district tribunals for dealingwith category B.cases were to be linked up withthe projected comb-out Of protected places.He thought this might provide an additionallever for getting enemy aliens ot aliensinterned. I think this all depends on theinstructions tha t the tribunals get from H.O.I raised the question of something in thenature of a joint memo on the position froman M.1.5 point of view after the tribunalshave finished their work. I thought it wasnecessary to send this to the HxO. and copiesto the Fighting Services in order that theymight be fully aware of the risks we wererunning. I also raised the question of gettingCatalogue Reference:KV/4/18527/some minister in the War Cabinet maderesponsible for the activities of M.I.5.I felt that until this was done we could nothope to make very much heaaway.The censorship has now been taken over bythe Ministry of Information but will remainin its present quarters.Maude is investigating the case of one G.METCALFE who is employed by I.C.I. atBillingham. It has transpired that allthe references given by this man were false,and it may well be that METCALFE is not hisname at all. He seems to be an a ble chemist.The motive for his action is not clear.Further enquiries are b eing made. Maude hasseen DOSTCHENKO in prison. He started bydenying that the questionnaire found on himwas in his handwriting or had in fact beenfound on him at all. He eventually brokedown with a smile. He will be deported assoon as suitable occasion arises.A Censorship letter addressed to Bjorn HALL-STROM, 51 Tavistock Square W.C.l. mentionsa Swede Birger DAHLERN who is said to bebringing peace proposals from Goering. Thismay be the mysterious Swede of the early daysof the war.The Ministry of Supply have been pressing foran exit permit for one Leo C.STEINLE, aBritish subject, formerly an American of Ger-man origin, who wishes to go to Holland andarrange for the purchase of machine toolsfrom Germany. STEINLE has rather undesirableNazi connections. We have explained thematter to the Ministry who have withdrawntheir support, rather reluctantly.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/185217JANUARY 17thI spent most of the morning trying to getsomething done about the setting up of anorganisation to deal with codes. V.V. haswritten to say that after a talk with Dennis-ton he gathers that there was a meeting onDec.l8th between representatives of the W.Oand the Censorship at which it was decidedthat this work should be centred in Col.Worledge M.I.8.c. On enquiry there I findthat nothing has been done and that M.I.8.0are rather reluctant to undertake the workwhich they f eel is outside their province.Denniston and C. and C.S. do not want totake it on. De Gras of the Censorshiphappened to be in the office. He knew aboutthe meeting but was very much of our opiniontha the work should be centred in W.I.6who would have the necessary background. TheCensorship would be quite willing to put theirexperts into the pool if an organisation isformed. Personally I think we should do wellto put Maude at the head of this organisatiornot with a view to his solving the codes butmerely in order that we might have someresponsible person to give general directionsand control the staff. I don't think thiswork would hamper his movements if wewant him to act as a free-lance. In themeantime I propose to see D.M.I. in order toclear up the position about M.I.8.c. De Grastells me that three people from the Treasuryhave been looking into the affairs of theCensorship in Liverpool. One of their mainobjects is toprevent the suggested return ofthe main body of the Censorship to London.They are also making suggestions about thedegree to which mails should be censoredand which countries should be affected. DeGras suggested to them that this was aCatalogue Reference:KV/4/185213matter which might very much a ffect theservices concered, .g.M.I.5. and M.E.W.The Treasury rather high-handedly took theview that they were competent to judge inthese matters and they would make theirrecommendations without reference to otherdepartments.Dick White has been looking into the affairsof the Czech Committee run by Sir HenryBunbury. It has been somewhat of a shock toCooper H.O. to learn that both Sir Henry'sprivate secretary and his chief assistant,MrsIvon KAPP, were communists. He is quite surethat Sir Henry is unaware of the situation.Cooper's account of the handling of Czechrefugees since Munich is certainly dis-quieting. From Munich until March, Czechrefugees, mostly from the Sudetenland, werepassed out chiefly through the Prague Insti-tute. They were vetted by the Czech Govt.police but since this organisation wasprobably penetrated by the Gestapo, thosearriving in this country during that periodmay have included some German agents. From15 March to 2lst July, the problem of Czechrefugees was in a chaotic state. To get outit was necessary to have a permit from theGestapo om else escape illegally with falsepapers. The work was done mainly through aMiss Wellington who says she had a friend inthe Gestapo and a Miss Hollingworth, who hadan intimate friendship with the British Vice-Consul in Katowicz. Miss.Hollingworth whosejudgement seems unreliable, is married underanother name and will probable be divorcedby her husband, who will cite the British ViceConsul in Katowicz as co-respondent.From July 21 when the Czech Refugee TrustFundCatalogue Reference:KV/I4/185214in the hands of this body which administeredsome 2-3 million pounds of British Govt.money, and has a fairly ekensive organisationbased on political groups. Dick is going totry ahd interview some of the people connectedwith this Committee.JANUARY 18thapt.Foley, formerly of P.C.0. Berlin andnow P.C.0. Oslo, spoke to me today about avery old friend of his, Gustav SCHNABEE, anAustrian, who is at present working in P.A.WELLING & Co., 7 Union St. E.C.2. Foleytells me that SCHNABEL is a really genuine ref-ugee case and when he came to this countryhe was befriended by Count MONGGELAS, at preseninterned. He feels that he would like towrite to MONICELAS but has not SO far daredto do SO in case he might be compromisinghimself and his family. I told Foley thatthere would be no objection to his writingand that it would not be in any way countedagainst him. Foley then asked me whetherthere would be any possibility for him totravel abroad in connection with his business.I said that this would probably be muchmore difficult as we had f ound it neeessaryto make a rule that enemy aliens shouldnot travel.There has been a disquieting report from SISre Eire. A submarine base is said to atxistnear the mouth of the Doonbeg river in south-west Clare. A submarine comes in 3 times aweek and is camouflaged with a canvas screen.One of the men in charge of the local coastwatching station is said to be an I.R.A.deportee. The local Civic Guard appear tobe terrorised. It was also alleged that aCatatogueReferenfce.Kea4/i8 waylaid in Galway Bay275by a submarine and made to hand over stores.A man called CROWL employed in Plymouth Dock-yard, wrote to Du Vivier giving him certaininformatior regarding damage to H.M.ships.CROWL was interviewed and admitte that hewrote the letter, which originally was foundon Du Vivier's premises when the latter wassearched. It was then enclosed in anenvelope to Raven Thompson. Both CROWL andDU VIVIER are being charged. In the meantime it has been discovered that a manemployed in the Ordnance Survey has beensending mapsatooRaven Thompson.A man called Brommedge in the Censorshiphas been making psychic observations on theUNLAND case. At the moment they are some-what cryptic. It will be interesting to eehow they work out.APTAKER, the Soviet Assistant Air Attachehas asked the firm of Hugh Reece to make himenlargements of photographs of London bridgeswhich appear in an official guide. As nouseful purpose would be served in stoppingthis we have asked Hugh Reece to let us knowof any further developments.German agents are trying to spread the view inHolland and Belgium that if they went throughMaastrecht there would be no need for Hollandto oppose them. This is interestin in viewof what Dick's friend told us at the time ofthe last Dutch crisis.U.35 is in touch with SLAMA, the Czech counterespionage expert over here. S.I.S. who knowmost of these Czechs report favourably on him.They are in fact I think in touch with himthemselves. We shall be working SLAMA onCatalogue Reference:KV/4/185174contre-espionage matters through U.35.Foley of P.C.O.Berin and now of Oslo calledin. He has just built up an organisationin Oslo from almost nothing at all. He con-trols Oslo, Stockholm and Denmark.WEISS has provided a useful note on theAustrian Groups in London. There is theAustrian Office with Count HUYN as chairmanwhich has as its object the rallying ofall parties, but does not include the Catho-lic Party or the Schussnigg movement. Thereis the Committee of Austrian Mgcalistsrun by CZERNETZ, consisting of Social-Demo-crats and Social revolutionaries. Their ideasare pan-Germanist,There is the Group of Soc-ial Democrats run by ALLINA assisted by Dr.Stefan KUTTNER, former secretary of theAustiian-German Volksbund, the SocialistAnschuss oganisation, are now both againstibhe Anschluss and willing to co-operate withnon-Socialists. There is the Austriar Leagueconsisting of the Austrian Legitimists underthe control of Arch-Duke Robert, which is thegroup WEISS-vOn BOSCH represent ing theSchussnigg Movement in the Catholic Party.There is the Austrian Centre under Dr.HERz,the real leaders being the CommunistsHORNIK and Miss KOLLMER. There is theAustrian Informatio at St.Stephan's Housedirected by Count STRACHWITZ, and lastly theUnion of Austrian Jouraalists under WilliMEISEL.Some time ago Waldron Smithers sponsored thecase of a Hungarian, Istvan KANITZ who had aspecial process of micro-photography. Stronglyagainst our recommendation and strange to sayalso that of the Aliens Branch, this man wasallowed to establish himself here in business.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/185277He talked a lot about employing British subjecbut he has employed none and now asks thatanother Hungarian, Feodora SOSS, may join him.I spoke to Dixon about the Eire bags andsuggested that we should have a specialcourier in future in view of the extremelydelicate nature of our correspondence withArcher. He said that he would look into thematter, and let me know.JANUarylgthThe Waltham Abbey Explosion is beinginvestigated. We had previously beenmaking enquiries about match-heaas whichhad been found in the cordite and the CIDunder Chief-Inspector Salisbury wereactually working on the case when theexplosion occurred. It is not possibleto say whether it is due to sabotage ornot but thereare certainly grounds forsuspeeting something of the kind. Later.enquiries indicate however that the coldweather may perhaps have been the cause.According to a press report Jean BirgenEssen DAHLERUS, a Swede, has arrived hereon a peace mission from Goering. Thisseems to be the same Swede previouslyreported on.I attended a meeting today to discussways and means of improving the work of theregistry. A number of minor suggestionswere agreed to. Our policy is mainlydirected towards splitting up files asfar as possible. A system has been startedby which B.M.S are formed on a particularline of policy and inserted in the mainCatalogue Reference:KV/4/185policy file as one exhibit. The idea is tokeep the information together on one particula:subject and not have it running through manyvolumes.I hear that a number of M.P.S have sent aprotest in to the Home Secretary regardingthe failure of the Govt. to intern more enemyaliens.Special Material has now been extended tocover the Papal Nuncio. It seems that hehas been visited by the musterious St.ClairGRONDONA who has been making the rounds ofnuetral Embassies on what he describes as asemi-diplomatic mission.JANUARY 20thKREVITSKY @ Walter THOMAS has arrived completewith lu gage all labelled Walter Thomas.He was met by Alley and a friend of his who isgoing to look after him. He was a littlesurprised and even suspicious to find twopeople speaking such good Russian. He himselfspeaks broken English and equally brokenFrench and German. He has been given a suiteat the Langham and seems quite happy. Alleyhad tea with him and owing to the lack ofsugar offered him a saccharine tablet. Hesheered right off this, obviously thinkingthat it was either dope or poison. He isabout 5'4", dark hair brushed back, Jewishnose, and the most piercing narrow blue eyesimaginable. NO business is being discussedbefore Tuesday but there are indications thathe has much of interest to tell us, probably ata price as he has very little in the way ofmoney except what he has got for his articlesand publications in the U.S.A.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/185279The French are worried about "The Week" whichhas published a very offensive article onthe French Govt. It is being explained tothem verbally that the view here is that itmight be a mistake to go for the Communistwhile they are losing ground over the Soviet-Finnish situation. They are to be told how-ever that if they do not wish The Weeks tobe exported to Franee it can always be arran-ged.Somebody in S.I.S. has suggested that contr-espionage is not really their affair and thatin war-time M.I.5 should take it over entirelyV.V. and I imagine most sensible people inS.I.S. take an entirely contrary view sinceS.I.S. are vitally concerned in preventing thepenetration of their organisation. We havereplied that we have always regarded M.I.5.as a kind of counter-part of S.I.S. in thiscountry and that it would be little short ofmadness for us to attempt to super-impose a C.E. or anisation abroad on top of the existingS.I.S. service.T do such a thing in time ofwar is quite unthinkable.There has been a bad slip-up in the Snow case.Some time ago Jock White wrote to S.I.S. askinthem to make some enquiry about Editha DARGLEin Copenhagen. The Danish police blundered inand asked her whether she knew a Mrs .KRAFT,hence a letter from Editha Dargle to Krafttelling her not to correspond in future andand a wireless communication to Snow tht hisfriends are closing down for the time being.JANUARY 22ndMenzies tells me that Halifax has been askedto see Lord Darnley and the Marquid of Tavis-Catalogue Reference:KV/4/185tock regarding certain peace proposals. Igather that there have been 6 or 7 approachesof this kind. It indicates that the Germansare feeling about but at present their termsaree quite impossible. It seems also thatthese overtures may be a part of what theGermans call Zermurbungstaktik, the generalpurpose of which is to keep this country offthe boil. Tavistock is of course connectedwith the British Council for ChristianSettlement in Europe which is a mixture ofthe Link,Nordic League and B.U.F. and amost mischievous body.Our papers are publishing a number of photo-graphs allegedto have been taken by the Ger-man air force during their various visits tothis country. They give descriptive details.It has occurred to me that it may be well tomake quite sure that these photographs werein fact taken by the Germans. It would bequite possible for some agent to representthem as such and to superimpose the variousmarkings with a view to the informationgetting back to the enemy. I have askedArcher to go into this.The Daily Telegraph have notified us about ahouse advertisement which in its concludingline contained information about theItalian vessel Orazia which was on firein the Medi diterranean. Enquiries are beingmade as to how this extra line got in.Hordern C.C.Lanes called in today. He wasworried about the position of the F.S.P. andthe S.C.0. in his area. Certain minordifficulties had arisen which, had been quiteeasily smoothed out but the Regional HighCommissioner ,Warren Fisher, was now takinga very high handed line and threatening tohave the F.S.P. cleared out of the variousCatalogue Reference:KV/4/185ports if there was any further trouble. Thereis tobe a meeting on the subject which willbe attended by Adam. Hordern will give usall the support we need.I had a long talk with Col.Worledge and alsowith ol.Butler about codes. The matter hadbeen put up to the D.M.I. who had giveninstructions that M.C.3.was to be responsible.I explained to ol.Butler that this might notbe very satisfactory since M.0.3. would now beunder the Ministry of Information. It wasmoreoever essential that any organisationdealing with these matters should be situatedeither in or in close proximity to M.I.5 whocould give the necessary background. Col.Butler agreed and said that he would put thematter up to the D.M.I. a gain. I fear thatit may be some time before we get this organ-isation going. I feel the want of it veryacutely at the moment as Miss Dew has broughtme an anormous bundle of intercepts containingan obvious code and relating to a man calledSCHUTZ.Stopford has been working on a rather curiousDutch case. A man called STRAATMAN came overhere some time ago with credentials as aD purchasing agent for the Dutch Govt. TheCensorship picked up a letter that he haswritten to his employers about a curiousapproach which had been made to him hereby a man called JACOBS, who had offered himmoney for certain information relating toarmaments. STRAATMAN has been interviewec andgave us a minute description of JACOBS whowas staying at some hotel at Kettering. Itis not clear at the moment whether STRAATMANis phoney or JACOBS is phoney or whether theyare both phoney.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/185We are threatened with a large influx ofBelgian and Dutch refugees in the event ofinvasion. The only precaution we can takeis to arrange for representatives of theDutch and Belgian police to come over hereand help us in sorting these people out.They will doubtless be riddled with Gestapoagents.JANUARY 23rdAn article has appeared in the Telegraphdeprecating the Govt.' policy on failingto intern more enemy aliens. It might al-most be written by somebody in this officebut as far as I can make out it wasn't.Norman Birkett has written a long apologiafor his work on the Advisory Committee. Headmits that he has disagreed with M.I.5.about the members of the D.A.F. and N.S.D.A.pand then proceeds to give an entirelymisleading picture about both organisations.We cannot let this memo pass and are concoct-ing a reply.Maude has solved the Metcalfe mysterythrough a personal interview. Metcalfe wastryung to hide in order to avoid a maintainance order which had been out against himfor some time.Some days ago a number of Nazi interneestried to burrow out of nLingfield camp. Theyhad succeeded in getting a certain distancewhen they were discovered. As a punishmentthey were put into some loose-boxes with acouple of rugs. The loose-boxes were laterburnt down. There are strong grounds forthinking that the maps and compases whichwere in the possession of the Nazis wereconcealed in a large hamper received fromCatalogue Reference:KV/4/185783theGerman Hospital Incidentally the GermanHospital since the return of BODE has becomea ittle piece of Nazi Germany in the middleof, London. People are reported to be givingthe Nazi salute in the passages.I saw Leonard Ingrams the other night. Hewas much impressed by the fact that nearlyevery German he interviewed as a possibleagent or propagandist has completely sheeredpff whenever he was asked to do anythingagainst Germany. Ingrams has had forced uponhim r.WIESNER, whom we know as a Left Wingerwho sent an ambulance to Spain. Ingramsdoes not like his rahter blackmailing tactids.We are putting him on telephone check.In his report to D.M.I. on the work of M.I.5Allen asks the question "How is the voice ofSec urity to make itself felt in the WarCabinet?". He then suggests that the SecurityCommittee, perhaps under the I.C.,reportingdirect to the C.I.D. might perhaps providethe answer. If and when formed, he thinksit should include representatives of the,Service Depts, Security Service and M.I.6JANUARY 24thI was out till 4.30 p.m. looking after Peter.On return I heard that a question had beenput down asking the Home Secretary whetherany representations had been made by theIntelligence Depts. of the Services to theeffect that they were not satisfied with thework of the Tribunals. D.S.S. and D.D.S. hadbeen up to see Newsam who had originallywished to say that we were satisfied and thatthe instructions to the tribunals had beensent out in a greement with outselves. D.S.S.refused to acquiesce in this. Newsam thenCatalogue Reference:KV/4/185suggested "in consultation" wit. OU: selves.D.S.S. again objected and suggested "afterconsultation" with ourselves. I am afraidthat the general effect of this question andanswer will be to give the public the impres-sion tha t the Security Service is satisfiedwith the position.Applications for expor permits have beenreceived from C.COCKBURN, Ivor MONTAGUE andT.B.S.HALDANE. We are suggesting that per.mits to COCKBURN and MONTAGUE should berefused and that as regards HALDANI whoapparently only wants to lecture at someUniversity we should let the Dutch have anyinformation in our possession through S.I.S.I ha a talk with B.3 regarding mysteriouslights. Apparently this scare has more orless died down. Local investigations have notled to any serious cases being reported to us.Maude is taking steps to prepare the necessarydocuments for the internment of RIZZA under18b.Dick's friend is going over to Belgium withU.35. She will be armed with some caref illydoctored information.JANUARY 25thIn the House today Thurtle asked the HomeSecretary what representations he had receivedfror the Police, Naval and Military Intelli-gence Departments regarding the number andcharacter of enemy aliens whoyhad been grantedexemption from internment by the Tribunals setup for the purpose of considering such cases,and what action had been taken thereon. SirJohn Anderson replied as follows:Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1852"When these tribunals were appointed, amemorandum was issued to them by the HomeOffice giving advice and guidance as to theprinciples which they should follow in theexamination of the cases of Germans andAustrians brought before them. Thismemorandum was drawn up after consultationwith representatives of the police and ofthe Service Intelligence Departments, and Ihave no reason to doubt that, generallyspeaking, the tribunals have given effectto the principles recommended by the HomeOffice when deciding whether or not togrant exemption from internment. But thedecisions of the tribunals are not irrevoe-able, and in any case where the police orService Intelligence Department can give meinformation which suggests that a caserequires further consideration, the decisionof the tribunal is reviewed in the licht ofsuch information. It is equally open toreview on representations by or on behalfof the alien concerned. I am not in aposition to say how many representations havbeen made to me without an examination ofeach individual file, but any suggestion thaa decision given by a tribunal precludesthe Home Office from taking appropriateaction on information subsequently broughtto notice is entirely mistaken. In additionas I stated in reply to a Question by thehon.member for Wolverhampton East (Mr.Mander) on 17th January I am at presentconsidering a scheme for a further review ofthe eases of enemy aliens whom the tribunalshave exempted from internment but have notexempted from the special restrictionsapplicable to enemy aliens."Conscientious objection has been allowedto go rather far. Advice bureaux and evenCatalogue Reference:KV/4/185285mock tribunals for rehearsing objectorsin the presentation of their cases are established in many parts of the country. Theseare organised by such bodies as the P.P.U, &cthe No Conscriptio League as well as theSociety of Friends.sen27Walter THOMAS has told us the history ofthe OLDHAM case. OLDHAM was employed as acypher clerk in the F.0. and committedsuicide few years ago. It appears thathe approached the Sov. Embassy in Pariswho thought he was an agent provocateurand turned him down. Later OLDHAM, who wasa heavy drinker and in financial ifficultiewent over to Paris and offered actualinformation regarding cyphers ete. Afterchecking the accuracy of these documentsOLDHAM was taken on and was the fore-runnerof KING.JANUARY 26thLeft at mid-day with flu.JANUARY 27th-28thAway.JANUARY 29thS.I.S. material: There are indicationsof a possible break between the U.S.A. andU.S.S.R. over Sweden. It is said that theUSA have withdrawn their experts fromUSSR and in particular from the oil indastry.This may lead to a serious dislocation, eventhough Germans are coming in to take theirplaces. The Swedes are giving considerablyin personnel and equipment to the Finns.Wyjnkeep, the Dutch Communist M.P who hasCatalogue been active eference.kisgisstionary movements forTHiSIsACOpy ThisORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINE DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONACT 3 (4 OF 1958. THE UBEU CROCORDS186the last 20 years; has asked the appropriateminister in the Dutch Parliament whether itis true that a centre of British Intelligencfor Western Europe had been established atthe Hague. This is I think of interest asa possible connection or collusion betweethe German and Russian Intelligence ServicesThe Americans have written to us about thecase of Henri KENNIS. So far their enquiriesave not produced anything of interest.They are worried however becausehasbeen making enquiries independently of thepolice. This has upset Dunn of the StateDept. I have informed S.I.S. and suggestedthat it might be for consideration whetherwe or they should not have a representa-tive in Washington, who could be in closetouch with Dunn.The Govt.s policy of allowing holiday travelto France has raised a number of problems.They propose to limit the passports to Franoonly and to instruct consuls not to grantany extention of the passport withoutreference. We have written to S I S. andto the F.O. suggesting that they shouldascertain from the French what steps theyan take in order to prevent British subjectleaving France and communicating with theenemy. We have also asked that we may beinformed of the significance of a Frenchexit permit and suggested that the Frenchguarantee be told that of our the holder's exit permit boha carries fides. no Inthe meantime we are preparing something inthe nature of a black list for Commnunists,members of the BUF etc. for circulation toPassport and Permit Office.Catalogue Reference:kVi4/:28The TITFORD case is still going on. Theremay be something in it but personally I amdoubtful.Pressed by the First Lord of the AdmiraltyH.0. have made a rush decision to internMARKMANN, his brother, and two sisters.This has been done. Nothing of great intereest was found beyond a German militarymanual in which was enclosed a map ofAldershot.We have had a report that on the 16th Jan.at 4.50 p.m. a man descended by parachutein the neighbourhood of Sittingbourne Kent4 or 5 persons are prepared to say: that theyactually saw the parachute and the incidentmay be confirmed by the fact that a soundplo t was traced in that vicinity at thattime. The R.A.F. say that they have doneno parachuteedescents in that area.Enquiries are being made. Another similarincident is said to have taken place on thel1th Jan. at Admiral Wood, Bickner, nearMaidstone.On Jan.26th th J.Henderson, Socilaist, askedthe Home Secretary whether he proposed toput Miss Unity MITFORD into a home orhospital under supervision until she wasufficiently recovered in health for deten-tion under the provisions of D.R.18b,havingregard to her recent hostile associations.Sir John Anderson replied "In the exerciseof the powers conferred on me by thisregulation to order the detention of personswho have hostile associations it is my dutyparticular to consider case, whether, detention on the is facts necessary of each inthe interests of the Defence of the Realm.Catalogue RReferertce:k/4/185 for me to state inaavance whether or not it may become288necessary to take any such action in res-pect to any particular individual."Air Ministry Intelligence states that if theAmerican experts leave the U.S.S.R. theoil refinery plans will be ruined by Sovietengineers. They do not think that thepresence of German specialists will save thesituation owing to their unfamiliarity withthe plant combined with the obstinacy andconceit of Soviet technicians. Air Ministryestimate that the existing Soviet productioncapacity of high grade petrol will beseriously over-strained. There is alreadya shortage of petrol on the Finnish front.Russian imports of U.S.oil fuel at Vladi-vostock have been stopped by U.S.A. sincethe outbreak of the war on Finland, but itis uncertain whether the deficiency ofsupplies to the Russian army on the Finnishfront is due to national shortage or thebreakdown of transport. During the periodlst Dec.-25th Dec. pilots of the FinnishDXX1 Fokker Fighters shot down 56 Sovietplanes without any losses to themselves.I saw Ned Reid about BRUNCK, who accordingto Padgham has been paying Schultzer-Bernettthe head of the Cerman S.S. in Holland.Ned said that he had known BRUNCK since 1926and was on very intimate terms with him,although he did not have a very good opinionof his bona fides. He first met him whenstudying banking in Hamburg. After therevolution BRUNCK formed a company calledthe - Finanz Komptor in Berlin, which Nedfound to be a mushroom concern. This puz-zled him since it was cleary that BRUNCKwas disbursing large sums of money. Oneday in his cups BRUNCK disclosed by hintshere and there that he was working for theGerman Govt. and it seemed clear to Ned thatCatalogue Reference:KV/4/18528he was financing Deutschtum im Ausland inRoumania,Danzig Schleswig ete. Hisconnection with the Govt. was Confirmed bya conversation by Ned with the ReichskreditGesellschaft where a friend of his toldhim that a mutuEl acquaintance BRUNCK hadjust been calling upon him. A short timebefore the war BRUNCK established a firmat the Hague called Hollendische Buitenlandand asked Baring Bros. to take some sharein the business. The deal was complicatby a suggestion that Barings should betrustees for some unspecified people whoseidentity BRUNCK would not disclose. Baringsconsequently turned down the business. Never-theless BRUNCK opened an account for hiscompany with Baring Bros, details of whichI have to obtain. It would be exteemelyamusing if Barings were paying all theGerman agents in this country.BRUNCK married a nurse from the LondonHospital who looked after him when he wasill. She is of Irish extraction, but moreCockney than anything else. I ampro-posing to leave her $45,000 account withthe Guaranty Trust in New York alone forthe moment, until we see what Barings canproduce.JANUARY 30thSneath had a meeting with MOSLEY on the24th when he visited BUF HQ. to obtain theletter from DUVIVIER to Raven THOMPSON.Sneath was accompanied by an officer of SB.MOSEEY himself bas standing in front of hisdesk and did not seer at aly surprised atthe visit from the Police. He adopted atonce at attitude of extreme affability anddisarming frankness. It seemed clear toCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1852910Sneath that he was anxious to show that thegreat Fuehrer was as much at his ease With3 slow-witted policemen as with kings andpresidents. He expended all his charm andexplained that he had long been awaitingthe opportunity of talking to the authorit-ies. He could not understand why theyshould pursue a hole and corner methodrather than a straight-forward man to mantalk which would clear everything up.OHe had always been expecting the police totap his telephone and read his letters butapparently they had not done SO. He wasonly too anxious to give any informationabout BUF finances, which involved anexpenditure of about 8,000 a year. Thisincluded the cost of maintaining NHQ and asmall subsidy paid to Action which was nowfortunately almost self-supporting. Asregards the money paid to MrS.ELAM he hadnothing to be ashamed of and nothing toconceal. There might have been an air raid.His headquarters might have been smashed bya mob and he himself was expecting to beassassinated. He had in fact taken certainprecautions. It was necessary therefore todispurse the funds in case anything shouldhapben to headquarters or the leaders.Inspector Bridges then interposed "Well,Sir Oswald, as 8 matter BE fact, we havenot come about this money". Sir 0. did notlose his composure at all. "Ah" he said"I know, I know. The Elams were friends ofyoung Edward WHINFIELD, I hear that hehas been detained." His face wore for amoment a look of sadness, for the leaderis not indifferent to the misfortunes ofeven the least of his followers. He thenwent on to say that WHINFIELD had been oneof his parliamentary candidates and thathe had disapproved of his gadding about theCatalogue Reference:KVI4/185continent instead of concentrating on hiswork in England. he would however be verysurprised to hear that WHINFIELD had beenworking for the Germans. Mrs. WHINFIELDhad also behaved indiscreetly and was in faca very foolish woman. As regards r.KRUGER,Mosley had met him at the Elams. He had metotheres there, such as HORNING and LordCOTTENHAM. r.KRUGER had written a bookabout Jews and was an able research workeand not at all the kind of person whoNould act as an egent. Inspector Bridgesagain intervened to say that he had in f actcome as he wished to see a certain document.Sir 0.' composure was in no way shaken."Oh, please - you can see any document youwish", he said. The file was sent for,and in the meantime the leader gave the ass-embled company a lecture on the foreignpolicy of the BUF. Not however in the styleof his public speeches but as one Englishmanto another. He seemed to sense the questionwhich was in the minds of his audience. "I donot want the Germans to win," he said,' Iwant peace now, before England has beenreduced to a dung heap. After the oliticansreduce England and the British Empire to adung heap, they are not going to get me totake over then. I shall retire frompolitical life".Among other things Mosley said he thoughtGermany could withstana a blockade for atleast 7 years, and that there was no possi-bility of internal upheaval since the Gestapcwas the finest secret police te the worldhad ever seen. He did not think Hitlerwanted to smash the British Empire. He hadpersonal contact with him on 2 occasions andboth he and his wife were convinced thatCatalogue Reference:KVI4/185Kitler did not want to harm England in anyway.The Duvivier file was then produced andcontained the required letter among othercorrespondence of a harmless nature. It didhowever contain correspondence which made itclear that certain members of the BUF hadan almost unbalanced admiration for every-thing Cerman. The leader was asked whetherhe approved of this. He said he quiterealised it and it was a great worry to him.In f act he could produce a list of people hehad expelled because of their pro-Germansentiments. He admitted that an enemy agentwould find a pro-Nazi member of the BUF agood cover for his activities. As regardspeace movements he said he was willing tosupport any peace movement led by sincerepeople whom he could respect. He wouldhave nothing to do with communists. Onthe British Council for Christian Settlementin Europe he said he thought Tavistock wasa good fellow but he would have nothing todo with BECKETT who was a crook. He did notthink that the latter would work for Germany.Mosley was still in touch with GordonCANNING but did not hear much of him. Whenthe party left the leader's presence theyhad the impression that he was convincedhe had made a profound impression on them.He struck Sneath as immensely vain, a badjudge of men and extremely urbane andcunning, and entirely lacking in sincerity.His chief handicap is probably his excessivevanity which must make it difficult for himto take an objective view of any situation.Francis HAWKINS is obviously a completenonentity, very timid and lacking in intelligence, and Raven THOMPSON, who flitted in foa few moments, looked less stupid but ratherCatalogue Reference:KV/4/18593The general impression of the offices wasthat there was not much going on. The visitof the police had obviously been longexpected and probably any compromisingdocuments had been disposed of.Duvivier and Crowle have both been given6 months hard labour.There was a board meeting today when I raisetthe question of codes and also of travelto France.I spent 3 hours with Walter THOMAS andfound him most interesting. He eyed mevery carefully when I went in and was evi-dently wondering whether he had seen mebefore. I did not attempt to deal withcurrent subjects, but went right back toSidney St. and the early days of the expro-priators. He had heard something about allthis but evidently did not know that thebank robberies etc. had been organised bythe Party, neither did ne know that Krassinhad had anything to do with this organisa-tion. It was a great shock to him when Itold him that Krassin was corrupt. Hesaid "You see, I have been driving in onedirection for the past 20 years. I havereceived a good many shocks and am tryinto get my bearings again. what you tell m3about Krassin is a great help".I asked him about Krassin's part in gettingLenin and Trotsky back to Russia in a sealedtrain. He said that he had never heard ofKrassin in this connection. He had alwaysunderstood that Kanetzky, Furstenberg,Bronskarshavsky,Vorovsky and Koslovsky were theprincipal people concerned. He had neverheard of the Frumkin brothers,Jacob andCatalogue Michael ReferenCe:KV/4/185 in this or in fact in24any connection. He confirmed my views aboutthe functions of the Russian C.P.cell, whichto some extent varied according to the sta-tus of its members. Since the late 20'sthe cell had had nothing to do with internalpolitieslin this country but was merelyooncerned with Russian Party matters. Asregards White Russians he knew nothing aboutany individuals here but was.quite certainthat Russia was making excessive use ofWhite Russians and would continue to do SOsince they would now be more likely tofall in with Soviet imperialist policy.The Society of Old Bolsheviks founded in1921 by Lenin had never had any executivefunctions or any very great influence on thecourse of events. In explanation of theSoviet-German pact he said that the VNOor Military Scientific Society had decidedthat the Germans would be ready to fightin 1939, and that ultimately they wouldfightnGt.Britain. Stalin was convinced thatthe British Empire was on the downgrade andnearing its end and had no conception what-ever of western mentality. He thereforepreferred to throw in his lot with theGermans.OCommenting on Hyde Park meetings, he said thbhat quite a lot was known about thesemeetings in Russia, but that a completelydistorted view prevailed. They were lookedon as backed by the British bourgeoisieand controlled by the BritishOGPU. The sameview was taken of the Trade Unions.Before leaving I tried to explain to THOMASsomething about our institutions here, andexpressed the view that perhaps all partiespeformed a useful function. I learnedafterwards from Jane that he found theCatalogue Reference:KV/4/185discussion interesting but thought L waswrong.Archer has had a long interview with HanaleyPage who wants LACHMANN to go on withdesigning of a tailless aeroplane at hisinternment camp. Handley Page admittedthat LACHMANN. still had feelings for hisnative country. It was agreed thatLACHMANN should have his papers but thatnothing could pass between him andHandley Page without Air Ministry super-vision.TANUARY 31stGordon CANNING has applied for an exit per-mit. He was turhed down and has returned tothe charge on the grounds that he wishesto accompany his ailing wife to the southof France. The matter has been referred tothe Home Office.A Dane named Thorbjorn MOLLER, a teacher ofreligion, has applied to go to Eire to studyaspects of Irish Catholic life. We do notaltogether like the look of this applicantand are making enquiries.Halifax has written a very strong letterthe Treasury regarding F.O. ComunicationsBranches at home and abroad. It has evident-ly been realised at last that they are inserious need of a thorough overhaul and thata good deal of money will be required ifour eyphering arrangeents are to be in anydegree secure. From what I hear from ArthurPollen, the Treasury's charity might wellbegin at home.I discussed with Turner today the cuestion ofCatalogue Reference:KV/4/18529kCategory C. and the possibilities of gettingenemy aliens SO classified sorted out. Itoccurred to me that possibly C.4 who aredealing with the restricted occupationsmight be able to help us. On eno iry thereI found that they had definitely turnedabout 50 out of 800 or 900. These 50 aremostly enemy aliens and might perhaps forma category for internment if the war devel-ops. This section either turn down a manfor good and all in which case his registra-tion certificate is stamped to that effect,or they turn him down for a particularjob in which case his certificate is leftblank and it is open to him to apply againfor work with another firm, which may beengaged on less confidential work. It seemsthat there are a considerable number of enemaliens (several thousand who have never putin an appearance before thetribunals. Ihave suggested to Turner that when theseare rounded up they should go before theRevision Tribunals and not before theAdvisory Committee, as has been suggested.C.4. have obtained an analysis of the workof the tribunals f rom the German RefugeeCommittee. This shows how each chairmanhas worked and makes it very clear thatthe sorting asfar as B. and. are concernedis quite valueless. Some chairmen startedOff by putting everybody in B. and afterthe first few weeks putting them all intoC. The Refugee Committee report was com-piled really with a view to seeing thatJewish interests were safeguarded. Thereport shows the degree of attention paidby chairmen to information supplied byBloomsbury House.Gilfillan came over today. We had adiscussion with V V. Cecil and Harry.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/185291Gilfillan was told about the suggestedappointment of Hill Dillon as liaisonofficer with N.Ireland Command. Nobodyseems very clear as to what he was going todo but it was generally agreed that on noaccount should he be allowed to dabble in,Irish affairs or run agents into S.Ireland.As regards Bowly,Gilfillan seemed to g et onwith him quite well but thought it would bea good thing if he could be given a hint notto deal with subordinates. Trouble inthis connection had arisen over the caseof Stephenson.Numerous cases including UNLAND, UNLAND,P.KILSB KILSBY andFLUKE were discussed in detail, and we didour best to put Gilfillan somewhat in thepicture. I asked him if it were possibleto pin down issagent to more definite state-ments and to give us more of the backgroundof the reports which he supplied. He didnot seem to think that this would be veryeasy. The fact is that he has what wouldappear to be a good informant but that bythe time the information has been trans-mitted through various Irish intermediarieswho do not even know what a German nameshould sound like, it is very difficult toget hold of anything to work on.FEBRUARY lstNewsam spoke to me about the case OfHUBSCH-MANN, a German so-called refugee photograph-er employed by Picture Post. This man hadbeen before the tribunal and had been placedunder restrictions which prevented him fromusing his camera. Endless letters had beensent in by influential people, saying thatthis man had been deprived of his lielihoodCatalogue Reference:KVI4/1852i&We had as a concession recommended that he imight be allowed to use a studio C ameraindoors. The facts are that British subjeetscome to Picture Post with suggestions forserial photograph and are turned down. Afew weeks later their idea is taken up byHUBSCHMANN or by one of the other alienssurrounding Stefan LORANT. HUBSCHMANN istherefore taking the bread out of the mouthsof British subjects. Further it seems quiteO fantastic that an enemy alien and expertphotographer should b e allowed to travel abouthis country without restriction. I have putboth these points to Newsam who said he wouldput the case up to Peake but tha t he thoughtthat our opposition could not be upheld inview of the numerous representations.LANGENBERG, the German agent in the Nether-lands Hast Indies who came to notice ometime ago, has been arrested by the DutchAuthorities and also his secretary MIA.LANGENBERG'S real name is May AUGNER. Quitea lot of information was obtained about hisactivities, which is being forwarded to us indue course. The Dutch have expelled him buthave permitted him to travel on a Japaneseboat. The boat on which he is proceeding toJapan is known but in view of the Asama Maruincident the Navy have been told to look theother way.The D.M I. has taken note of Allan's reportindicating that we are not satisfied withthe aliens position and has intimated that hewill give us any support we want through theC.I.G.S.Claud COCKBURN has been turned down for anexit permit to Finland. Dupreas of the PressDept.F.0. had written to RUST of the DailyCatalogue Reference:KVI4/185Worker saying that he had given COCKBURN apersonal recommendation to Godwin of thePassport Office. Actually at the same timehe had warned the Finns not to give COCKBURNa visa. This was reported to Maxwell whowas highly incensed and got into touch withCadogan The latter was hopping mad, andDupreer duly received his raspberry. D.S.S.states that be has been agreed between Maxwel]and Cadogan that the practice of grantingexit permits and then suggesting to foreiegovernments that they should refuse visasshould cease, and that we must stand on ourown bottoms in future!A Moslem reporting on the Congress IndianDay meeting at Kingsway Hall says "The pro-ceedings began with what was called an Indiansong, sung by a number of enthusiastic youthsall out of tune. It was therefore rather anunkind remark which fell from the Chair, tothe effect that it wa's a musical expressionof India's aspirations."With regard to the loss of Eire mails, Dixonnow writes that the bags for the D.0. haveturned up. The delay is due to the fact thatfor some unexplained reason they had been toNew York and back. Enquiries are being madeand the question of a courier is beingconsidered.I had a meeting with Cen.Franch today aboutcodes. He now inclines to the view thatperhaps a coding section would be betterplaced in M.I.5. He anticipates difficultiesin this matter from Worthington, but saidrather pointedly that if it w&s the best solu-tion Worthington would be over-ruled. Thereis to be a further discussion.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/185THIS IS ACOPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDFEBRUARY 2ndIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONACT 19583 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSFurther information has been received aboutGordon CANNING, which indicates that inaddition to taking his ailing wife to theRiviera he intends to meet a man calledBARNES, who is also concerned in peace move-ments,or the Italian Riviera. We havepassed this information to H.O. who hadided to let CANNING go on compassionategrounds.There is to be an International Force whichis to proceed to Finland. We have asked subrosa to vet British subjects. Officiallywe are proceeding with a Non-Interventionpolicy in Finland.An elderly statesman with gout,When asked what the war was about,In a written replySaid "My colleagues and IAre doing our best to find out. 11utisK]Walter THOMAS is coming out of his shell,and has told us quite a lot. He has as faras possible given us a detailed picture ofthe 4th Dept. and the OGPU. He obviouslyas a consience. He is quite ready to talkabout representatives of the OGPU or indivi-duals that he was up against, but he is re-luctant to disclose his own 4th Dept. agentsunless we can show him that we already knowsomething about them.I have put forward suggestions' that theRevision Tribunals should deal not only withCategory B. but with non-refugees in Cat.(and also with so-called stateless aliens.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/18530I have further recommended that properstenographic minutes should be taken, thatwe should if necessary be represented, andthat our instructions to tribunals shouldbe accepted.Newsam seems to think that ouicannot askan enemy alien whether he is prepared tosupport the British cause any more than you camake such a request to a neutral. This seemsto me to show a complete misconceptionalethe position. In the one case we are deaingwith enemy aliens and in the other with neuterals.Passport Control New York, has blottedhis copybook by making enquiries about HenriKENNIS direct with the police authorities.I have written to V.V. about this, suggestingas a possible way out bisour difficultieswith Dunn of the State Dept. tht we shouldappoint somebody either from his office orours to reside in Washington and carry outa direct liaison with Dunn.Paul CHOURUPINE has been a rrested by theGreeks and found to be in possession. of adocument in German outlining plans to dis-credit British currency in the Nearand Middle East and S.America.Ivor MONTAGU has been turned down for anexit permit.H.O. reports dated 27th Jan. show that 540enemy aliens have been interned by thetribunals.Air Ministry Intelligence indicates thatthe French experimental station have testedatalogretrererence.ka4risseh contains an 1100.p.engine. The speed is 354 m.p.h. asTHIS IS A COPYOFIGINVAL DOOUMHEIT TAVEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION0ROF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958estimated by the Al Ministry but theclimb is not SO good as was thought.FEBRUARY 3rdSpoke D.D.S. re proposals that 40 Germansshould be allowed to return without beingisolated. He takes the view that thesepeople must go back in batches on a recip-local basis. I also discussed with himAe Revision Tribunals. He told me thatthe Admiralty had originally said that theyshould be the judges of who was to be allowedto reside in protected a reas affecting theNavy. It was eventually arranged that theyshould have a representative on the tribunaland that the W.0. should do the same if theySO desired.The Canadians have telegraphed to say thatSIS agents in Japan who are being worked fromVancouver are blown on and regarded by theJaps as drug traffickers. It is lucky thatwe told the Canadians about these peopleotherwise we should not have got thisinformation.I have been looking uD our file for ENGEL7PERG of the German Consulate in New York whoIS murdered the other day. He was here in1933 and told us that he used to report onthe political reliability of people in theEmbassy. He then went to Italy and later toAustria where he was doing the same kind ofthing. He had very high connections in theParty. I passed this information to theAmericans, and have suggested to B.2 thatthey should carr out further investigationsinto ENGELBERG'S former contacts here.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/185302<R(VI7S(JWalter THOMAS tells us that some years ago thJesuits made a very determined effort topenetrate Russia. THONAS himself interviewedthese people whom he described as extremelytough. Their proposal was that they shouldbe given a free hand to nobble the OrthodoxChurch and that in the exhcnage they wouldsupply the 4th Dept. with information aboutounter-revolutionary activities. Theyworked for 2 years and then Stalin kickedthem out. I am going to get furtherdetails about the matter at my next inter-view with THOMAS.says that the Italian Consul atMalta has just returned from Rome. Hesays that Italy cannot make war owing tolack of essential materials. The Air Forceneeds re-equipping, the anti-tank guns havenot been perfected, the army needs completereorganisation and the ministers are atlogger-heads. Efforts are being made towardstrade expansion and everyone wants peace.FEBRUARY 4thTravel abroad fluctuates at about 3350 and10,861(Xmas) The average daily trafficis about 6,720.Stafford has put up a long memo stating thepresent position with regard to travel and 21making various suggestions. I have made outa note giving our views and criticisms onthereport and Adam has dictated 3 generalnote on travel policy.A Treasury Committee called the StephensonCommittee has been examining the work of theCensorship. They have made a report to theCafalogue Reference V44/18r "admittedly moreamportance lS attached to work for M.E.W.304than for the Security Service". A meetinghas been called to discuss this report.Although M.E.W. may be more important thanin the last war it does not follow thatsecurity is less important. Further, thatthe censorship have only been dealing withabout 10-15% of correspondence to certainspecified countries, which may account forthe rather indifferent results. Their workas regards letters has amounted to littlemore than a lucky dip."Snow" has offered some information to theGermans and has been asked to go over toAntwerp.Miss Bagot has had a traffic index returnshowing a man's age as 517. He has a smallson aged 6. His name is Moses. (?Methusalah?)FEBRUARY 5thD.S.S. and Kenneth attended the CensorshipMeeting today. Monkton was in the Chair.Altham of N.I.D said he did not know thebasis for the views expressed in theStephenson Committee report but he couldonly say that they were certainly not thoseof the Admiralty. The meeting seems tohave been a suecess from our point of viewsince Monkton rather felt that the censor-ship should be increased and that money wasno object since it was making large sums throthe confiscation of bonds, securities etc.A further point which emerged was thatcommercial mailswere not as valuable to MEWas formerly.It had become known that theywere being dealt with by the censorship andprivate mails were being used in c onsequence.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/18530Spoke D.D.S. who has arranged with Cooperthat parties of German women, and Germanmen over 65, should only be allowed toreturn to Germany in batches.Curry tells me that the ARNHEIM case isdeveloping in rather an interesting way.There would seem to be considerable groundsfor thinking that ARNHEIM may have beenacting as a German a gent, but there is atpresent no direct evidence that the wifewas involved. It is not unlikely howeverthat she is cognizant of what her husbandis doing.FEBRUARY 6thNed has sent me a copy of BRUNCK'S accountwhich looks a as S if it may be of interest.A good many of his transactions have beenwith the Reichskredit Gesellschaft, butthere are also some payments to privateindividuals which may be interesting.D.M.I. has arranged that no Ordnance SurveyMaps can be supplied from this country toneutral countries except under special permitThis does not cover despatch from U.S.A.of maps already in possession of firms ththere or from Canada. to American firms.The International Map Co. of U.S.A. havevolunteered information about maps which theywere asked to supply to Berlin. They haveturned the orderdown and will doubtless keepus informed if they hear of other orders.In the meantime approaches are being madeto the Govt. of Canada asking for theirco-operation in the scheme. I have suggestedthat we should find out what the possibilitiesare for thepurchase of maps here throughEire.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1856Siegfried Israel KOHN and his wife Franziskaarrived here on 2.8.39 as refugees. Thehusband is employed in a toy factory run bya German named Hugo HEIDECKER at Aberavon.We have now learned from the censorshipthat the KOHNS obtained their employment frothrough ardent Nazis in the Argentine who hopthat Germany will defeat England. The localC.C. who is making enauiries remarked thatit is a matter of grave concern when enemyaliens who have arrived in this country amatter of weeks before the outbreak of warare granted full exemption by the tribunalfrom internment and f rom all restrictions.Wing-Cmar.R.G BLOOMFIELD D.S.0., has writtenan extremely indiscreet letter to a certainWallace GROVES relating to measures forcombatting the magnetic mine. The offendingpassage was in the form of a p.s. inBLOOMFIELD'S own handwriting. The rest ofthe letter was typewritten and inoffensive.BLOOMFIELD has been placed under close arrestand Stammers has asked us to make enquiriesabout GROVES, who is in America.We have received a report from the censorshipthat De V. wa s proposing to fly over and seethe King regarding the two I.R.A. men awaitingthe death penalty. I informed StephensonD.0. who told me that there had been asuggestion that DeV. should see the PrimeMinister but that an intimation had been giventhat no useful purpose would be served.V.V. has produced a report indicating thatthere is considerable submarine activityon the west coast of Ireland. It does notseem to amount to more than a submarineservicing peridically within the 3 mile limit.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/185307N.I.D. has been asked to say whether theyhave had any reports through officialchannels.Poynton C.0. informs me that the Cominternis publishing a new Colonial Bulletin here.I have asked him to let us have his commentsas to the undesirability of this publicationbeing allowed to circulate here or in theColonies.I have had a consultation with D.D.S.regarding his memo on travel policy which hasnow been completed and forwarded to allmembers of the Travel Committee. It haspointed out that travel is at present 6 timesas great as it was in the last war and thatit can only be controlled with reasonablesecurity if the numbers are reduced to 350per day, which is the limit of M.I.5's capa-city. To do this it is suggested thatcertain categories should be refused leaveto travel a nd that others should have thenumber of their bourneys per year limited.Travellers, regardless of nationality, shouldbe considered as being either victorists ordefeatists and should be dealt with on theirmerits accordingly. A Black List should beavoided since it would be misleading andincomplete.FEBRUARY thI find that Jeune, for whose appointmentI have been pressing, has already been inthe office for 2 weeks. This office israther like "Youth at the Hekm". I am quitesure that if somebody came in here and saidthey were B.21 and were dealing with SouthAmericans nobody would be any the wiser.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1853o8Hill Dillon called today . He aas beenappointed as G.S.0.2. Liaison Officer withNorthern Ireland Command. He seems to beextremely knowledgable about general con-ditions in Ireland and obviously has greatexperience, but it is very difficult to seeexactly what the purpose of the appointment iis. He told me that the G.o.C. Pollock whomhe knew personally, had sent for him andasked him whether he would be prepared tojoin his Staff. Herrather gathered thatthe G.O.C. felt himself very much in the darkabout Irish affairs and unable to get anyvery definite information as to what was goinoneitherinthesouthorthenorth.Nothingvery definite had been said about other dutiebut thore seemed to be a possibility thatHill Dillon might have been called uponto run some kind of a show into southernIreland. He himself was obviously reluctantto do anything of the kind, particularlysince even before his appointment had beenmade a neighbour had told his wife that shehad heard of Hill Dillon's appointment a San Intelligence Officer to G.O.C.N.Ireland.His wife denied this and when she asked wherethe information came from was told that shehad heard it from Mrs. Pollock.I gave Hill Dillon as complete a picture asI could of all the services operating inIreland and expressed the view that nnyfurther attempts to penetrate southern Ire-land would lead to endless confusion. Heentirely agreed and when we parted he seemedvery doubtful about the utility of hisappointment, which could be perfectly wellcovered by Bowly,the S.C.0. if the latterknew more about Irish affairs. Hill Dillonnever wanted the appointment but accepted itas a military duty. He realises that he isrunning considerable risks which he would beCatalogue Reference:KV/4/185309quite prepared to a ccept in time of war, buthe did not see the use of getting a bulletin the back if his appointment is not reallygoing to be of any benefit to the State.Special Material shows that the Swedes areenquiring for fighter aircraft but do notwish the fact to be known. Speaking toScandinavian journalists in confidence onFeb.2nd Winston said that Norway and Swedenmust give every possible assistance toFinland and that if Germany a ttacked themthey could rely on England.A secretary of the Chilean Embassy speakingto a friend says "I like this job. It isquite interesting writing all those lettersto the M.E.. asking them to release cargoespretending that they are hat they are not.It is quite fun. Sometimes they are notwhat we say they are.Jebb has got a grant of 2100,000 to re-organ-ise .O.Communications, which is sorelyneeded.We have now heard that an escaped barrage bal:loon was responsible for the rumours aboutGermans descending in parachutes at BicknerWood in Kent.FEBRUARY 8thU.35 has just returned from Holland andBelgium. Reports which have reached himfrom the German Embassy in Brussels indicatethat there is now to be a return to MeinKampf. It seems to have been realised thatthe destruction of the British Empire is analmost impossible task. Generally speakingdefeatism is rife amongst the majority ofCatalogue Reference:KVI4/1853(0the staff of the Embassies at the Hague andBrussels. How far this is a reflection ofGermany is doubtful. One informant whom hesaw had recently been in the Rhineland wherethe same sort of atmosphere appears to exist.There is a good deal of grumbling and refer-ence has been made to people being lucky be-cause they are what is known as Left-Bankersi.e. they reside on the left bank of theRhine which it is anticipated will beforevery long be French territory. A story wastold him about taxis in Cologne. Nobodycan get a taxi at the station unless theyhave luggage. They therefore resort to thepractice of going to the station with a largesuitease and coming out again in order toobtain the services of a taxi.The aviator who came down on Belgian terri-tory with information of the last Dutch-Belgian crisis had apparently genuinedocuments with him and was not intended asa plant. The Germans were highly amusedthat he was accepted as such.German military information from France andGt.Britain is said to be good. The OGPUare working in with the Gestapo and areobtaining a certain amount of informationfrom refugee circles in this country,though not of a very high standard. Informa-tion they are getting from other sources isgood. The Prime Minister is still thoughtto have a considerable following in Germanyand his presence in the Govt. is believedto have a defeatist propaganda value amonga large section of the Germap people.I saw Bobby Petherick today. He is liaisonofficer in France between the British andFrench Censorship. He told me that theCatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/1853iFrench Censorship was in a frightful muddle,owing to its being highly decentralised.A great deal of its energy is expended on theinterception of correspondence within France.There have been certain developments in theUNLAND case in spite of the fact that hiscorrespondenc is being constantly inter-fered with both by ourselves and the Tirecensorship. His visitor has never turned upand he himself now contemplates a journeyto Copenhagen, after seeing his contactsin Belfast.Somebody in the censorship seems to be pullinthe leg of Spens,employed in that office onunravelling codes. They have sent a letterto Arthur SCHUTZE'S correspondent in Switzer-land which contains a chess code. Spenswith great labour has worked out the answerto find that it contains information rela-ting to the move of the censorship to Londonand plans to bomb it out of existence.Baillie Stewart's mistress has been discover-ed here as a W.A.T. driver to the Censorkhip.The General Secretary of the Y.M.C.A. WorldCommittee, an American, reeently paid avisit to France to see the internmentcamps. It seems that a great deal is beimdone in the moral and spiritual welfare ofinternees and that they enjoy a considerablemeasure of liberty. Certain areas areallotted to them and provided they reportthemselves at stated times they can moveabout with comparative freedom. There arealso plenty of facilities for educationand recreation. Some have joined up inLabour Battalions. Others have joinedvarious legions and a certain number ofCatalogue Reference:KVI4/185others have been released after examin tion.312Special Material shows that the Captainand grew of certain Danish ships which wererecently attacked from the air have refusedto sail unless the Danish Govt. gets anassurance from the German Govt. for theirsafety. Alternatively they demand to beallowed to sail with a British convoy.FEBRUARY9thCount Rolfe BECK has been refused leave toembark and has been eearched at the port.The Czechs apparently regard him with gravesuspicion.Dutch parcel mails to Germany have increased250% owing to Liebesgaben. Anti-Germanfeeling in Holland seems to be strong.Forged dollar and British currency notesare being distributed in the Balkans andMiddle East and a gang employed on thessamework has been arrested in Canada. Thislooks like a joint German-Russian plan todiscredit British and American currency.FEBRUARY lOthIt has been decided that JEUNE shall beginhis work on establishing contacts withinternees. The object is to obtain informa-tion about people already interned andany possible friends outside and also to getadvance information of any plot to escape.He is working in conjunction with A.G.3.D.S.S. told me today about a case of leakage.Some M.P.baronet went to Frarde where hesaw Reynaud. For no particular reason Rey-naud seems to have disclosed the whole ofthe Allied plans on the Western Front. TheCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1857 313 13M.P. then came back here and started talking.Maude has been investigating a leakagea sclosed by a Ukrainian timber merchantnamed LAHOWSKY. This man had been t alkingto someone in the Ministry of Supply andexpressing anxiety about Scandinavian timber.He was told that he need not worry as weshould shortly have an expeditionary forcein Scandinavia to safeguard our interests.This is the first indication of any suchmove that we have heard. We had of coursepreviously heard about an InternationalBrigade to assist Finland.Lord Killannin same to see Cecil todayon the introduction of Wakefield. He ownsmost of the property round Spiddal in West-ern Ireland. He gave us somne quite interest-ing information about local a ctivities,sonof which came from Cae Catholic Bishop.On one occasion he had met PETERSON of theD.N.B. at some bar in Dublin. Jokingly hesaid tI suppose the Germans are very interes-ted in everything that goes on in this littleone-horse town?" PETERSON had blushed tothe roots of his hair.Killannin also knew STEVART, the son-in-laof Maud Gonna Bride. He thinks thatSTEWART who is a very likeable person buthotly pro-Nazi might quite easily be actingfor the Germans. He did not know thatSTEWART had actually gone to Switzerland quiterecently or that he had obtained a visathere for Berlin. He mentioned that STEWAROwas extremely interested in racing. Thismay be significant as UNLAND has a contactwho follows the same hobby. Informationthat we had from other sources makes it quiteclear that STEWART is frequently at theCatalogue Reference:KVI4/185German Legation in Dublin.3 4A war Office report shows that Tass and theD.N.B. are now co-operating closely.Derbyshire has just lunched with Grand, whoseems to be planning some wild-cast schemein the Caucasus.. For this he is trying toenlist the services of General DRO, theDashnak leader who joined the Communists in1920.We have allowed SINFIELD,the Communist, togo to France provided he does not enter amilitary area. We also have a request fromthe N.U.R. to allow LOEBER of the Railwaymen's executive to have a visa to proceed toEire. LOEBER is a Communist but as he seemsto be concerned with the genuine business ofhis union we propose to ompromise bysuggesting that his visa should be for 3 mths.FEBRUARY llthJan Kurt LOHRY has been put forward forinternment under 18b as a dishonest Czech,without means, and a suspected Gestaporiagent.The Oxford Instrument Co. have been makingphoto-electric cells for a photo-electricbombs. These bombs are to be dropped onaircraft in flight. Shadow or diminution oflight caused by the target is sensed by thephoto-electric cell and amplified to explodethe bomb. These bombs have been found bytests to be highly successful and it isbelieved that the Germans have sorething likethem. The manager of the Oxford InstrumentCo. is very perturbed as cheques in paymentto his company have been endorsed as beingfor photo-electric bombs. These are sent outin envelopes with open f rontS SO that werethe cheque to become displaced the nature ofCatalogue Reference:KVI4/18531>the payment would become apparent, to thepostal authorities as well as to the Bank.There has also been indiscreet talk aboutthis invention by an A.I.D.inspector.The Americans have telegraphed to say thatBallace GROVES, to whom V/C.BLOOMFIELD waswriting, is a crook of the first water. Hehas been indicted for fraud and seems to bea kind of Americay Clarence Hatry.A censorship letter from Bulgaria indica-tes that the Kinis pro-Ally if he dared toadmit it, the Queen pro-Italy, the Armypro-German and the people pro-Russian. Ajoint invasion by Germany and Russia sooneror later is expected as a matter of course.S.I.S. material: Goering is in favour ofRussian co-operation under a new regime wherehe would take charge. He has broken withthe heavy industrials and thinks he cancontrol the other prominent Party members.Another informant speaks of a possiblebreak between Hitler and the Generals withinthe next 2 months.The Russian economic negotiations are beingunsuecessful. Hitler is angry. The folloing is said to be the result of therecent discussions between Czaky and Ciancin Venice. Hungary and the Danubian basinare to be an Italian sphere of influence,Roumania is to be a German SO here. Germanywould demand a passage through RussianPoland to Roumania. Italy would ensure thatHungarian and Bulgarian claims were satis-fied by Roumania. Germany would see thatRussia did not attack Bessarabia. It isthought that Germany does not contemplateactiveroperations in the Balkans but merelyCatalogue Reference:KV/4/18531economic penetration under threats. Russiais giving increased support to the Chinesein order to keep the Sino-Jap conflict going.She evidently fears that the Japs may takeadvantage of her embarrassment in Finland.The new opposition to Stalints entourageis said to have made its appearance. Thoseconnected with this group favour a regineof Russia for the Russians with Stalin athead. They demand the ruthless prosecutionof the Finnish, but do not wish to becomeengaged in a major war unless they'reattacked. Co-operation with Germany isto b limited. No Germans are to beallowed in the Russian Anmy and only technicaaid in industry. Individual farms areto be developed but the collectives are stillto be maintained.German steel production is said to be 45%below that of 1938 but in the case of areal offensive it is estimated that therewould be suffi ient supplies of steel tolast 6 or 9 months.Shekib Arslan is intriguing with he Muftiand the Germans to win over Ibn Saud to apolicy of Arab revolt. Saud is adopting hisusual non-committal attitude. There are asyet no signs of his giving tway.The Asama Maru incident has increased theprestige of the British Navy in the eyes ofthe Jap Navy. The incident has caused alarmin German circles who fear that their trafficroute to Shanghai and Dairen may be inter-fered with.The Jugo-Slav army is estimated to be good fo:about 60 days but not till April.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/185317FEBRUARY 12thI had a discussion with Archer about theOxford Instrument Company. He is askingthe Air Ministry what action they wishtaken and has suggested a warning in strongterms to A.I.D. inspectors.I have passed a report to Herschel Johnsonwhich I received from S.I.S. regardingleakage of information retafdimng despatch-es between Kennedy and Roosevelt. Thisappears to come from a reliable source.I had a talk with D.D.S. about the TravelCommittee. It seems that we are nowcommitted to the policy of a Black List.The Danes have a trade agreement wherebyBritain takes 60% and Germany 40% of theirexports of bacon etc. Two Danish shipswere taken into the German ContrabandControl at Bremen and the cargoes of baconete. for this country were eventually relea-sed. The motive for this is not clear.It may be propaganda intended to show neutralcountries that they get much better treat-ment from Germany than from England.It seems that there is a notice posted inthe Orderly Room at the Scots Guards H.Qesaying that men are wanted who can ski inan arctic climate. Presumably this informa-tion is by now public property.A report from the Cameroons shows that mostA of number the Germans of them there have are been National-Socialists r Pleased on paroleand are working in their planations underrestrictions. They seem omewhat confusedas to what they should do as good Germans.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/185218.I.S.material:Mussolini has told Hitler that he cannotwin the war either with or without Russia.He has urged him to break with Russia andmake peace with the allies. He personallystill adheres to the axis because he does'rsnot want to see National-Socialism destroyed.He feels that it might be the prelude toa break up of the Fascist regime.It is rpported that Germans have leased theUkrainian oilfields from the Russians. Itis felt however that many months and greatexpense will be needed to put them in work-ing order.A reportedated Feb.7th is to the effectthat a German delegation has gone to Finlandto discuss trade matters and that the Finnsare visiting Germany regarding timbercontracts.Final figures of aliens dealt with by the tribunalsare as follows:Dealt with: 73,353Interned:569Exempted from internment but not fromrestrictions: 6,782Exemnpted from internment and from allrestrictions 64,24455,457 were known to be genuine refugees.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1853oFEBRUARY 13thS.I.S. material: Hitler is still the unknownquantity, but three plans appear to beunder consideration. (1) Defensive operationsin the West sponsored by diplomats and partof the Army. (2) Mass offensive againstBritain,excluding France. This finds mostfavour and has the support of Goering.(3) An offensive in the West includingoccupation of Holland and partial occupationof Belgium. Some senior Army officers arein favour of this but it is the most contra-versial plan and the least probable.Special material shows that John Andersonwas adamant about the Irish executions andthat the P.M. Eden and to some extent evenWinston were anxious to find a way out.GEROTHWOHL on 6.2. told the Roumaniansthat the Supreme Council meeting haddecided toOther journalists who seemed to know aboutthis were Morton of the Herald and Bilainkin.I had a talk with Roger about Communists inthe event of war wit th Russi a. We have alist of contacts in factories and .Branchand Factory Managers are notified aboutthese people. They can therefore be easilylaid off in time of emergency if necessary.It would further seem desirable to internall organisers and members of the ExecutiveCommittee, but I don't think it would benecessary at any rate in the first instanceto make any recommendation that the Partyshould be declared illegal.We had a Board Meeting without D.S.S. andD.D.S. to discuss the Travel Committee.We were all agreed that if the terms ofCatalogue Reference:KV/4/185321our memo were not bo be accepted we were asan office in duty bo und to report on thesituation to the Fighting Services.We also considered the advisability ofsuggesting that the Passport &c Permit Officeshould be under military control. Person-ally I don't think the H.0. would much mindif it was, provided that they were notresponsible for answering questions in theHouse.Turner has been making enquiries aboutan allegation that the police were roundingup large numbers of enemy aliens who had notreported to the tribunals. This is not infact the case. If any are found the HomeSecretary proposes to deal with them himself.Had a discussion with Curry about theMercedes case, and decided that our bestcourse might be to ask S.B. to placeat our disposal one of their best Inspectorswho can work on the case under our direction.The Enemy Trading Seetion have told us thatas a result of investigating Cargo Super-intendents London Ltd. have found tha t thisorganisation whose headquarters are inGeneva, has wide ramifications. It isengaged in wheat testing for the WheatCommission and for this purpose hasrepresentatives in a great many ports.These people have therefore ample opportunityfor advance information about the movementsof ships. The firm employs a considerablenumber of aliens.Snow has returned with 2650 in dollars andBank of England notes. His visit was highlysuccessful. He saw RANTZAU and a Mrs.KALLER. He was contacted on the way bySamuel STEWART. who sat down beside himCatalogue Reference:KVI4/185322in the carriage. They travelled over toge-ther and besh RANTZAU told Snow thatof their man oneSTEWART runs several shipping lines betweenBelfast,Dublin, this country and Antwerp.He was already suspect and we had intendedtrying to put somebody in on one of his boatsRANTZAU is visiting America shortly andwill be returning in April. Snow bro ughtback with him a letter addressed to oneEugene HORSFALL who resides at Felpham.The letter merely states that the writerhad forgotten to give H. IrS.WHINFIELD'Saddress. Mrs.WHINFIELD is apparentlyengaged in the purchase of certain bookswhich are to be used for code purposes.This is the same woman whose son wasarrested in Switzerland and who is connectedwith Mrs.ELAM and the BUF.Arrangements are being made to send overexplosives and wireless parts secreted inelectric torch batteries. The Germans aretrying this out first with genuine batteries.The explosives are to be used for sabotagepurposes.D.D.S. attended a meeting of the J.I.C.regarding Finland. The Committee has beenformed on which M.I.5. will be representadby Ma jor Sinclair. It consists of ColonelHolland and representative of the AirMinistry and Aamiralty. The purpose is tocamouflage the project to send an expedition-ary force O 100,000 men to Norway about themiddle of March.The Japanese Vice Foreign inister,diseussinthe Asama Maru incident with the GermanAmbassador on Feb.5th made it clear thatJapan was anxious to avoid any furtherincidents. In the course of conversationCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1853v3the German Ambassador told the Jap confi-dentially that the British have an arrange-ment with the Italians to pick Germans offItalian ships. When asked, the Ambassadorsaid that indirectly his Govit. had approvedthis. (Probably he did not wish to lose facewith the Jap or disclose any breach in theaxis)FEBRUARY 14thCowgill came to see me today, about acertain JAHNKE, with whom he had beenindirectly in touch. At the outbreak ofwar JAHNKE was running an IntelligenceBureau in conjunction with KANARIS andsituated in close proximity to Rudolf HESS,with direct access to the Fuehrer. JAHNKEwas a Prussian Deputy who seems to haverun an amateur intelligence organisation.His whole show was taken over, with himselfat the head, by the Government just beforethe outbreak of war. JAHNKE had been g ettingcopies of S.I.S. reports and also reportson Imperial Policy. He also saw the contentsof telegrams or despatches between Kennedythe American Ambassador here and the StateDept. His informa nt here was said to be irthe F.0. and to be either a clerk or thewife of a clerk. Cowgill was anxiousto know whether this JAHNKE was identicalwith a man of the same name who had beforeLocarno been acting as an agent of theRussian 4th Dept.Maude has had an interview with ArthurSCHUTZ and considers him very shifty. B.6.are continuing observation and M. is tryingto work in an informant.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/185324McLeod A.G.3. has written a most seditiouspersonal and confidential document to hiscamp commandants which is a thinly veiledindictment of H.O.policy with regard toenemy aliens. In view of the situation heurges his subordinates to extra vigilance.Farrer has sent me an amusing commentary onPLATINI, a suspeeted enemy trader aboutwhom we had sent him correspondence. Hesays: 'Mr.PLATINI'S letters have occasioneda good deal of amusement in this dept. Hewill shortly be changing his address asthe landlords of his office are about toto sell the distrained furniture for non-payment of rent. Menawhile his friend inMexico is pressing him to get credits for25 million and come over to Mexico tosign a contract with Petrolens Mexicanos.PLATINI'S friend, Mr. Angel BELLO refersto the 126 companies in which PLATINI isinterested and writes 2 pages of illiterateSpanish on the difficulties and expensesof doing business with Mexican officials.He has spent 47,360 pesos on banquets,drinksetc. and in addition Mexican officialsalways live above their salaries and there-fore want him to loan them money. Hereally begins to doubt whether the deal willgo through. Ir.PLATINI is more optimistichowever, for looking on the bright side, hestates that he is the sole agent forDistribudora, the Mexican Govt.organisationfor selling expropriated oil. As he isnever likely to raise the fare to Mexico,the Br tish Govt. might do worse thandeport him."There has been a slight hitch with Walt erTHOMAS. We offered him 21,000 and allexpenses. Arrangements were made as to howCatalogue the money Reference:K Reference:kV/4/185 was be Raid and Harker left5ushim apparently in good mood. This morninghe asked for a private talk with Ally, andsaid that he did not wish it to be thoughtthat there was any lack of faith as betweenhimself and the British Gove. or that he hadnot given us information for other thanideological reasons. On the other hand, hehad lost a contract with an American news-paper for $6,500 and his news value wasobviously deteriorating with time. Hetherefore thought that if we were oing togive him a little nest egg which would beused by his wife, 25,000 would be a moreproper figure. Harker want up to see himand after a great deal of talk and apologiesetc. the little man threw up his hands andsaid "All right. Make whatever arrangementsyou like". The deal was finally settled on22,000 and all parties seemed satisfied.I had a further talk with Roger about actionin the event of war with Russia. We thoughtthat in addition to the action formerlyproposed, all headquarters and otherspecialaddresses should be raided and that ordersshould be made forcing the C.P. to submittheir publication to censorship.The Deuxieme Bureau have let us down agai:by passing to their Ministry of Supplyinformation which we gave them about CharlesBEDAUX. The French Ministry have informedBEDAUX that one of his contracts had beenheld up owing to informa tion submitted bythe British Govt. through the French DeuxiemeBureau, and gave him documents in writing tothis effect. BEDAUX has now! writ ten toWalter Monckton who has passed the corres-pondence to Maude. I am taking the matterup vith S.I.S. and saying that in futureCatalogue Reference:KV/4/185326if we cannot get some guarantee as to thehandling of our information, it will bevery difficult to continue our relations inthe spirit of frankness and full co-operationI had an interview with Walter THOMASthis evening.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/185THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAREDSIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONFEBRUARY 315tF THE PUBLIC.RECORDS1958.WrryouoWe had a full Board Meeting about travel,when we voiced our grievances. D.S.S. andD.D.S. are agreed that if our memo to theCommittee is not accepted in its majorrecommendations we shall have to notifythe Fighting Services.Slade of N.I.D. tells me that the Admiraltyhave intercepted wireless communicationsemanating from some station situated betweanDublin and Wicklow. The messages were goingbetween this station and Nauen in Germany.The signals have been taken dow and are tobe forwarded to us and to C.& C.S. Sladewas proposing to pass the informat tion to theD.O. but I urged him to refrain from doing ththis as I was not anxious that the Eireauthorities should begin searching about forthis station until we had seen whether wecould do anything with the signals. Itmight be valuable to us if the station wereallowed to continue at any rate for a time.At Godfrey's request I saw Lord Rothschild,who is doing sabotage research work for M.I.RHe thought that the results of his experi-ments which were primarily for offensivepurposes might also be of use to us informulating a defensive policy. I told himthat broadly speaking we wanted to give ananswer to the factory manager who said"Youtell me that in the event of trouble sabotagemake take place on a wide scale. What doyou expect me to do about it?n He saw thispoint and is going to consult the J.I.C.which is working on the problem. He willalso try and keep us posted about bacterio-CatatogueReference.kv/4/1853a9We have had a report today that one HenryANDREAE who was anxious to obtain a commissicIs was introduced by a friend of his. T.USHER,to a certain H.I. or I.H.ABELSON. He metABELSON at the Charing Cross Hotel and alsoan individual styling himself Sir CurtisLAMPSON. He was told that the fee would be2600. When he demurred, he was told thatan advance of 2300 would probably besufficient if an undertaking were given thatthe further sum would be paid as soonas his name appeared in the Gazette. We Lveput the matte: r in the hands of S.B.FEBRUARY 16thA short time ago S.B. informed us about asuspect Czech named Herta WEINFELDOVA who wasestablishing contacts with officers andgenerally acting in an extremely suspiciousway.. Further enquiries have confirmed theprevious information. She ha s not registeredand will be taken in on that account. Mean-while we are getting an 18b order againsthere. I think she might be able to tell ussomething, although she herself is probablyrather small beer.We have also decided to wind up the TITFORDcase. The woman is behaving in a verycurious way andthe informant, hasdisappeared.Sinclair ha attended a meeting of hiscommittee under ol.Holland. Variouprojects were discussed for misleading theenemy about the Finnish venture. Theseinclude rumours about an important move inthe Near East Nhich we maykibe able to putacross through double-cross agents, and alsoCataloque the which will have theO1 indicating a move in that330quarter. In the meantime Maude is trying tofind out how far orders placed by theMinistry of Supply have given the show away.The situati on here seems to be fairlyreassuring, since many of these can beexplained by the public announcement of avolunteer force for Finland. We are alsogoing to try and find out how far the Swedesand Norwegians are aware of the project.It seems that they are being pushed somewhatreluctantly into giving support to Finland,but whether they know that it is our inten-tion to land a force of 100,000 men in Norwayi not yet quite clear. There seems to besome doubt still in fact whether we shallever send a force to Finland, but fullpreparations are evidently to be made foraction in Seandinavia as well as in theNear East. If the Germans are as confusedas we are, there may still be an element ofsurprise in anything that we do.The Japs have is sued strict instructionsto their Embassies that no technicians,people of military age or possible beliigeranagents are to be carried on board theirships. These instructions are to be keptvery seeret. I imagine that this is theresult of the negotiations b etween Craigieand the Jap Govt. If however it leaked outthat they had made this enoessi on, theywould in addition to incurring the displea-sure of the Germans, lose tfaee and place alever in the hands of the military party.FEBRUARY 17thS.B. officer at Holyhead has written inabout the censorship regulations at ports.He points out that the instructions toI.0.'s and S.C.0.' are conflicting andthat as a result there is free passage ofueReference:KV/4/185331Kendal wants to know whether we are goingto take this up with the H.0. or whether heshould do SO. The fact is that we wrote toMaxwell 5 months ago on this question andnever got a reply, inspite of representa-tions by D.4. and D.D.S. This is one moreinstance of the confusion which exists atthe ports. It will never be overcome untiltravel is placed entirely under militarycontrol.The German F.0. in a circular letterto foreign Embassies and Cons lates laysdown pompous rules about conduct by Germansvis-a-vis enemy aliens in neutral countries.The Germans are to observe "a dignifiedreserve", firms must dismiss Britishemployees but "reliable Germans" can stayon in British firms as in such cases itcan e ven be of use for German interests ifthey remain in employment. I think thisdocument may be useful to us in our repre-sentations to the H.O. that the employmentof Germans in industry, particularly SO-called "reliable Germans" is highly dan-gerous.Spoke V.V. re German illicit wirelessstation in Eire. He says the cypher usedis diplomatic and unbreakable,accordinto C. &c.CS. There is therefore nothingto be gained by allowing the station tocontinue. V.V. thinks we should communi-cate the facts to Archer.Spoke Hordern re the case of CHRISTIANSEN,manager of a firm which has just gotsecret contracts for 0187,000. I said Ithought D.D.S. should lay the facts beforeBurgin or Horace Wilson both from thesecurity angle and on account of the undes-irable situation created by Roberts of theCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1853332Ministry of Supply being chairman of thecompany.I have today put forward my suggestion forthe re-grouping of B.Branch on a territoriabasis.D.D.S. seems to think that the H.0. willmeet our wishes with regard to the Revi sionTribunals. It is proposed to have the 12chairmen up to the H.O in order to seewhether they fully understand their instruc.tions. In this way it is hoped to get someunifornity. This will all depend on theinstructions, which I am told we are tohave an opportunity of criticising beforethey are issued.FEBRUARY l8thJock Whyte has brought me the case of GulaPFEFFER. It seems that this woman was atone time in close touch with a certainof the F.O. whom she, talkingto her solicitor, said she had blackmailed.in a written statement say S thatin 1935 he went to Berlin with the knowledgeof his department where he met PFEFFER'Srelations. These include Capt.Vor PFETFERwho I believe to be identical with thenotorious Captain PFEIFER of the GermanS.S. It now transpires thatisemployed in the C. &c C.S. It seems notaltogether improbable that he may be theman in the F.O. who has been supplyingJAHNKE with S.I.S. reports and ImperialPolicy reports. He might also be theperson giving the contents of Kennedy'telegrams to Roosevelt.A letter has been intereepted by the censor-CataloguerReference:kV/4/185s. CRINNION in Dublin332>saying that Mr. F. STUART is at present inHolland where he is hob-nobbing with AdolfMAHR and others of the f ormer German Colonyin Eire. I have been considering what todo that with if him his when passport he arrives bears a and German have stamp decidedhe should be thoroughly searched and interro-gated. If not, he should be given a normalsearch without arousing his suspicions.There is an interesting development in theC ce of the Oxford Instrument Co. and photelectric bombs. Michael RICHARDSON, whohad been taking indisereetly appears to bea friend of a German efugee named IreneMUNK, who frequents the Randolph Hotel atOxford and gets into conversation with R.A.F.officers. I am suggesting that she should beinterrogated.The firm of TILLING STEVENS have a secretcontract. Two of their employees seem to besuspect. They are Brenden MCCAUL and WilliamASKWITH. MCCAUL, who is Irish, may have IRAconnections and ASKWITH has been makingtracings in a furtive way. B.3. are makingenquiries.According to an S.I.S. report the BulgarianAir Force is being extended under Germanrection and with German machines.A plot is being hatched in Berlin for a risingin favour of Amanuilah in Afghanistan. Oneof the German consuls in Egypt, HeinrichLepique, who was given a safe conduct out ofEgypt has now set up an espionage bureau inTripoli under the guise of a consulate. Heis to cover the southern shores of the Medit-erranean.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/185 Reference: KV/4/185334FEBRUARY 19thSpoke Herschel Johnson about the case ofJAHNKE and the alleged leakage of Kennedy'despatches to Roosevelt. He said thatthe information could only have come f romthe GermanEmbassy in London or Washingtonand that there was no possibility of leakagein the cyphers since all their telegrams wereby special cable route and not by wireless.told him that Cadogan was aware of thefacts and he expressed his intention of speak-ing about the matter on the occasion of hisnext visit to the F.0.We have put up thecase of one MICHAIELISan enemy alien engaged in the supply ofventilating fans to rearmament factories.In our opinion this man who is an aryanGerman, should be interned but it is quiteevident that the Advisory Committee on theirpresent form would release him. There areothers of this type, such as HESSE, and weare asking the H.0. for guidance as to howthese people can be dealt with under existingregulations.Special material: A journalist has told theSwedish Legation that he believes that Britainnd France are going to take some importantstep in the near future. He had that impres-sion from what Gripenberg had said and fromother directions.S.I.S. material: Illegal entry into Palestineis still being fostered thro'Greekagenciesby the Gestapo. Abyssinia is Systill in a stateof revolt. Italian attempts at pacificationseem to be of doubtful value. Bulgaria hasno military alliance with Russia. She hasturned it down and Russia in her present stateCatalogue Reference:KVI4/185335was glad to have any sort of agreement onpurely economic and rather inconclusive lines.A war on the side of Germany seems to beunthinkable in all Italian circles.An incident occurred the other day at Milanwhere two cartwheels were solemnly sawnthrough at the axis in front of the Germanconsulate.FEBRUARY 20thThe Yard are taking action in the case OfABELSON and Sir Curtis LAMPSON who wereoffering to sell commissions. They have askedthe W.b. for an expert witness who will statethat the purchase of commissions is not thenormal procedure.D.2. have raised the case of a man calledCOYLE who has been serving on a tanker. Thisman is believed to be conneeted with theI.R.A. and possibly with a previous act ofsabotage. The question arises as to who isresponsible for seeing that these peopleare not allowed to S erve in the MercantileFleet. The Admiralty seem to think that theresponsibility is theirs, but that M.I.5. shou.be deputed to carry it out. We have in thepast been informing the Ministry of Shippingabout communists employed as seamen but ithas never been very clear what the Ministrydo with the informati tion when they get it.I therefore arranged for Roger to visit Mr.Norman who says that it is passed on to theShipowners' Association which has a membershipof some 650. Shipowners do not appear towelcome the rather meagre details which theyreceive, and seem to think that the Govt.should take the responsibility by some kind ofaction which would prevent these people fromsigning on. En really hot cases however theywould be prepared to take the question up withCataloguerreference:kv4/185336I have suggested to Roger that he should seeNorman again and explain to him that we willin future indicate more definitely when wefeel that a man is really dangerous, butthat we still think a useful purpose wouldbe served by passing the names of those weconsidered to be dubious to the Ministry ofShipping and to the shipowners, since thisinformation would perhaps give them anindication as to where trouble might beexpeeted. There is also another purpose whichnight be explained to the Shipowners, namelythat both communists and members of the I.R.A.are in time of war likely to be used ascouriers and that we should much value theshipowners co-operation if they could assistus in keeping an eye on these people, partic-ularly when they change ships, and reportingto us any suspicious cases.Air Ministry Intelligence shows that theSoviet Air Force has a total of 4,839 machines2,068 of which are obsolete and the remainderof 2,771, which are fighters and bombers, areobsolescent. The maximum speed of theirmachines appears to be about 250 m.p.h. Rus sirelies entirely on foreign designs and unlessshe can buy large quantities of foreignmachines during the next 2 years the whole ofher Air Force will be completely obsoleteand useless.Archie Boyle has been made D.A.I. vice Buss.I had a long talk with Cowgill today on the Ccase of FIETCHER. He has taken full detailsin order to report to Menzies. I also dis-cussed with him the case of ARNHEIM. Hesays that there is a good dal of informationboth at the W.0. and F.0. about French actionin the case. As soon as we can get this,Catalogue Reference:KV/4/185337Crauford will go over and see the 2eme bureauon an introduction from Courtney.We had a board meeting today when travel wasthe main point of discussion. A very stiffletter has been N ritten to ake,Chairman ofthe Committee, stating that SO far no consid-eration has been given to our memo and thatwe felt that in the interests of security itshould be done forthwith in order to estab-lish certain principles before getting downto matters of detail. Peake has writtenvery politely and appreciatively saying thathe will see that the matter is dealt with atthe next meeting.Roger, saw Leggett today about the question ofinterning members of the C.P. in certaineventualities. Leggett has the impressionthat if a few of the leaders were to be putin, the rest would be SO scared that we shouldhave no trouble..I am not quite sure that heis altogether right. He looks at it purelyfrom the political angle and not from thesabotage angle. He thinks we should do wellto be careful about interning communist tradeunion leaders such as HORNER and he will verycarefully go through our list and give us thebenefit of his observations as soon as it ha.S habeen prepared. He is quite sure that anyaction we take against the C.P. will havethe full backing of the T.U.movement.Instructions from the H.O. re sabotage havebeen received. It seems that as a result ofour informing the Admiralty of a possible out-break on 27th Dec.( think this referred tothe I.R.A) the information reached the police,who began to take action is a somewhat alarmistway. The H.O. ask that in future we send acopy of our information to them and add a noteto Defence Depts. that it should not be passedCatalogue Reference:KV/4/185338either direetly or indirectly to police, whowill if necessary be instructed by the H.0.FEBRUARY 21stSpecial material: Dulanty has been in touchwith Maiski about the case of the wife of acertain Stanislaus MARKOVICH. He wanted toknow whether this woman was dead and if notwhether she wa s divorced according to Sovietlaw. He had written to the Consulate buthad been told that they dodnot deal withthese matters and that he should apply offici-ally through the British F.0. He explainedto Maiski that he did not want to do thisas although Eire was in the Commonwealth theydid not like to b e classed with otherDominions like Canada and Australia. He hadtherefore established direct contact with theSpanish Embassy and would like to have similararrangements with the Russian Embassy. Maiskiwas noncommittal and said that he would lookinto the question.Lord Tavistook left Stranraer for NorthernIreland yesterday morning. According to ourinformant it was his intention to get intotouch with t he German Legation in Dublinregarding certain peace proposals which he.is going to put forward in the name of theBritish Council for Christian Settlement inEurope. If these proposals are not consideredhe proposes to start a campaign.I have asked Archer to let us know if he comesto notice in Eire and after due considerationit has been decided that there is no purposein having Tavistock S earched when he returns.F.0. have been fully informed.A clerk in the Passport &c Permit Office hasCatalogue Reference:KVI4/1853391,told D.4.a that enemy aliens under 16 andwomen and males over 60 are to go back toGermany after having been vetted by us, inbatches once a fortnight. It is expectedthat they will all have left within 3 months.This is entirely contrary to the assurancegiven by Cooper to D.D.S. that all these peoplewill go back together. There are now to be atleast 6 or 8 parties. I have spoken to DDSwho after consultation with Cooper doesnot think that anything is to be gained byour raising further objections.Decided after CO nsultation with CSS and Sladethat the Eire Govt. should be officiallyinfor'med through Maffey about the illicitwirless station near Dublin and that we shouldsimultaneously inform Archer, asking him tolet us have full details in due course.The police have got Sir Curtis LAMPSON witha cheque on him and are instituting proceed-ings on other counts pending investigations.It appears that they were already gunning forhim on another charge. We have provided themwith an expert witness who will say that itis not the usual practice to sell commissions.Dick's lady friend tipped off a likelystarter at the Hague to S.I.S. They madea direct approach which seems to have beenentirely successful. The man is well placedto give us information about German Navaloperations. He seemed rather astonishedthat nobody had thought of approaching himbefore.The Bank of England have been interestingthemselves in the distribution of forgedTreasury notes abroad which they believe toCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1852440have been circulated by Germany. They haveinstructed their agents abroad to get specimensSo Basa far as they well have as one 77 from obtained Paris in and London. one from Thesenotes are machine made and capable of beingproduced in large numbers, but are not SO goodas other forgeries made here in the past.The Bank are ready to publish a warning but donot wish to do SO before a large amount of9forgeries ame known since this would merelyhe playing the enemy's game. They have a newTreasury note ready for issue.Special material indicates that Moghadar, thenew Persian Ambassador, is pro-German oropposed to Persia throwing in her lot withthe Allies, and that he ha S been S ent hereby the Shan to g et him out of the way. The op-position in Persia which f avours Germany orneutrality is said to b e gaining ground.FEBRUARY 22dSpecial material: The Belgian Embassy hasinformed Brussels that reports are to handfrom V arious sources which indicate thatGermany is making great efforts towards therealisation of an understanding between Romeand MOsCow. German ministers and diplomatsare applying themselves to persuade the Russia an;that their regime would benefit by arecognition of the affinity of their ideologywith the principles of National-Socialism andFascism. The idea is to align the National-Socialist power against the Democratic powers.TI had a long talk with Maude today aboutleakage through the Japanese. yA numb er ofB.J.S indicate that such leakage is going on.GEROTHOHL may be one source, but as apreliminary I have suggested that we might doworse than obtain a very clear picture as toCatalogue Reference:KVI4/18572,what happens to all the relevant documentsin the F.O.Discussed with Cowgill the case ofHis enquiries made it even more probablethatis a t least the F.0. contactwho was in touch with JAHNKE. If this is SOne has played his eards fairly well by re-porting ce tain f acts to his superiorsand when they happenai There seems littlecoubt that he has known Von PFEFFER since1935. S.I.S. file indicates that he has madetwo a ttempts to obtain the release of GulaPFEFFER, one by representing that she isharmless and the other by siggesting that shemight be a useful double-cross agent.I ar a ttending a conference at S.I.S. toconsider how we can best proceed.MCLeod A.G.3. has declared open war onthe Advisory Committee. Having a ttended oneof their sittings he wrote a letter to Church-ill in very outspoken terms. This arew areply from Birkett and a suggestion that thecorrespondence should be sent to the H.O.McLeod answered that he dic not see that anyuseful puroose would be served by sending itO H.0., who were not concerned.Stephens is lunching with McLeod today and willprobably hear a good deal more. I have madeit clear to him that he should notbecome aparty to this intrigue. MCLeod doesnit carewhat he says and is quite prepared to get thesack and return to his business.FEBRUARY 23rdWill Codrington, who was formerly in the F.O.has in Catalggue been erReferencekv4/185 S tightening up Security the machinery Officer342and British Embassies and Legations abroad,particularly in regard to cyphers and confi-dential documents. From what we know of thepresent situation he is likely to have a fulltime job for some considerable time.There has been a fire at Cossor Valves andat some other firm where Govt. work is goingon. Arson is suspected.Curry has prepared a memo with a view touefining our responsibilities in connectionwith counter-measures to bacteriologicalwarfare which may be considered advisable.The most that we do here is to collate anyinformation that can be obtained abroad or inthe dominions and colonies and deal withsuspected persons. We are pointing out thatpreventive internment of suspected personsis not at present the policy of H.M.G. andthere are therefore many potential saboteursat large. A special committee to deal withthis whole question has been formed under theC.I D. with Lord Hankey in the chair. AProfessor Hopley is the bacteriological expert.We learn through Matthews that Sir JohnAnderson has expressed the view that cases com-rg from the Advisory Committee ecommendingrelease should be very closely examined bythe H.O. before action is taken. This wouldseem to indicate that someone has seen thered light.I attended a meeting at S.I.S. in order todiscuss the case ofof the C.&c.C.S.CSS,V.V. ,Cowgill,Denniston, Cowgill Denniston, Stopford and myselfwere present. From Denniston's description ofit is obvious that he has a kiad ofsecrete service kink. he has never been verycontent with his ordinary cypher work and hasCatalogue Reference:KVI4/18523always been trying to get into something moreexciting. He likes to imagine himself as akind of cloak and dagger man, and is given torelating hair-raising stories about himself whickhave absolutely no foundation in fact. Therewas a curious incident at the outbreak of war.ol.Vivian received a letter in a foreign hand-writing from a woman. She stated that Mr.had told her at the time of the 1938prisis that his life would be in great danger athat if she wanted to know about him she shoui icommunicate with ol.Vivian at Room 47, F.O.On this occasionwas sent for, con-fronted with the letter, whereupon he becameas white as a sheet and almost hysterical.He wanted to know whether he was going to besacked. He was told that he had behaved in anextremely indiscreet way by giving Col.Vivianthe kind of publicity which he did not in theleast desire and if he did anything hike thatagain his services would probably be dispensedwith. The letter was then torn up and theincident closed. My impression offrom what was said is that he is the kind offellow who must be in the limelight at allcostS, and that if he is the source of theleakage this is more likely to be his motivethan money. It was generally agreed that theAdds were about 60-40 against him and that vemycareful enquiries should be made about hishabits and associations before any action wastaken. There is really nothing to interrogatehim on since he has very carefully covered him-self in his association both with Gula PFEFFERand with Capt.von PFEFFER. It seems also froman earlier report that he met TAHNKE on at leastone occasion. We are going to try and get alook at his banking account thought I doubtwhether this will disclose anything much.Had a talk afterwards with C.S.S. He is stronglyCatalogue of PReferencet.KV/4M85n will make an attack34yin the West before very long and he thinks thatif we embark on the Finnish venture this willonly precipitate a Western offensive. Inconfirmation of this theory it may be said thatthe Germans are removing a great deal of theirmachinery from the Ruhr and that a certainnumber of women and children have been evacua-ted.Tan Cutsem of the German Section in M.I. who hasben a strong opponent of the theory of anattack in the West, is now somewhat shaken.I gathered from C.S.S. that Archie Boyle'sappointment to D.A.I. was very sudden. Busswas only given 24 hours notice. The exactreason is not known although I gather thatBuss has been placing the numbers of the GermanAir Force at a very high figure and thatcertain circles are not in agreement. C.S.S.thinks Buss is sound though perhaps not veryconvincing in his general manner.I am discussing with C.S.S. the question ofagents in foreign Legations and Embassies inLondon. He will be very pleased to belp usin any way possible and feels it highly desir-able that something should be done to meet thepresent situation. At the moment we have onerather weak informant in the Jap Embassyand an indirect line on the Swiss which is notvery profitable.FEBRUARY 24thThe H.O. have given us a peremptory order topresent the case of ARNHEIM to the AdvisoryCommittee ithin 10 days. I doubt very muchwhether this can b e done and I have suggestedto D.S.S. that he should see Maxwell and explainthe extent of our investigations to date.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/185343A curious individual called CONRAD has volun-teered information about the case. He is aFrenchman and when pressed through an inter-mediary to make a statement said tha t he couldonly do SO in the presence of the French M.A.as he was an officer in the French Army. Hecame here fromHolland and I strongly suspectthat he has been making enquiries into the caseon behalf of the 2eme bureau who probablysuspeeted our bona fides in view of Hans ARIHEIM'S connection with a British officerand with Stephen King-Hall on whose behalfhe says he went to Tunis. Canuford iscollecting as much information as he can andthen is going over to see the French.The H.O. have decided that if a man misses thetribunal he should prosecuted if his actionis intentional, but if his non-ap pearance isdue to a mistake or to the fact that he wasunder 16 the H.O. will decide his case.A ny cases SO dealt with by H.0. are not tocome before the Revision Tribunals since thesetribunals should have no power to over-rulethe decision of the S. of S.No press cables are to be stopped withoutreference to t he Press &c Censorship Bureau.FEBRUARY 25thWinchester till 6.30.FEBRUARY 26thWe have applied for an order to intern RosaFALKNER, a German domestic servant previouslyemployed by C.S. RICHARDS of Metro Vickers.She returned here after the outbreak of warsaying that she had been arrested in Germanyas a spy and released through her father'scaralogteReferehcetkev/185e3ysShe got back via Holland and obtained her exitpermit from Germany on the strength of a letterfrom a Dane in Holland with whom she was goingto stay. She then came on here, and findingthat Richards had no vacaney for her, she tookto prostitution.The H.0. have decided that PRITT is to be givenhis exit permit if he wants to go to Franceto attend the trial of the French Communi stDeputies, but that the French are to bewarned. This seems to be a departure from thepolicy of standing on our own bottoms.I discussed with Roger today what our policyshould be vis-a-vis the C.P. in the event ofwar with Russia. He is going to have a furthertalk with Leggett in order to get his viewsabout the internment of communist members ofTrade Unions and possible repercussions ifthese people happen to be shop stewards.D.S.S. does not altogether like Curry's memodefining our responsibilities in defenceagainst bacteriological warfare. Harker is goito have a talk with Elliott of the C.I.D. onWednesday.The Admiralty have reported that an I.R.A.station has been transmitting from Drogheda.Roger is to see Norman of the Ministry ofShipping again and suggest to him that heshould get the shipowners federatior to CO-operate with us regarding doubtful seamen whomay be used as couriers.The Air Ministry have lost 100 copies of ourdetailed production figures month by monthright up to 1942.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1853u7We have now got reports in from the policeabout the Waltham Abbey explosion. Theyare evidently very shocked at the laxitywith which Govt.establishments are run andremarked that there is no point in beinginterested in sabotage in these factories asthey are run in such a way that you have onlyto wait for them to blow up.Wearepassinga summarised version of these reports tothe Ministry of Supply.Jebb tells me that one SOKOLIN, the Sovietrepresentativ on the League of Nations atGeneva is a non-returner, who is seeking anasylum in this country. I have asked S.I.S.to sound him. We do not want him here unlesshe has got anything really important to say.According to a report that I have had from NedReid, the son of the Dominican Minister inLondon has been selling Dominican passportsat el0o a time to German Jewish refugees.His father has discovered what is going onand has kicked him out.FEBRUARY 27thThere was a board meeting today. D.D.S. gaveus an account of the Travel Committee. He istrying to get the Committee to agree toa quota of those who are merely travellingfor private reasons. A great deal of time iswasted by Stafford, who seems to have theimpression that the P.& P.0. is on trial.The real fact is that he has been trying hisbest to run his department without any policyor guiding rules and has been a butt for thecomplaints of the public. Everybody realisesthis and the Travel Committee has been set upfor the purpose of formulating a policy.The Committee have apparently agreed on onepoint, namely, that Irishmen who refuse toCatalogueiReference:kv/4/to5up will get no furtherfacilities for coming to the U K.John Phipps called here today. We are tryingto get him disembodied SO that he may be takenon here.I hear that there is a slight lull in produc-tion of aircraft here. Archer tells me thatthis may be due to the change-over from Battlesto Blenheims.ol.Stirling came in to ask about Irish tele-phone messages. He wanted a line about theI.R.A. I have put him in direet touch withCanning and suggested that in future he shouldcommunicate such messages to S.B. direct.Vickery has reliable information that Ghulam SiSiddig has been hatching a plot for a revoltin Afghanistan. It was to start in Uzbekistanbut the Soviet raised objections. They haveit is believed given way to German pressure.Ghulam will use the name of Amanullah but itseems that he is really out for himself.S.I.S. have heard from the French 2eme bureauabout travel. They suggest that Britishsubjects visiting France on holiday should besubjeet to the same restrictions as otherforeigners,namely, that they cannot proceedInore than 5 miles without a sauf conduit.They also undertake to see that those whosepassports are limited to France only will notgo further. They suggest that we should makesimilar arrangemenrs over here for Frenchcitizens. I do not think we can reciprocatebecause it will be tantamount to placpingFrench citizens on the same footing as Cat.B.enemy aliens.I had a talk with B. regarding our internalorganisation. am putting up a memo on theGataloguer juerReference:KVI4/185yu9FEBRUARY 28thAccording to A.M.Intelligence, 294 Sovietaircraft have been brought down in Finlandup to the 2nd Feb. 121 were shot down byfighters, 124 by anti-agireraft, 21 byinfantry and 28 landed owing to enginetrouble.Our air patrol now extends from the Arcticcircle to the Bay of Biscay and from thewestern coasts of Europe to some hundredsof miles west north west and south-west ofIreland, The visibility on 10-12 days inthe month at 1,000 ft. is not more than 3miles, on 13-16 days 7 miles and on 6-7 days15 miles for a ship and 4 miles for a peri-scope.There is a meeting at the H.0. on Thursdayto consider the question of importing agricul-tural labourers from Southern Ireland.The following aircraft have been sent toFinland: From France 176, U.S.A. 44, Italy35, U.K. 144.Lord TAVISTOCK has returned from Ireland withpeace proposals. They are being put intoproper form and are to be given a wide-circulation. The F.0. take the view thatpublication should go on and that the Pressshould tear it to pieces. The question ofseizing the pamphlets was considered butturned down.SOLF, the German who took a photograph of awrecked aeroplane with his OWIY camera whichhe had sold to his girl-friend, has beensentenced to 1 month's imprisonment. Thecase has had considerable publicity in thepress and there is now an outery for hisCatatoguenReferenceki/4/8t comes out of prison.There has been a good deal of criticismlatterly in the press and in Parliamentabout the work of the Tribunals.Snow, when visiting STEWART, saw on the tablea letter addressed to GORDON. STEWART hadpreviously informed him that his "GermanAntwerp friend" was coming over from Dublin.Enquiry through the S.0.0. shows that thisman is Alan Samuel GORDON, connected with ashipping firm in Dublin which runs boats tothe continent. An examination of GORDON'Spassport when he went back showed signs ofthe removal of the photograph. No action wasttaken.FEBRUARY 29thAxel WENNER-GREN, a wealthy Swede with anestate at Nassau and the largest yacht in theworld, has confided in the Governor of theBahamas that he carried out delicate nego-tiations between the P.M. and Goering at theoutbreak of war. He is now reported to bein Europe and it is said that he is associatedwith the U.S.A. Govt. impeace efforts.He is said to be in Rome and to be going toBerlin. He is particularly concerned withsaving Finland and in this sense may beplaying the German game.The Czechs have givenuis a magnum opus on theGerman Intelligence organisation and counter-espionage organisation. Jopson is translatingit.Airy has asked whether if the German Consulatis brought in by contraband controlhe can be interned. I have sent a replyin the affirmative.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/185SNOWS wireless has blown up. We haveconcocted a telegram to his friends in orderthat they may not get the impression that hehas been raided.The HOUCHIN courier service has beenestablished. It is for press and commercialuse There is now a suggestion that itshould extend its activities to neutralcountries. We are saying that we have noobjection provided that the couriers arevetted and considered to be thoroughlyreliable. It has occurred to me that theservice might be of use for our own double-cross purposes. A man who could say thathe was an employee of this courier servicewith a pe fect cover for travelling mightbe able to implant himself successfully onthe Germans.Stopford is investigating the case of oneAmadeo SEGUAIRE who is connected wiith aSpanish company which deals with Vickers.A report had reached us that information wasleaking to the Germans through this companyand through a certain Guiliemo PETRUCCIOwho may in fact be identical with SEGUAIREwho stays regularly with Sutton of Vickers.Enquiry with the firm shows that Sutton isconsidered rather untrustworthy.S.I.S. reports: Stalin is not anxious tofight any great power. He is thereforeprepared to give Germany what raw materialshe can in order that by prolonging the warshe and t.Britain may exhaust themselves.He hopes that at the conclusion of hostilitiesneither ourselves nor Germany will be in aposition to attack Russia.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/185