The National Archives(c) crown copyrightCatalogue Reference:k :KV/4/195Image Reference:693December l6thThe D.G. talked to me and Burt about the futureof B.5. Burt explained to the D.G. that therewas no necessity to be generous to the Yard inthis matter. B.5 were doing many duties whichif not performed from here would have to be doneby the Yard and that he need not anticipateany trouble from Norman Kendal. The D.G. seemedfairly satisfied and told Burt to record hisviews on the file. Unfortunately this was afile with a confidential note from Victor whichhe had expressed rather frank views on Fishand Smith. I therefore took the bull by thehorns and explained to Burt how the wholematter had arisen in Paris. He did not seemvery disturbed.SAEF I.telegram of today's date indicatesthat special attention should be paid to line-crossing activities. +heSD have been tryingto recruit and train some 8,000 pro-GermanLuxembourgers who fled before the allied advanceFrancists and Miliciens are under trainingfor work in France. Commando 130 are preparingpar achute and line-crossing operations.a.I.S. Northern italy are planning line-crossersby mountain routes into France. Uniforms andidentity papers both Canadian and American arebeing distributed to various .I.S. controlstations. Security points requiring emphasisare that agents have been given, lifts inservice vehicles, that there h as been an out-break of telephone cable cutting, and manyattempts at telephone tapping, and that threeCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1953enemy agents have recently been discovered inconfidential positions with allied militaryunits. Lastly organised escape routes arebeing prepared for German P/Ws in forward areas.Three /T military espionage agents have beendiscovered in the Strasburg area and one inthe Metz area. Four more agents have beenarrested in the Monte Carlo area. These belongedto the Bubhholtz organisation used for espionageunder commercial cover. Two further agentshave been arrested in the Marseilles area.A captured agent has stated that the G.I.S. isarranging for the landing of agents by sub-marine on the coast at wa Rochelle for 10 daymissions and return by the ame means. Six moresaboteurs have been arrested in the Strasburgarea and large quantities of explosive coalrecovered.. At least 4 are French repatriatecworkers instructed to use explosive coal inlocomotive bunkers. Animportant sabotagedumpip has been discovered near Antwerp by theuse of a mine detector. From reports on theSD sabot ge school in Uranienburg,l lemish andDutch women may be used for sabotage work.At a meeting of the RSIC on 7th Dec. Twinndrew attention to the fact that the SpanishService with which he deals had undergone ablackout. New security measures had beenintroduced by the Germans but these were notof the fundamental type introduced elsewhere.It was therefore not impossible,that thesituation in respect of the Spanish servicemight improve before long. Both Twinn andDenis rage expressed the opinion that thischange of method in spain was not the culmmna-tealaloguy Rteferenee:9/4/995o improving security3u3but was a reaction to some specific and recentdevelopment. There are two possible explana-tions, one is the capture of the OSS manand his secretary by the Germans (one of whomcertainly had a knowledge of ISOS) and theother Klop's disruptive activities in Lisbon.Herbert and irby-Green had a meeting withSection V on the 12th. K.G's view was that hegot no assistance at lLfrom the only quar-ter in England which could provide it, namelyRyder St. and he wondered why we considered itworth while his doing the work he did. SectionV.considered that K.G.S work and reports wereinvaluable to their st tions at Madrid, Sevilleand Tangiers and that as long as there is closeliaison between K.C and these stations they arenot inclined to worry. They did not acceptwithoutqualificatior the suggestion that theyare doing nothing with K.G.s reports. On theother hand they withdrew the suggestion, if theyever made it, that they are abstaining fromdoing anything on these reports because theyunderstood M.I.5 were doing what wasinecessary.It was made clear to them that we had noinformation about Gib. except what KIG.g gaveus. Only Section V. With a full knowledge ofwhat was going on in Spain from their own staticand with the responsibility for distributingISOS could give K.G. the assistance he required.A number of ISOS instances were quoted andit W S apparent that Section Vy officers atRyder St. .had no real conception of the use thatcould be made, with perfect security, by theDSO of these sources. They have however nowagreed to send out reports appearing in mostsatalogueqreferente:kp4/195d at least a weekly3sample of the standard shipping observationsthat reach Berlin from the Rock.A I.report dated 25th Nov. fromthe italianfront indicates that in the forward areas theenemy has again intensified his spying activity.Between 15th and 20th Nov. 26 agents wereapprehended. Of these, 11 were saboteurs includ-ing 3 Italian swimmer saboteurs from the No. 10M.A.S. flotilla which L anded at Leghorn.Those who came through the lines were todamage vehicles, raileay stock and variousmilitary installations. Two dumps of materialnear Lucca have been seized. Most of theespionage agents have obtained tactical intelli-gence. Two were bringing money to an agentin Florence, already captured, while threeSD envoys were to come on a a 30-day propagandamission to Naples, a new departure whichsuggests that the enemy may attempt to exploitthe discontent which is recognised to existin southern Italy. Two proved and 3 suspectedagents have been arrested in Rome and two witha W/T set near Naples. Four other agents havebeen arrested in Athens. Three of these hadW/T sets. One was a Flt/Lt. in the EreekAir Force.The number of Frenchmen estimated as being inGermany on the 3th Oct. is 2,655,000.The Japs have recently been shown a good dealof German secret equipment.They were nothowever allo ed to seeV.2. They were toldthat V.1 had been put into action ithin a yearof its first being studied, but that 12 years h ideafdlogeekieerenee:kV/a1195.2 is fired virticalyy3uinto therair: On entering the stratosphereisaimed-in the required directionby radioswhich continues for a shottime to control it.Up.to to the apex of its trajectory it is purledby its: own power and afterwards falls on toits target by its own momentum. The range isabout 350 kms. and_by and by the time it reaches. theground its speed is 1600-1700 metres per secondDecember 18th>:Lenton is still fussing about getting informatirelating. to the resumption of SITTIG'S trans:missions. We have replied to Bennett that wehave in fact no information bey old the knowledge that the transmitter is sonce moreronthe.iainibut that in cany case the matter shouldbe ehandledrithroughismu handled through Smuts:ot 16020Thada Thadameeting with-Re meeting with Ravi,Buster and DickButler. T pointediout to Rawli tha't we neededStephens to t controlTU2ohere since theforward areas allthat wwas happening insthe CIword was a transfer of the work now carriedvothe SCI units-to to the forward CSDICseemed therefore desirable that somebodyohe-operations-side-should-be-in-comnandoritheforward camp until it became predominantly. CT.Rawli-agreed-with-this-viem:but-inade-it-cleathat he thought Tin Eye should have anopportunity of giuding the policy as he himselfwould be ultimately responsible for the estab-lishment in 1 Germany. Rawli has in mind LeBosquet who hs his best interrogator: Le BosqueweatalogaoRefinanctkan/1ost Tin Lye for somereason reason-gotridofh got ridof him.THIS IS A COPYBETAINEDUNOER LCHONubHE PUBLIC RECORDE958.Moa20uoBurley has got out a fist of the variousrestrictions which have-been-modifiedonewayor another: 0. The relaxation is considerable.Pan-Air are trying to run passengers - and mailfrom Foynessto Lisbon. We are endeavouringto get this stopped. There is also a proposalto run the Span ish alr line to USA. We areinsisting that it will h ve etotouch_dowIfor control of passengers and freight onOalliedterritory-aCrimayqes:December 19thBertram Edehtelis me that Kirby-Green hasegoneback as the Duke of Gloucester wa's proposingto disembark at Gib on hiswa to AustraliayKG. G. seemed rather worried aboutthisasathe:visit was supposed to be kept secret. L toldBertram that hewould-have-to tell the theC.0. C.O. thatthe Duke's visit to Gib. would be certain told1eak to the Germansa within a few hours, thoughwhether the Germans would or could do any thingabout it 1S ranother matter.Blunt, Dickson, Postan, Noble and RoskillOcame-to-talkto-me-about-t to-talkto-me-about-the-italians to talkWeseem-to-have-got onto Anna Neagle instead of CARADINI. I have nodoubtsh is much more interesting. Itrdoes notseem worth while trying to get things right asthis cannot be done without a certain amountof dislocation. We decided therefore to waitu@atallogueRefetence.k://4/1t96 the Embassy in about347three weeks time. In the meantime Jimmy andPoston have been vetting the caretaker. Onpresent form we do not feel very inclined tomake an approach. We think th t we. shouldknow more about him first.Baxter Came to see me about Peel, one of hisexaminers who has been marked permanently unfitfor military service and placed in Cat.E. Hewants to stay on after the war. Although hiswork is good I think this would be a bad betas he is a very sick man. There is however noobjection that I C an see to his remaining on asa civilian for the present.I attended the Travel Control meeting called byHarker to discuss the future of SCOs. the W.O.are trying to cut down our ceiling. Harry wantsto get some ammunition to fight the Establish-ments Branch. T said that gener lly was worrieabout the cutting down of security but there wermany functions which the SCOs performed whichcould not be adequately pefformed by 4.0.s atany rate not by the present staff, which wasinsufficient and not always very good. Apartfrom this it seem to me that since new seaand air ports would shortly be opened andtravel very much on the increase the SCOs werelikely to be extremely busy. Apart from thisI thought the W.0. should realise what theoffice had provided in the way of SCOs for the2nd Front and the Far East and ythat the portorganisation here was really their only trainingground. They would probably want more FSP inthe future. It would be wise therefore not todisband the existing organisation.Catalogue Reference:kV/4/195Bertram Ede has written a memo on O.C Virtuallyhe wants to run the whole show except what hedescribes as the case work. the trouble isthat intelligence is built up by cases and thatthe only judges of intelligence are the peoplewho are really doing the work. Policy dependsupon the knowledge of the work, the intelli-gence product and the officers in the area.It seems to me that Ede must either run the whwhole show or confine himself solely toadministrative problems. Halfway-house isalways likely to cause friction.December 20thR.J. came in today. His position is no clearer.He made the suggestion that he might perhapstake control of the War Room. TAR told himthat as far as he knew sobin Brook had beenearmarked for this job. I told RJ that 1 wasagainst uprooting people from this office togo into the War hoom situated elsewhere. RJasked about SIME. I told him that DouglasRoberts had rather weakly given up his DSOpost at Istanbul. He had heard about this andthought it unwise. He felt that Teague ofISLD was rather too heavy a weight forRoberts.Curry talked to me about his memo on ISCOT. Heis going to see Arnold-Foster to tell him thatthe matter should be drawn to the attention ofhigherauthority. He thinks that it is speciallysignificant in view of the Polish debate. Isaid that I did not think that anybody was undeCatalogue Reference:KV/4/195349any illusions about the Lublin Committee. Theonly thing therefore tha his report wouldcontribute would be the wider issue. Theinformation however on the existence of a net-work on Comintern lines was at the momentrather fragmentary and might be more effectiveif presented later on. I told Curry that ifhis memo was presented to Cadogan he would notbe likely to read it. Loxley would probablyread it and pass it to the department. Thiswould lead to a considerable spreading ofthe knowledge of the source. It was forconsideration whether this was worth whileat the moment.Swinton rang me up last night to ask whetherhe was right in thinking that Juan MARCH whohe said was coming here, had formerly had someconnection with KLEINWORTS. I told him thiswas SO. Why he wanted to know cannot say.Tin Eye rang up. He is sending in a memostating the position as he sees it when theforward CSDIC is established. He wants itlaid down that he will have some say in theformation and control of the forward organisa-cion. He is quite satisfied about having LeBosquet as the head of the organisation andresponsible to 21 AG.The J.I.C. have written a memo on a possibleJap withdrawal from the outer zone. The presentstrength of the Japanese fleet is 4 battleships,3 fleet and converted operational carriers, twoescort carriers, 7 heavy cruisers. They may havetwo other fleet carriers under construction.Tetalogue Rererenoegktii4/lascentrate almost their328entire air force in the Phillipines. The with-drawal of their land forces to the inner zoneis now very difficult owing to the shortage ofshipping, and it may be to their advantage tohold the outer zone as far as possible in orderto deny to the allies its resources. It seemslikely therefore that they will withdraw theirnaval and air forces to the inner zone but leaveland forces except in a few outlyingspots. She may to some extent reinforce herforces in Burma from the outer zone.A Marita report shows that Strang has beenin close touch with Tamara Wilson CROWE. Itlooks a little as if he may be having an affairwith her. He has told her about his visit toMoscow, about Stalin's refusal to join in theTripartite Conference, and about a secret missiwhich he is now about to undertake in Brazil.He did not give the nature of this mission. Hewas derogatory in his views about Stalin andconditions in Russia. I do not see what I cando with this information without jeopardisingthe sources.I have read the case of Henrik MIERSEMAN. thisman, who was connected with the Germans GC &. CShas given information showing that the Germanshave been running about 10 SOE transmittersfor 18 months between August 1942 and Feb. 1944.Before closing down the Officer in charge ofthe German stations sent a message to majorsBingham,Blun and Co. "Thank you for your longmutual co-operation. In case you should cometo the continent shall receive you with thecatalogurereference:kV/4/195 your agents".3s7At the Wednesday meeting Sclater said that hehad learned that a French Press Station hadbroadcast in English morse the complete orderof battle of the allies on the western front,stating that the information hadbeen receivedfrom SHAEF. A short time later the same daya further communique was issued stating thatthis information should not be published anywherSclater has taken this up both direct withHAEF andthrough the Par Office.December 21stBuster came to talk to me about John Noble who.he is very anxious to get into his section. Iexplained to him my difficulties and saldthatI mouLd see what i could do later on. MeanihileI urged him to accept John Phipps and told himthat if I could I would get him Martin Forrestwho would be returning here eariy next year.Ihad ultimtely promised Martin to Niall Mac-Dermott to run a Wehrkreis in Germany but hewould probably not be wanted todo this work forsome months. Meanihile B. 1B would be anexcellent trining ground and perh ips tide usover the most difficult period.At 12 o'clock tody the D.G., in the presenceof bick Dutler, lemny Harris, TAR, Marriott,J.CBuster and myself, presented GARBO with theMBE. the D.G. made him a nice lit le speech.Later wre lunched at tae Savoy when GARBO res-ponded to the toast in nalting but not toobad English. think he was extremely pleased.Catalogue Reference:kV/4/195THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED85IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLICRECORDSACT 1958. NNews about the German drive, WHrC tarted onthe 17th, is a little better today. Monty hasnow taken over the 9th and lst US Armies and isconcentrating in the Louvaine area for a south-ward drive. Penetration has gone fairly far.No publicity is being given to the fact thatMonty has tiken over. He thinks that he wilbe able to restore the situation within 48hours.Five of the parachutists who have been capturedreport that 60 Germans, dressed as americanofficers complete with Chesterfields,Luc}Strikes and Jeeps, are heading for Paris wherethey intend to assassinate Eisenhower. they aresaid to be Led by Skorzeny himseif.Thismaybetrue. On the other hand it is not altogetherunlikely that it is part of a jitter campaign.has left SIS and the liaison officerwith the americans is now Bill Dunderdale.Valter his joined Lickie Coit. they have takenover Lunn's travel agency and are also goingto market a new fountain pen invented by Milesof the aircraft company, which holds enoughink for a year and will not blow up in theair as many pens do.An entertaining German document captured inBelgium at the headquarters of the Abwehrstelleand dated 2th Dec. 1941, gives an account ofa lecture delivered by Canaris,. to the assembledcontrollers af Asts on the lOth Dec. 1941. Itwas emphasised that poaching by the GestapowsataloguenBeterenbeikyi4oahtered by all availablemeans. The use of gestapo officiils as Abwehr353agents was strictly forbidden because a casehad occurred where a Gestapo official was usedby a certain Ast as an agent and paid out ofa special fund. Messages were passed under thecover name of a non-existant sub-agent. Caseshad also occurred of agents being given topsecret documents and having access to safes.In one case such an agent had been found tobe working for the enemy intelligence service.No women employees are allowed to have safekey S. Military intelligence only is the jobof Asts, hence reports on politics and moraleare strictly forbidden. The Abwehr has nothingto do with the persecution of Jews. Ast dutiesare bo be carried out in a humane, respectable,correct and cultural manner. Activity againstJews is to be avoided but not criticised.The strength of the service is estimated at2,926 officers, 931 officials, 18,251 employeesand 287 workers. Expenditure was now aboutmillion Reichsmarks a month. No excessiveluxury or entertainment should take place.Canaris was angry about an expensive enter-tainment given to himself by one Ast. Modestyis the way to good fortune. Caution and moder-ation are also necessary over the consump-cion of alcohol. There is NO be no excessivespending or celebrations. Only nonsense is tobe talked after 10 pm. AS regards the super-vision of women employees, it is mentioned thatthere is to be no exeessive dressing up, paintedlips or finger nails.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/19533December 22ndI saw Marriott, TAR and JC about Brutus. SHAEFhave intimated that they want either GARBO orBrutus to be on the air within the next few days.The trouble is that on SHAEF'S own request weput them both off the air. Presumably thereis something brewing in the way of major decep-tion for a counter-attack. So important isthis, according to Wile, that it is worthsaerificing one of our agents. In Wilde'sview it is the last occasion on which they canbe used with real advantage. This is all veryfine, but it is still important to preserveGARBO as we are intending to use him exclusivelyto smoke out the Nazis after the armistice.We have therefore decided to put Brutus on theair. This means that we have got to bring himback notionally to London. We propose to dothis tomorrow SO that he can have time tosettle down and pick up a certain amount ofinformation. We do not know yet what SHAEFwant us to put across. We have warned themthat Brutus's return is not very plausible andthat there is therefore B certain risk inusing him.Jim Hale has had a letter from Maxwell whois evidently reluctant to maintain 18A afterStage A. He says that the House of Commonshaving got rid of LOB will certainly focustheir attention on 18A. In that, case Maxwellthinks that the case is not strong enough todefend in the House. The suggestior is that ifwe really feel the need of something of thekind we must m ake application for legislationaEalaroguleerefereaee:kopyrgsted with a case.In other words as the DG puts it, we must notinsure our house until it has been burnt down.The sort of case that may might be eitaer thatof some British subject here wishing to assistthe Nazi underground movement, or someone wishingto assist the Japanese. In either case the HomeSecretary would be quite impotent unless hecould produce the evidence for prosecution. Iffor example there is a general movement to stopche war with Japan there will be no powersfor dealing ith it. The extraordinarything about all this is that the averagecitizen is perfectly content ith the situationand satisfied. that the la will not be abused.The only pepple who make a fuss are a limitednumber of so-called Liberals who feel it incum-bent upon them to protect the liberties of theignorant citizen.Peter Hope came to see meHe wanted to getsome job in S.J. I said that possibly theremight be something for him later When the WarRoom situation beeared up.I dined with GAREO, Mrs. GANBO, ommy and his wifeMiss bishop at the Dorchester last night.Mrs.G. was in tremendous form and related tome in animated and broken English the part thatshe had played in the early days of her husband!D.A. career. It is fairly clear that if at onestage she had not stimulated the eyAmerican Asst.N.A. N. A. housseau at Lisbon the case would neverhave got on its legs. GARBO was completely indespair and was intending to go to Brazil. Mrs.G. mystifiedthe American and finally whetted hisaperaliogeeReferHe:RV4A9sARBo's communicationsfrom the Germans and thereby indicating thatTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958. N.OVagents were going to the USA to commit actssabotage. GARBO, looking rather like Leninin his new beargd, is by contrast quite aplacid creature. Both are very likable charac-ters.December 23rdPearson of the Canadian D.P.. came to see me.He had nothing really to say except that hewas anxious for any information that we mightbe able to give indicating that there would bea mutiny in the camps in Canada round aboutStage A. I said that we would certainly do SOif the information came our way. On the otherhand I thought he would be more likely to hearabout it through M. M.I.19 19.Joe Lynch called t.oday. I talked to him aboutthe case ofHe is going toimpress on the Bureau that the matter is oneto which we attache great importance.December 27thBurt came to see me. He said that there wasa proposal that he should go to Paris inorder to make some preliminary enquiries intothe case of Roberts, formerly canteen managerof cunliffe Owens and now connected with thelings Club canteen in Faris and Brussels. Itis said that he is engaging in a big smugglingracket. Personally I am rather against theoffice getting mixed up in this business. It.iCataloglye Refertetree:Rd/4tigs Provost siarshal. Onthe other hand it is perfectly true to say that357we should probably make a better job of it.It is however undesirable that Burt shouldcome into the picture since he is personallyknown to Roberts. A possible result might bea suggestion that MI5 are persecuting any onewho was formerly connected with HOYES.1 spoke to the D.G. about Noakes. He is quiteready to let him go as soon as he can bereplaced. I told the DG that we ere proposito put in John Phipps and later possibly MartinForrst."ood of CICI came in. He has just got backand is being demobilised. He said that anyattempt by SIS to take over their records atthis stage would be met with a flat "No"It has already been attempted by Wharrey'successor. Wood i think entirely sees ourpoint of view about intelligence in the MidEast. I said a word to him about Joe Spencerfor whom he evidently has the highest regard.He spoke of a telegram that he had receivedfrom Ede suggesting that he should reconsiderhis resignation as we might have some otherwork for him. In order to get this messagehe had been foreed to miss a plane in Cairoand was evidently not very pleased. Themessage was somewhat incomprehensible to him Ssince he knew nothing of Ede. I told Woodthat i could not imagine what Ede had in mindunless it was some DSO point in Rangoon orSingapore. Wood said that he knew enoughabout the East to keep clear of either place.Kim Philby came in. He seemed fairly satisfiedatalogue Reterenge:KV/4/195k. I said that i. was359satisfied except that I still felt there wasa failure to appreciate the ppposition thatwould be raised to the suggestion of massfusion. I could not really see the objectionto my scheme which would in reality amountto the same thing and be much more palatable.Ede showed me a telegram he had received fromTim hiry indicating that Cass, who is GSOL I.B.at SEAC, is for the prupose of C.I.proposingto base himself of SIPS and to reinforce thisunit with MI5 personnel,possibly under thecontrol of Tim.According to the rench Ambassador in Moscow,de Gaulle did not go there to conclude a treaty.His aim was to ensure that France's foreignpolicy should not rest exclusively on herrelations with England. He alsowished to dis-pel the anxiety caused in Russia by the ideaof a bloc of western states. The French andRussian point of view is that in the past theyhave had to bear the brunt of the early Germanattack because England had never been in aposition to put a big army into the field inthe early days of a war. it was consequent:ly necessary for France and Russia to havesome closer arrangement in lealing with theGerman menace. S a matter of consequencein this identity of interests the French gaveassurances that they would not be a party toa policy directed against Russia within a blocof western states. It was only later that theRussians asked the French whether they wantedto confirm the points mentioned in the treaty.Upon de Gaulle consenting in principle, theCatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/19535Binitishs stated that tney sere pleased withthe idea of a Franco-Russian alliance becausethey considered it would be a factor in com-pleting and strengthening the Franco-britishalliance. Churchill suggested that a treatyof alliance should be realised as a 3-powerBritish-Franco-Russian treaty of alliance,but it was thought better not to lose timewaiting to transform the 2-power alliance intoa 3-power aliance. Agreement was reachedabout the Rhine frontier for France, and theCurzon Line including Vilna and -wow as theSoviet-Polish boundary, Poland to be givencompensation up to the Oder. the hussianstried to suggest that the French should recognithe Lublin Committee as the Polisn uovt.The French temporised. The stubborn attitudeof tne French held up the signing of the treatySO much SO that at the last farewell banquettalks lasted till 3 am when de Gaulle andBidault made their farewells, leaving only theFrench Ambassador with Stalin and Molotov.At 5 am de Gaulle was roused and called to theKremlin when the Treaty was signed. Presumablyhowever the French had compromised on sendingpresentation to the Lublin Committee andallowing the Committee to have its represen-tative in Paris. It is difficult to say how fafar the above account is really accurate. Itmay well have been put out by the frenchAmbassador for foreign consumption.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/195360December 30thI saw John Hill with Speir today. I told Hillthat in Cairns'' view he was notdoing himselfany good in this office but that for somereason the 1.0. Medical Board had taken aslightly different view. They ished to keephim in Cat.C. "e finally agreed that weshould concentrate on getting him releasedfrom the army on medical grounds. He couldthen go back to his legal job.At the 12 'clock meeting today I discussedthe case of Gege BELLEGARD. who is nowresiding in this countryHe has had a most remarkable car eer. Hisoutlook is apparently anti-Soviet and for thisreason he eventually got into touch with theG.I.S. in Riga, proceeding to Berlin when theSoviet occupied the Baltic States. He wasalso in touch with Finnish circles and with arepresentative of the British Service ininland. Finally he got permission to proceedto Stockholm. He has recently been brought tothis. country. Before leaving Stockholm hefixed up a liaison with a representative ofthe Japanese Embassy on whom material isbeing planted from this country. He mayultimately go to America and be used by the FBLI had a talk with Jimmy rickson and Anthony.As regards Jimay's scheme for a diplomaticneks agency to act as. a cover for his work,I said that the first essential was that thealapobreretrefereneelkvp419s a firm financialbasis and succeed on its own merits. +o dothis it would have to provide news+ for Journa-istszwhich:they-wouldinot-be-tiket likely to get getfrom other quarters: If this news were purelyof a gossipy-kind wouldi be acceptable? Ifon the other hand it was too hot, it Iwould drawattention to: itself both in -diplomatic andjournalistic. circles; possibly with awkwardresults. Jimmy. seemed: to think that it mightbe possible-to strike a-mean line-andathatnews agencies were oommon as dirt and wouldnotbe ot-be-ikely-to-attractangreat-de a great deat ofattention. I have suggested that before wetake the matter.any further Jimmy t should gothrough all his gossipy information and putforward of the kind of stuff he would offer;through the agency: He should also estimatethe extent of the flow, rsince it would: be Snouse startingcansagenc starting agency. yifitwasiagoingstot if dryup in the first few weeks. s MeanwhilewAnthon Anthonyvillthave.atalkewith- -Kim-PhilbyonfthersubjectWe also discussed the prospective agent entrwith withthe etitaians: Jimmy has: put forward ca schemefor getting into contact. It seemed to me thatsomeone else, possibly Bingham, should initiatethe scheme and Jimmy should take over if thingslooked promising.IsoI talked to TAR, Buster, Marriott and Harrisiiabouthe-case-of-Onofre-GARCIA-and-de 1a TORRE.Itis suggested that these people might possiblybe -released.Marriott released. had strong views fromthe B. LA angle, and we ultimately came to theconclusion that their release would have totbepostponed until after the cessation of fufo!hostilities:feDbOF ofCatalogue Reference:kV/4/195THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION76(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958Msu 2060L gather that the. lack of intelligence about tthe:German-concentration-on-the Luxembourgfront before their sensational attack was dueto two main reasons. DEGGShad for some timebeen referring to the area as a rest stoandre: and re-fitting area. G G.Ci& C:S. had. not tumblec tothe true meaning of this phraseology;andEFthinking that: the Germans were using that areafor resting-theirstroops,hadaused-th resting had used that partof ofthe line for doing the same thing withthe-Americanstroops resultiwasthats result was. that theAmericans cimn the line were thin and tired andthat in theirarearstheir vehicles were beingrefitted: The German concentrations Shad beencarried out in the Lwooded areas: and no reccehad been possible for nearlyica days owingrtofoggy; weather. sin any case sthere were very 3few rialpho.tographs_iavailable: Thisdoesnot however. excuse the Americans forfailingtodigtin-properly-and-establish- roadbloaksin the rear: I gather too thativast quantitiesof petrol and other stores have been establlshean the vicinity of Stavelot. Luckily howeverthese did not fall into the hands of the Geman"C" called this morning to rsee the DG oxandto-inforn-hin-that-lelix-had-resigned-andthat his resignation has been accepted:a Ithad-been-brougat-about-in-conneetion-itha-the theWar Room but the actual issue was one: ofciadministration. ion.7sApparentlyrtetix.feltthahe ought to have control over both section 9and 5: personnel in the field and switch themCataloguesReferendkV/4hg power was taken from5him and handed to Vivian. TimiS! to takeSe ction V, but I gather that Kim is toexercise a guiding hand. Felix wil be leavingthe office in about 3 weeks time. he D.G.has been asked to do that he can to get Felixre-instated in India. I think he has a contracwith SIS dating f'rom the time that he resignedhis position in the Indian Police.Someone has proeucea the following irreverandprayer and hymn for Govt. Depts:Let us pray.Oh Lord, grant that this day wecome to nodecisions,Neither run into any kind of responsibility,But that all our doings may be ordered toestablishNew Departments,For ever and ever, Amen.The prayer to pe followed by the hymn:O Thou who seest all things below,Grant that Thy servants may go show,That they may study to complyWith regulations till they die.Teach us, O Lora, to reverencecommittees more than common sense,Impress our minds to make no plan,But pass the baby when we can.And when the tempter seeks to giveUs Ieelings OI initiative,Or when alone we go too war,Chastise us with a circular.Mid war and tumuit, fire ana storms,Confirm us,Lora, we pray, with forms,Thus wili Why servants ever be,flock perfect shhep For Thee.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/195Amen.