The Nationa Archives(c) crown copyrightCatalogue Reference:k :KV/4/187Image Reference:46838can be carried by one plane.April 4thLennox tells me that the capture ofBenghazi is not as serious as it looks.The Germans have about 1 divisions ofmechanised troops. AS long as they cannotestablish effective aerodromes in thevicinity it is thought that they cannotwith their present strength do a greatdeal of harm. Given the aerodromes theycould bomb the SueZ Canal.April5tI attended a meeting of the w.Committee inthe morning. T.A.R. and J.C. were present.the principle subject of duscussion wasthe case of Snow and Celery. J.C. gave amasterly exposition of the case. He putforward the various hypotheses (1) thatSnow had not given away the whole showto the Germans as he alleged he had, thatthe mhadtintended thisistory to enable himto go into retirement with a foot in bothcamps (2) that his story was quite true,that the Dr. still thou ht that he had hisuses and could in any case be employedas a paymaster and that eventually hisplace could be taken by Celery. (3) thatSnow was a rogue and had been from thestart. In this case he would merely havebeen telling them what they knew already,namely that he was in touch with theBritish Intelligence but really working forthe Germans. J.C. pointed out that theCatalogue Reference:KV/4/187astory of Celery was still obscure. Itwas not clear whether he had actually goneinto Germany or not or whether he wasworking for us or wholeheartedly for theGermans. 11 good deal more sifting wouldhave to be done before the position iscleared up.D.G. told me today that he had practicallydecided to form an aliens block underTheo Turner (this would include aliensinontrol, B.3, 3, B.17, B.2 24 and severalother odds and ends). He wished Curryto control the subversive block as he thoughthere would be a good deal for him todo on research work into the Comintern.I said that this would be a blow to Curryas both he and I felt strongly that withHollis in control of the Communist blockand Sneath of the Fascist block Curry wouldhave very little to do, whereas Turneralready had a full time job to which itwas proposed to add a great deal more.Moreover Turner, good as hewas, had noexperience of investigation work. D.G.said finally that he thought it would bea good thing to try things out. If theydid not work we should have to go backto the old arrangement. This is all verydiscouraging.D.G. has spoken to Lord Swinton about JohnMaude going to America. He thinks thatthe idea is a good one. He will deal firstlywith the 10,000 American technicians whoare to be sent here and secondly withsecurity matters affecting ports on theCatalogue Reference:KV/4/187American continent. In this work he willbe assisted by a Naval Officer who is beingsent out by the D..I. If he is satisfac-tory we should seriously consider Leavinghim as M.I.5 representative in the States.It would of course be necessary for himto work under Stevenson.I omitted to mention the case of LonsdaleBRYANS which same up again about themiddle of last month. This man has nowreported. He had been in touch withcertain Germans alleged to be opposed tothe Naxi regime and have tried to get intotouch with hibentrop and his circle.He wanted to go to Germany for that purpose.In SO far as the contact with the Germansopposed to the Nazi regime is concerned,he states he was in touch with Lord HalifaxHopkinson tells me that Halifax's connec-tion was a very tentative one and thatBRYANS had no mandate. It is of coursequite clear that BRYANS had no charge toget intouch with Ribbentrop's circles.The identity of the Germans he was in touchwith is not known. He states that he hasgiven their names to Lord Halifaxpersonally but cannot discuss them.April 6thWar declared by Germany against the Greeksand Yugoslavs.I talked to V.V. today about JohMaudegoing to america. He thinks that theCatalogue Reference:KV/4/187qu'appointment would be a good one but feelsthat Maude should work under the directionof Stevenson who has some high-soundingtitle like General Co-Ordinating Officerof Security.The following is an interesting accountof an interview with De Valera whichtook place about 23.3.41:"I was with him about half an hour. Hewas very courteous and talked withoutrestraint. He is undoubtedly extremelyworried about Eire's lack of defences andpointed out how vulnerable to air attackwere Dublin and Cork. He said thatChurchill didn't want the ports so much asthe land behind them on which to estab-lish air bases; that the Irish people wouldnever stand for British troops enteringthe country because they would never believthey would leave again after the war andthat he doubted that he would be aple toconvince them that they had not come tostay. He deplored the"lack of trustbetween the Irish and the English",said that Churchill could clear anay thedistrust at once by making "a public state-ment that under no circumstance whatso-ever would British troops enter Lire excepton his (De Valera's) direct invitation".He said that in case of a German invasionof the south there would undoubtedly bescrapping on the Border if the troops fromthe North attempted to come over the Borderexcept on his invitation; he would not ad-Catalogue mit Reference.KVI4/18 of an invasion he842would ask for help from the North. Hetalked at great length on the subject of thpartition of the North and South and saidthat this question must always preventany real friendliness between the Irishand the English. He produced a map onwhich he has shaded off the NorthernCounties anxious to be (according to him)united with the South and under onegovernment; the only part left white Was avery small area round Belfast. I askedhim what he would do if America came intothe war, and he said "I can only repeat toyou that I am determined to maintain theneutrality of my unprotected country to thevery best of my ability. He gives onethe impression of an extremely worried manin a bad jam and determined not to admit itI had luncheon with Jee Walsh in his housethe day before the interview (which inci-dentally Walsh arranged) with De Valera,John Betjeman, Sir John Maffey's PressAttache, was the only other person atthis luncheon.nalsh did all the talking which was chieflyon such subjects as Irish art and litera-ture, and the efforts which ae said werenot sueceeding very well, to revive theItish language. He repeated several timesthat the great majority of Irishmen weredefinitely anti-Ger man, thought Britainwould win the war and wanted her to do SObecause of not wanting to be dominatedby the Germans. But that many of them coulCatalogue gae-Reference.kvi4/i8 past injustices and84on that score wanted to see England "geta really good knocking".netth 99027001T081Catalogue Reference:KVI4/187844April7thA report came in during the night to saythat 2 enemy agents had been arrested some-where between Banff and Aberdeen. Ittranspired subsequently that their nameswere Erik Gustavssen GLAD and Helge JohnNeal MOE, two Norwegians who had beenlanded by a se aplane and come ashore in arubber boat. They had a two-way wirelessset; a bicyele each, formulae for explos-ives and other sabotage material, twocameras, (one cine and one contat), revol-vers and Eloo each plus some dollars.They also had alternative suits and nailclippers believed to be for cutting wires.If they conclude their messages with thename "Henri" the Germans are to assume thattheir traffic is controlled. They arebeing brought down to London.Mosley is proposing to bring an actionagainst the Govt. for wrongful detentiorand in the meantime wants to have con-fidential access to his solicitor. Pilcherand I discussed this with theD.G. whenit was decided that Pilcher should seethe Attorney first and find out whetherthere was any possibility of the actionbeing heard. This would seem to be a realchallenge to the whole of the D.R. Thereal trouble is that the conditions atBrixton are not suitable for the detentionof political offenders. Mosley has swornaffidavits about the food, the waahingfacilities etc.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/18764sThe Swinton Executive have agreed thatthe internment camps are to be combed outfor useful workers, subject to the provisothat their cases shall be carefully vettedby the Security Service. M.A.P. are notto be allowed to put them into aircraftassembly shops or other dangerous places.There is to be a rigid application of theA.W.S. permit and vetting. Some 14,000enemy aliens have now been releasedsince the general order for internmentlast JulyLL.G. appears to be talking in a verydefeatist way. He thinks it is uselessto go on with the war, that an out and outvictory is impossible and that an earlymove should be made towards a negotiatedpeace.Lennox gave me the following news today.Benghazi has been recaptured by Germanmechanised units. We have sunk two moreGerman destroyers. The Scharnhorst andthe Gneisenau show signs of trying to getout of Brest. The Germans have madea heavy raid on the Piraeus and blownup a ship which was carrying suppliesof T.N.T. to the Greeks.April 8thWe had a short Director's meeting atwhich policy was discussed with regardto M. M.A.P. I said that I thought it wasvery important that the security of M.A.P.establishments should be co-ordinated withCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1878y6the work of this dept. since itwas clearfrom my conversation with Mr. Hildrethof the Establishment Branch of M. M.A.P.that he was intending to appoint a policeofficer at Swanage who would be makingenquiries on his own. I had asked Mr.Hildreth to come round and see the D.G.at 12 O'clock today. He duly turned upand was seen by D.G., G.,Harker,Allan Harker, andmyself. He was quite frank about theposition. There was clearly no co-ordina-tion between M.A.P. and the Air Ministry.Hildreth knew about the appointmentof Chief Inspector White at M.A.P. H.Q.but he had no idea what his duties were.He understook to find out. He knew nothingabout Archer'S work in M. .A.P. factoriesbut was very relieved to hear that some-thing was being done. As regards M.A.P. P.establishments he was very worried as heknew that these were entirely uncovered.He would be extremely grateful for anyhelp we could give him. It was suggestedto him that he might begin by appointinga local Security Officer in each establishment who could communicate his troubleseither to the head of the M.A.P. SecurityService or direct to our R.S.L.O. Heseemed to think that this was an excellentidea.I saw Curry today and broke to him thenews that D.G. wanted him to look afterthe subversive block. I had previouslyon a humber of occasions informed D.G.that I felt Curry would be wasted sinceboth Hollis and Sneath were quite capableCatalogue Reference:KVI47187647of looking after their own shows. D.G.had it in mind that Curry should do re-search work on the Comintern and kindredorganisations and in accordance with asuggestion made by Charles he thoughtCurry could look after Dick White's andpossibly also Theo Turner's sections atBlenheim. If he does all this we shallmore or less be back where we started.I still think that the Secretariat andAliens Control should be under Theo,that Hollis and Sneath could manage theirown affairs and that Curry should comeinto the so-called espionage block andcontrol the activities of the AliensSections that are not already under Dick,plus B.3 and B. 24. It is obviously uselessto try and do nything more about this.It has been agreed that No. 3's in egionsare to be given the rank of Lieutenant.I saw Neville and Caulfield at N.I.D.today. Nevill had a proposal from theD.N.I. that we should supply him with aregular report on the Free French Navy.I said that in present circumstancesthis would be extremely difficult, XXRIt had always been our policy to co-operatewith the Security units of the Allied For-ceS and to rely on them to keep theirhoues in order. Any departure from thispolicy particularly in the case of theF.F.N. would probably end in trouble.We do of course get casual reports un-seolicited from various people aboutpersonalities in the F.F.N. and we shouldataloguevReference:ev/4/8zas these on.su&But if we were to try and put agents intothe F.F.N. the policy would have to besanctioned from above. Caulfield wantedto know what we could do to provide suit-able organisations at Fleet bases for thepreparation of false documents. These hadbeen required in connection with someoperation up the Danube and had had to behastily improvised. I said that I thoughtOthat S. I.S. would be better qualified totgive an opinion than ourselves. I didsee however immense difficulties in settingup any organisation of this kind whichwould be able to meet all contingencies.Very careful preparation was necessaryand an intimate knowledge of the documentsstamps etc. in use in the particular local.ity.S.0.2. have asked whether we can supplythem with Princess HOHENLOHE'S letters forpublication in America. They apparentlywant to help one of their contacts there.I have said that I think it is extremelyundesirable since HOHENLOHE might wellretaliate by the publication of hother-mere's letters which he wrote to Hitlerand also Hitler's replies. FFulford is to expand his section to coverall individuals and organisationsinterested in an negotiated peace.News from the Near East ie not good. Weare back at Tobruk and the Germans havesucceeded in getting through the StrumaValley.. The AEgean has been reached.Catalogue Reference:KV4/gunApril 9thStephens reports that the two Norwegians,GLAD and MOE, are genuinely anxious toassist this country. He recommends thatthey should be removed from Ham and takenout to dinner. I have arranged with Burtto have two men on guard outside Dingham'sflat where they will be staying.D.N.1 has written to say that he would beglad if Boddington could be placed at thehead of the Marine Sabotage Section withBurn as his assistant. This seems to meto be rather unwarrantable interferencein our affairs. He says that Boddingtongets on SO well with the Navy and that heunderstands that there is no love lostbetween him abd our Sabotage Section whichdo not appear to have been very successfulin the cases they have handled. The D.4.intends to send a rather strongly-wordedreply which will indicate to the D.N.I.that he should keep off the grass.The Germans have occupied Salonica.April l0thLast night's party with the Norwegianshas raised doubts in the minds of thosepresent. Certainly a number of difficultiehave to be got over. GLAD appears to havejoined the Germans at a very early stageafter the invasion of Norway. He was fora time employed in their censorship butCatalogue maintains Referente:ktvi4i187lpe Reference.kv a lot of his850countrymen to join up with the Norwegianforces. MOE seems to be rather under thethumb of GLAD.Lakin came to see me today about theship Parracombe which is to leave Leithon Sunday night for an unknown destina-tion. Commander Lewis had seen Col. l.Stan-ford at an I.S.S.B. meeting and had askedhim to do what he could to prevent theinformation about the departure of thisship from leaking out. Senter went roundto see Lewis with a view to getting somefurther particulars. He was told thatthe ship would leave Leithx, that it wouldcarry aircraft material, that it would goin convoy OGib. and make its way thencealone. There was to be a Spaniard onboard and there seems to be some sugges-tion that the ship would fly the Spanishflag. Lakin wanted Boddington to go upto Leith I said that it was quite ridic-ulous of the Admiralty to expect us towork in this way. If they wanted us tohelp them they should call us in in thebeginnign and give us the fullest possibleparticulars. Where was the aircraftmaterial coming from? At what stationwould it be unloaded? In what shedswouldit be placed? What dockers would be emp-loyed etc. etc. I rang up Lewis and gavehim my views. He said he would try andextract some information on these pointsbut that it was very difficult. I askedwhether it would be any use my seeing theD.N.I. He said that the D.N.I. was awayand that he doubted whether he would beCatalogue AReferencekth8 Reference These matters areGSYapparently in the h ends of the OperationsBranches who keep everything under theirhats. I have spoken to D.G' about thisand when Doddington returns we are to putin a letter of protest.Cowgillhas sent us a charter for R.S.S.It seems to lay far too much emphasis onthe interception of the Group trafficand to neglect the possibility ofillicit transmissions from this country.We are replying in this sense.Dick, Dick,T.A.R.,J.C., Marriott and myself hada long discussion about Snow and Celery.It was agreed that the only safe coursewas to assume that the Doctor knew aboutour controlled agents and that he probablyknew as much about it as Snow or Celery.On this assumption Snow can be of littleif any further use to us but the fact thatthe Doctor has given him 10,000 and theexplosives shows that he wishes himselfto keep the party alive. the reasonsfor this may be a wish to maintain hisown prestige, a wish to use Snow as paymaster or for contacts in the event ofinvasion and the belief that he can learna great deal by studying information whichwe allow to go over, because it will tellhim what we regard as unimport and whatwe regard as important. The fact that hewishes to keep the party alive is a strongargument for closing down oon it and it isalso desirable that we should put the onusof ending it upon him. .Snow will thereforethat we propose toCatalogue send a message on 3aturday to the effect8S2,that his health and nerves have collapsedand that he must throw in his hand. Hewill also ask what he is to do with histransmitters and his explesives. Theadvantages gained from this course willbe (1) we shall be able to observe Snow'sreactions which may help us to decidehowfar he has involved himself on theother side and (2) we shall be able towatch the Doctor's reactions since hemust either himself break up thte partyby refusing to answer or send some sortof reply and instructions to Snow. IfSnow accepts the decision without commentor a suggested alternative we shall thentell him that we believe Celery's storythat Snow never warned him, which weregard as a foolish and treacherous acton Snow's part. It is possible that thisstatement may elicit from Snow furtheraccusations and possible information aboutCelery.Tate in the meantime will go over withrenewed and urgent requests for money.He will explain that he cannot send anyvaluable information because his moneyis running SO short, that he dare notspend it on travelling about to procureinformation. If he is not helped at oncehe must throw up the sponge. Here againwe shall be able to decide according tothe Dr.S reply what is to be done withTate and the Dr. will haveythe responsi-bility of breaking up the party withconsequent loss of prestige to himself.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/187653If Snow really did tell the Dr. that histraffic was controlled the Dr. must knowthat Tate is also controlled.Celery. We shall hold C. in play untilwe have more information through Snow andTate. C. will write a letter which willbe sent to Lisbon as though it had beencarried over by a ship's steward or seamanin which he will say that he trying hardto go over to Lisbon again according tohis instructions but that it is becomingmore and more difficult to obtain a seit se itin the plane and he cannot be sure when hewill be able to obtain one. In the meantinhe would welcome further i structions ifthey can be conveyed to him.the future control of Snow and Celery wasnot finally decided on. Therewas generalagreement that they would have to bekept under close supervision and that itmight be necessary to shut Snow up oralternatively to remove him from the countrThe reports from Lisbon on his activitiesthere are urgnelty needed before a deci-sion on this point can be arrived at.This meeting was held after Dick hadexamined both Snow and Celery and thenconfronted them with each other in orderthat they could argue out the discrepanciesin their statements. Dick felt confidentthat Rantzau knew that both Dnow and Celerywere under the control of the BritishIntelligence Service but that he had de-cided to use both of them as agents againstCatalogueReference:KV/4/187 Catalogue Bantzau probably saw a854certain advantage in the situation asSnow and Celery might in these circum-stances. be able to get through portcontrols carrying with them large sumeOf money and equipment for sabotage.The Dr. may have accepted Snow's word thathis agents in .Wales were not compromisedand could therefore be used for sabotagepurposes. It seems fairly clear thatCelery did not know the party was blownbefore he went into Germany. Snow mayhave been prevented from telling himby the Dr. who was anxious to test Celeryindependently or he may have been activateby motives of personal spite and jealousyagainst Celery. It was curicusly notice-able that in spite of the unpleasantthings that Snow and Celery had said abouteach other they did not embark on anyserious recriminations, and in theendseemed quite ready to go on working toge-ther.D.N.I. is employing Louis de WOHL to readthe horoscopes of the most importantAdmirals in the tavy and also those ofHitler, Mussolini, Darlan and Portal.Merritt of N. I.D. is his intermediary.It is believed that D.N.I. himself is astrong believer in astrology. On theother hand it may be that since Hitlerworks on these lines and de WOHL isacquaintea with the methods of Hitlersastrologer ,D..t. hopes to work outthe most propitious for Hitler to act.The whole business seems to me to behighly, misleading and dangerous.CatalogueReference:kV/4/187THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED855IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 apreoocThere seems some likelihodd that J.iaude's services will not be required.i inAmerica after all. Stevenson alredy hada port security organisation of a kind.The position is not yet clear whether thereis room for an M. representative onhis staff.April llthInvestigation into the case of TerBRAAK the Dutch parachutist found deadina shelter at Cambridge is beginningto reveal a good many holes in the net.It seems that there is some system bywhich these people can obtain temporaryration cards. Hart is going into thematter in great detail.S.I.S. are proposing to make use ofand his foreign organisationfor the purpose getting inform.tio fromenemy occupied territory.Had a conference with Dick and B. 2a a O1the Norwegians. We are not yet satis-fied as to their bona fides and thereare still a number enzuiries to be made.he do not iintend to put them on the airfor the moment. It is proposed that weshall eventually put over the story thatthey have given themselves yo to theauthorities and handed over their sabotageequipment, having posed as bona fiderefugees who joined the German S.S. inorder that they might escape to thisCatalogue PeferENCe:IK/4VD8Zr wireless set andhave now got taken on, one in the BritishS30Army and one in the Norwegian Army, orpossibly in some other form of employment.I have Suggested to V.V. that he shouldcommunicate with Stevenson with a view togetting the F.B.I. to vet a dozen or SOofthe technicians who are coining to thiscountry and intreauce the to his Germanfriends as possible agents for the Germnservice. In this way we could build upquite a nice little show, which ill setRantzau's mind at rest.Curry,Holiis and I nad ia conference todaywith V.V. and ootman about building upsome organisation to de il with contemporarysocial movements. Our objective is tocollect authenticated inside informationon important politico-socil movements inall European countries and G.B and U.S.A.on their aims leading personalities, andpractical chances of puttin; their ide2s into effect. It is suggested that Fulfordand possibly burgess will undertake thiswork in close co-operation with Fottmen.April 12thI spent te whole morning visitin2 theCensorship with D.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 20oo:Herbert seems very much opposedto our receiving letters in original unlessthe circumstances are exceptional. Hesays th his Minister has peen severelycriticised for the deliys which occur.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/187451I have been talking to Hookinson apoutthe Hungarin wireless. Tn spite of thefact that Hungary is nov fignting for theGermans the M.A. is still olazing awayin his own oarticuliar cypher. The F.0.take the vie that, as long as a diplomitis in this country he can communicite withhis Govt. aa he still olds diplomaticprevilige. The use O1 the wireless sethas been sanctioned ofiiciily, SO hedoes not think anything can be done.This seems to me an outrigeous situationand I am pressing the matter. IL nave sidthat in any Case we must be fully acnuann-ted with the iacts about the disposal ofthe set. if he tikes it with him it mustbe examined Lo see if it was complete.I Ifhe leaves it here we musttake it over.Dick has had an interesting conferencewith all those concerned in theLAUREYSSENScase. It seems fairly clear that L.had a number of visiting cards of a ladyin Lisbon. ie also had a good many copiesof her photograph. Moreover he has beenseen associiting with other seamenat a cafe in Erith. Most of tae peoplewho had seen him thought that he was a duilwitted Flemish peisant. It seems morelikely that he is quite an intelligentGerman agent and that his protestationsabout not being able to reid or write inspite of the fact that he carried on hima very good pen and pencil are quitevalueless. What he is clearly doing is togive the visiting card and a copy of theCatalogue Refarencerky/4/87an seman who mightmake a good German agent.ss8They are told to call on her when nextin Lisbon if they want to have a good time.She is of course merely a German recruitingagent. It is significant that the addresson the visiting card was differnt to theaddress for the same girl that L. had inhis notebook.I have put forward to D.G. a recommendationOby Curry and controlling officers thatsections should have extra staff to super-vise their carding and extracting and thatsomebody should be appointed in theregistry for each section to deal with,in matters affecting this work. Curryfeels that if we are to be responsiblefor the carding and extracting we shouldbe in touch with the person concerned inorder to see that our instructions arecarried out.An S.I.S. report states that the Germansare concentrating in Denmark and thatthere are rumours of an attack on Sweden.From other sources it is clear that theGermans are rather nervous about an attackby ourselves on Norway and possibly onthe Swedish iron ore mines. This con-centration may therefore be a precautionto meet such an eventuality.April 15thEaster weekend. News romyLibya is bad.The Germans appear to pe in Bardia.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/18April 14thI had a discussion with Lakin today. Heis worried about the future of W.3. 3. andevidently feels very strongly that weought to take over responsibility, forsecurity arrangements in all operationsby the fighting services. I said that ithough this was rather a big order butthat there were obviously many thingswe could do which the fighting servicesebuld not do. What seemed to me essentialwas that if we were to undertake this workwe must be brought in right from the start,and assist in the actual planning of theoperation.Today's news is that theGermans have reachedSollum but we still have forces holding outat Tobruk. News on the Greek front seemsto be slightly better and there is a reportthat the Yugoslavs have entered Durazzo.April lothMeeting ttkinniiidnsouse on vettingof Americans and air personnel - 50,000technic ana are to come over here and haveto be vetted by S.I.S. in conjunction withthe F.B.I. Anxiety was felt about ferrypilots who had alre idy been recruited byM.A.P. independently. Out of 124, 42n d been found to be unsatisiactory,mainlyon account of drunkenness. After a certaindetay they had been allowed to go back toU.S.A. This was to be deprecated sinceCatalogue Reference:KV/4/187sothey had full knowledge of the locationof our aerodromes and the factories wherethe planes were made. They must alsokno about our balloon barrages and otherdefence measures. It seemed that Mr.Bickle had been recruiting these peopleby advertisement. I pointed out thedangers of such a course as it was inthis way that the enemy often recruitedhis agents.The Germans have been informed that Snowis seriously ill. They have replied thatthey hope he will soon be peter, thathe must make his own arrangements abouthis wireless set, and that if he canresume his former activities later on3O much the better. They will continueto listen for him at the appointed tires.I lunched with A.5 A. whom I met for thefirst time. She seemed very intelligentand very anxious to continue her workif a suitable sphere could be found. Ipromised to see what I could do.April 17thTate had been pressing the Germans tolet him have some money. They have sug-gested dropping Some by aeroplane andsending a larger amount later c/o thePost Office at Watford.I saw Medhurst. He promised to make thenecessary arrangements, to see that theCatalogue aeroplane Reference:kyt4/i87i Reference was not att is icked proposed in the to partic- drop theormoney.We have at last arranged for the dismant-ling of the Hung rian M. A. wireless. Thiswas done in the presence of a representa-tive of this office. The M.A.,presumablywith his tongue well in his cheek, eX-pressed his gratitude to the British Govt.for having given him facilities in thepast.WEGENER of Siemens Schuckert has beenbrought up to the Oratory Schools. He isto be visited there by his Sister andone of M'S people, with the objectof hisdisclosing to M's man the name and addressof somebody who might be prepared to actin German interests.An Italian convoy of 5 destroyers has beensunk offTripoli. This is regarded is animportant and highly successful operation,since the convoys contained reinforcementsand armaments for the Germans in LibyaApil l3thNew registry procedure has come intoforce today. All papers except urgentones are to be sent direct to the regis-try to be joined up with their files.Iam afraid the delay is likely to be con-siderable and that a large number of fileswhich are not required will pe travellingto and fro beteen London and the country.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1878iAt 12 nnon today a parachute was discoveredunder a hedge in the I.0.W It was openand complete together with a sheepskincoat bearing the name HAUK on the collar,Lying helmet and life jacket. It turnedout to be the property of a P.W. who hadbaled out the week previously.2lstApril 2LatMutt and Jeff are now established in thevilla at Hendon, where they have succeededin establishing contact. Generally speak-ing we are more satisfied about theirbona fides but person ally I feel thatJeff has rather too much German backgroundto enable US ever to regard him as relia-ble.Had a talk today with the D.G. aboutcarding. I told him that I was seriouslyworried about the suggestion that weshould not card the reports of ourCColonial and Dominion links or reportsreceived from S.I.S. I thought that ifthis practice was to come into forceit was necessary to issue some orderto all sections of the office informingthem of the position and pointing outthat in future they would have regarda look up in our registry as incomplete.This would mean that they would have tomake fairly extensive references to therecords of our links abroad and to S.I.5.He tald me that he was quite prepared forsuch an order to go out and that heCatalogue Retefence;key4/szrequest all names to all which ourthey thought were of any more than merelylocal significance. These he thoughtshould be carded. I pointed out thatthe difficulty in all this work was thatone could rarely tell at the time whatnames were likely to be of significanceat some later date and only by extensivecarding could one hope to get traces inthe future.April 22ndWe had a director's meeting at which thenew Intelligence Bareau under Col. Lentonwith h. g. t Cape town and Pretoria wasdiscussed. It seems that we are nowcommunic ting with this Bureau whichstrikes me as being a somewhat cumbersoneorganisation.After the meeting I had a very frank talkwith Horrocks. 1 told him about myanxieties about the registry and the newsystem by which section officers were togive directions about carding and extract-ing. I thought that if this work was tobe done properly it would be necessaryto have someone to see that the sectionleader's orders were properly carried out.Horrocks thought this might be necessarybut felt it would be best togive thesystem a trial before coming to any deci-sion. I then talked about the decision torely upon S.I.S for the carding of theirdocuments and also to a large extent onour colonial links whose reports were nolonger to be carded in any detail.Catalogue FReference.kV/4/187 seemed much in favour of&64starting a comblined registry with S.I.S.in order to cover this ground. I told himthat L had esxpressed this view verystrongly to tae D.G. who did not seem verykeen about the idea. If Horrocks couldpersuade nim to start something of thekind I personally should welcome it, asI felt that the present arranginent waslikely to leave nasty gap in our recordsandto be detrimentil to the work bothNOW and in the future.COPYRETAINEDSECTION2eod31958.I saw Lennox today. le hive 2 divisionsand L armoured brigade in Greece. TheGeemanshave tiken uemnos, Thasos andImros. the leit wing of the Greek armyis more or less cut of iand will have tosurrender. TO of our battalions on theright wing nave got left behind. AttemptsCataloguerReference.ki48t ike them of by se.In Libya there are about 2,000 wops and:Abs2.500 Germans at Sollum. The Navy aredoing their best to stop supplies reachingLibya. In Abyssinia there are still about40,000 wops in the vicinity of Addis AbabaThe Luke of Aosta has been given 48 hoursto decide about the fate of Italianwomen. We had told him that if he didnot surrender we could not guarantee theirsafety, and we should not have the shipsto repatriate them.Tripoli has been heavily bombardedfrom the sea. Some 3,000 tons of shellhave been put into the town. We have onebrigade in Irag.April 23rdWe had a meeting here with V.V. Neville,Allan, Vick, Taylor Tay lor and Jeffes about theNaval Mission to the U.S.A. All wereagreed about the necessity of seding oneof our port control officers, but A.D.N.I.thought he should be part of the iavalMission and be under the orders cf Craig.V.V. wa.s very emphatic about any workdone on the civil security side at port?would have to be the responsibility O.Stevenson who already had 3 fairly exten-sive organisation and had been establishedby the American authorities S ChiefCo-ordinating Officer for Security. Itwould create an impossible situation ifcontacts the mission with were Stev to eson's make officers, independent andmoreover this would be entirely misunder-Catalogaeefereneev4/87r authorites, whothemselves nad given Stevenson his title.All were agreed on this point exceptA.D.N.I. who felt he would have to referthe matter to the D.N.I.A Belgian n med GILS who was asoociatedwith LAEREYSSENS had escapedf fromthePatriotic Schools after a preliminaryinterrogation.April 24thD.G. held a meeting about the future ofV.3.The present situation vis a vis theI.S.S.B. is certainly unsatisfactory. Oninsufficient data we constantly get lastminute requests to safeguard some opera-tion and it is obviously impossible forus to give proper service. If the ServiceDepts. Require our help they must ka seekour cooperation in the early stages ofplanning, when it may be necessary toconsult the S.C.0. and R.S.L.0. In thisway many mistakes could be prevented.The I.S.S.B. are inclined to set up theirown machinery for this purpose and tomake use of our officers as and when itpleases them. This raises a rather funda-mental issue particular in SO far asS.C.0.S are concerned. Does D.D.8.3control port security officers in hiscapacity as a director of security ser-vice or as D.D.M.I. security W.0.? Ormore broadly if somebody said that theS.C.0.s workot at the port of Liverpoolwas being badly conducted, Who would beheld responsible, the D.G. or the W.O.?In my view it would be the D.G. and ICatalogue Cataloguerefelerice:kviayis?rte by the charter641of the Security Service as laid down inthe War Book. Harry Allan did not seem tobe very clear on this point. If the D.G.is responsible he clearly cannot have hisport security officers making reports tothe W.0. without his knowledge and approva]I have had a talk with Curry and Theoabout the reorganisatio scheme. Thetrouble is that neither Theo nor myselfhave any very competent person in thecountry to control the work of our sec-tions. Curry feels that if he is to goon looking after them he will not be ableto do the research work which he feels hemust do if he is usefully to control theactivities of the Subversive block.Curry is very distressed about his positiand feels I think that he is being side-tracked on to work which he is not reallycompetent to do and that his knowledge ofthe German organisation is not beingutilised.A Norwegian boat has arrived at Lerwickwhich we regard as highly suspect. Grouptraffic has S nown that some expeditionis being planned in Norway to send agentsover here, and that an individual nameknown as FRISCO from the Victoria HotelAalsund was to be in charge. The Norwegianboat which arrived has on board a mancalled JORGENSEN whowas born in San Fran-cisco and admits that ne was the hallporter at the Victoria Hotel,Aalsund.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/187868JORGENSEN and the crew are being detainedat the Patrictic Schools.The Censorship are being very troublesomeabout sending up letters in original.The comment slips are inadequate for ourpurposes and without knowing the casesin detail it is difficult for our censor-ship officers to say what letters shouldbe held. We are trying to speed up theOarrangements in order to meet Censorshipdifficulties.I lunched with Janson and an AmericanMarine called McQueen. McQueen expressedgreat anxiety about the lack of securityat the Americer Emb say. He said thatanybody could get into the building andthat highly secret documents were leftlying about in people's rooms. I toldhim that we should be quite ready to givethe American Embassy any assist nce oradvice on security matters but that as wedealt through Herschel Johnson it wouldbe better if the request came from him.April 25thWe had a further meeting about W.3 at whicit was decided to send a letter to allService depts. asking them to take partin a discussion here at which the respec-tive responsibilities of the I.S.S.B.and the S.S. would be clearly defined.I saw Lane today. He was rather worriedabout his position. I said that he had notCatalogue Reference:KV/4/187been given the Cardiff region as EddieGrant was considered to be more suitablefor the post. I also discussed with himhis various memoranda, particularly theone on a modus operandi. I explained tohim that our work was in many ways differ-ent to ordinary police work and that itdid not readily lend itself to a cut anddried system. the fundamental differt ncewas that in crimina cases some act hadbeen committed which was known to theauthorities whereas in cases of espion.age the act had been committed but nobodyknew anything about it. it was necess rytherefore to employ different methods ofapproaI understand that 15.000 lb bomos are nonin production.April 26thMutt and Jeff are going on the air onMonday with their full story. they aregoingto say that they have, after consider.able adventures, given themselves up asrefugees and succeeded in getting throughthe various xaminations to which theyhave been subjected. That they await thedecidion of the authorities as to how theyare to be employed. Ultimately we hopeto work them into the position of examinersto the exisitng Immigration authorities.This may give us considerable help insorting out ht- bodies of refugees whoarrive in future. The Germans arearranging for someone to come over andgive Tate his money. This man is describedCatalogae tReferenoekvi4/1s Phoenix in Hamburg"We intend to arrest both him and Tate.Elaborate precautions to effect thearrest are being planned.Curry is very worried about the positionof B.l He rather naturally wants to knowwhether if B.1. is in his block he isresponsiblefor their work. The old systemby which B.1 existed in a state of semi-independence is extremely undesirable.Particularly since it seems that theirstandards for admission to the Army andtheir methods of investigation leave agood deal to be desired. I feel thattheir whole machinery needs overh ul andclose supervision. It also needs to beco-ordinated with the work of the R.S.L.O.I saw Lennox today. He tells me that weare evacuating Greece tonight. Yugoslavswill go first, then ourselves, then theGreeks.The invasion of Spain is expected Withinthe next two weeks.An important convoy is leaving forAlexandria. The Turks are to withdrawtheir main forces behind the bosphorus.A German invasion of spain is expectedbefore long and it is not thought that wecan hold Gib. indefinitely. Operationsto counteract this disadvantage have beenplanned.April 27thThe Belgian GILS has been caught by theCatalogue Reference:KV/4/187Liverpool police and is to be taken backunder escort to the Patriotic Schoolsbefore going to Brixton. It is hoped thatthis may be an example to the other in-mates of the R.P.S. There is no doubtthat GILS was closely associated withLAUREYSSENS and that he intended to act asone of his sub-agents. He certainlyknew what L. was doing. This we have gotfrom GILS! mistress through whom thepolice effected his arrest.We are sending out an .B.Officer andport security officers to Freetown andLagos. This matter had apparently beenarranged independently by Harry Allan andthe W.O. Meanwhile the C.0. had beenmaking arrangements for someone to co-ordinate intelligence in W. Africa where thereis considerable enemy activity.It is reported that MARSCHNER the Germanparachutist whocame down in Lire wasintending to visit UNLAND.April 2othCurry' view about the reorganisationis that attempts to si mplify complexproblems often lead to greater complexity.Personally I am inclined to agree withhim. we are doing our best to adapt our-selves to the new arrangement.We had a meeting of D.G.. Hy YAllen,Jeli andDick on the uestion of intellipence inW.Africa. It was decided that we shouldwait for Sir ans Visscher's report beoreCatalogue Reference:KVI4/187g72deciding whether it is necessary to havea security service representative on theGovernor's conference, who would deal withthe various aspects of our work in thehinterland, and co-ordinate that workwith port security.D.G. and I visited the Censorship whereAdmiral Sturdee showed us over thetelegraphic branch. Herpert again emph-asised the importance of getting originalsquickly released.April 29thWe had a director's meeting t which plansduring a possible invasion were discussed.Divisions were asked to give some estimateof the number of people they consideredto be essential to the working of theoffice at such a time. I said that thiswould present considerable difficultyfrom the point of view of B.Division,since the number of people employed onpurely academic research work was verysmall. D.G. asked the meeting whetherthey had any questions to ask about thereorganisation order I said that whileit was no longer my concern I could notquite understand from the text whetherthe Director of F. was to be responsiblefor B.l's work or not. D.G. said that hewas. This means of course that Curry willhave to go into B.I's worky and see thatit is being done properly.Catalogue Referente!kv/4/i87ry Reference and Theo after themeeting.The was very anxious that Curryshould go on assisting his sections inthe country if this was at all possible.While I thinkCurry was quite ready to dothis work he felt that if he did he wouldnot be able to give much time to otherthings and to the work of his owndivision.D.G. saw Fuliord,( urry and I on theFootman plan. D.G. wanted rulford tolook into the question and put up a memo.As a preliminary step Curry and Fulford argoing to have a. talk with Footman.I saw winant in the afternoon. He wasworried about a letter I had writtenconcerning an American citizen named FLORE-ENCE. F. who is an American professorof somewhat left-wing and pacifist views,is doing researc work at DirminghamUniversity and asked for a permit tovisit a protected area in order to carryout certain work he was doing for theAmbassador. I had therefore written tothe Embassy asking if this was true andif SO whether the Ambassador thoughtit necessary fr F. to move about inprotected areas in order to carry out hiswork. The Ambassador told me he hadknown t. for many years, that he hadbeen pacifist in the last war but he wasanything but a pacfisit in this. Heassured me that he was thoroughly pro-British at heart. Winant was extremelypleasant but a little shy at first. HeCatalogte REferenee.:V/4/187 lectual and talks74very quietly, SO quietly that at times Icould hardly hear him. We talked quitea lot about Russia and ab ut communists.He thought we had mishandled the Russiansituation. He had actually seen Russianplanes on Czechosloval aerodromes afterMunich and he thought that if we had goneall out to get Russia's cooperation thenshe might have come in on our side in thepresent struggle. I said that thepresence of these planes in Czechoslovakiawere certainly difficult to explain. Idid think that they might have givencertain technical aid to Czechoslovakiahad a war been started at the time ofhave Munich gone but very I doubted far. Personally whether this I would regardedRussia as being entirely cynical in thepresent stru gle. She had started theEurope n war knowing exactly what she6as doing and she had peen in fairlyclose relations with the Germans eversince 1923, on all matters affectingarmaments and intelligence. Her presentpolicy seemed to be based on a desireto preserve the integrity of the SovietUnion and with this object to avoid aclash with Germany. I thought also thatshe had a long term view of seeingGermany and the. British Empire exhaustthemselves after whic 2 she would resumeanactive world revolutionary policy.I knew I was unorthodox but I stronglybelievedthat the idea of world revolutionstill held a place in Soviet policy.Winant disagreed about the Third Inter-national. He thought that we had alwaysCatalogue pgufeaReferehce:kviarisenificance in relation575to the communist movement in this country.I explained to him that while these mayhave been the views of certain die-hardpoliticians they had not been the viewsof the Government. We h ad always maintainethat continued legality of the partyacted as a useful safety vayve. Itbrought to light certain genuine grievancewhich were admittedly put forward forpurely political ends and SO caused theLabour leaders and ultimately theNational or Conserv tive uovt. to passsocial legilsation. Progress had beenachieved in this way over a period of 20years, although things moved slower thansome people wished. I felt that if theywere forced to move quicker there mightvery easily be a swing of the pendulum inthe other direction. He entirely agreedwith this. During the whole discussionwhich was somewhat length y, Winant'ssecretary kept on coming in to announceanother appointment. Winant forced himeach time to retire. Eventually I got upand said that I could see if I did notleave he would be getting into serioustrouble with his secretary. We partedon a very friendly note ind he askedme to come and see him gain or to lunchwith him. He has a very pleasant person-ality, has travelled a great deal, and isextremely interested in all social andpolitical problems. I should imaginethat he might on occasions get rathercarried away by his enthusiasms, and byhis fairmindedness.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/187-s76 76Sir Hans Visscher called in the morningand was seen by D.G. and myself. He isleaving by air for W. Africa t morrow andwill report on the situation to us andM.1.6 as soon as possible.Lennox tells me that SO f r we have got35,000 troops out of Greece. 1,000ofthem are in Crete. We lost 1 troop shipwith 1,000 men on board and 2 destroyers.It is thought that the Germans may becontemplating an attack on Crete. Plansfor an attack on Egypt have eenkept.Hitler hopes to be able to use the SuezCanal by the end OI May. The Germanshave 5 columns advancing in the vicinityof Sollum but have not made much progresslately. We lost altogether 20 ships inthe port of Piraeus. The Germans have shot20 of de Gaulle's men captured in Libya.The P.M. has ordered that the next 20 Ger-mans captured by us are to be h inded overto de Gaulle. Thereis a certain amountof anxiety about an attack by air-pornetroops on Syria. America is asking Vichyto stand firm in Syria.April 30thI discussed the case f del CAMDO withthe D.G. del CAMPO is a self-coniessedGerman agent of Cuban origin who camehere from Spain and has been interned.We are getting a rellable RepublicaISpaniard to impersonate him and go tothe Spanish Consul at Newcastle with aCataloguelReference:kVi4/187ce The spanish411Consul is known to be anti-British andto be sending reports to Suner about airraid damage, shipping conditions etc. onthe Tyne. We want to see whether he isprepared to give positive assistance toa German agent. MBrooman-White wants toget 2 men employed in the Army transferredto London. They both have Spanishconnec-tions and may be useful. Pearson andHarry are rther sticky about this. Itold Pearson that our work was unorthodoxand had to be carried out in unorthodoxways. I felt therefore that the Servicesshoudd take a rather different linein regard to problems of this sort. Theywanted the information and they must assisus to get it. I think he sa the pointand he is prepared to reconsider thequestion.May lst.Had a meeting with the D.G.,V.V. and-Harry about the party for U.S.. V.V. wasanxious about the position of the portsecurity officer vis a vis Stevenson.The matter has I think been adjustedand it is understood th t Stratton illhave to work under Stevenson's directions.I had a meeting with Dick and Felix aboutthe Norwegians. We have now had 80arrivals in 7 different boats, and theris reasontot think possibly there may besome Trojan Horse going on. One of theboats is the Tarnevik about which we hadprevious knowledge. The skipper is oneIANSEN who has been recognised by JORGENSECatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/187$78at the RPS as a man who had been in constarcommunication with the Germans. J. hadseen him at the Victoria otel,Aalsund.HANSNEN had been in America and knewSan Francisco. It seems likely thereforethat he and not J. is the man FRISCOpreviously menttioned. We deciedd todetain all the definite suspects, torelease a few who were thought to beentirely innocent andto hand over theremainder to the Norvegians under cautionthat they are still somehat suspect andmay have to be re-arrested. D.G. subsequen-tly agreed to this course of action.I illed on Vincent Massey in the after-noon and handed him a report on thestate of the port of Halifax. He saidhe would show it to his Nav l represen-tative and then cable to Canada. 1 alsotold him that we were sending a NavalMission on port security and suggestedthat possibly it might be thought desirabe!that they should visit Canada. He askedme to let him have letter giving thenames of those concerned. He would thentelegraph out to his Government.Ritchie came to see me about lihts.He thinks that this work could quiteeasily be carried on euite- by Wilsonand Brunnarius. He realised that theork had to go on in order to pacify thevarious authorities who were vorried whenthey saw lights go up which generallyturned out to be our own. At the SameCatalogueReference.kv4/187 much whether weshould ever get a genuine case on whichto act. Ritchie himself is quite readyto take on any other work for which Lmight think him fitted.Later I saw Beresford. I asked him abouthis work, particularly in relation toits being carried on at Barnet. He agreedwith me that in many ways it would beeasier for him to operate from London.I spoke to V.V. about R.S.S. He told methat G.P. had just crossed his last fenceand would be taking over in the courseof the next few day s. I explained thatwe were still worried about tranmissionsfrom this country. G.P.S point of viewis that the traffic must be tvo-way andthat if it was coming in from abro idwe stand a reasonable chance of pickingit up. I said that while the grouptraffic was of the greatest importanceto us both I did not think we could neglectthe possibility of illicit transmissionfrom this country, As regards invasionand the role to be played by R.S.S. withtheir vans I gather that this is goingtobe taken over by Army signals and thadneither ourselves nor G.P. will beresponsible.I had a meeting in the evening with D.G.,Col.Thornton,I Lakin and Airy on thepreparations for a special operation,which is contemplated in the near future.Airy is going up to Glasgow to deal iththe Censorship material and to co-ordinateCatalogue Reference:kv4/187 and the S.C.0.S80In the meantime I.S.S.B. are sending upMajor Cass to look afte the security ofthe various units and to m ke contactwith the S.C.0. and possibly also theR.S.L.O. There is obvious duplicationhere but I hope th t our respective func-tionswillbe defined at the meeting withthe Services which is to take placeshortly.Lennox tells me that 43,000 out of 56,000have got out of Greece. 500 were savedfrom the torpedoed transport which wascarrying 1,000. It is thought possiblethat another mechanised division mayhave reached Tripoli. FOPS have beenordered to work out a plan for theevacuation of Egypt if necessary.May 2ndThe C.P. have told their district organis-ers that the Greek and Jugoslav wars arejust wars and must not be regarded asimperialistic wars. It is difficult toOunderstand quite what this means, unlessit is an indic ition that hussia is gettingreally frightened about Germany' action.I lunched with Herschel Johnson. i warnedhim that GEROTHWOHL was getting informatiofrom Biddle. I also told him aboutScanlon's association with ARTAZA, theSpanish consul in Newcastye. As regardsthe latter I said we were particularlyanxious that no sort of indication shouldbe given to ARTAZA that we regirded himataloguetReferenceikMi4/187Lastly I told him that one of Mr.Harriman'commission, I think a ol.Green was shortlyto receive a visit from Gen. FULLER andI thought it advisable that Green shouldknow about ruller, altho' the purpose ofthe meeting was probably only to getFuller's view about tanks and mechanisedwarfareVincent Massey asked me to call on himagain. He said that he had got hisnaval representative to send a telegramout te Halifax. He thought that there wasprobably a great deal OI truth in whatthe ship's captains had said but he hadto put the matter slightly less crudely.He said that he would telegraph about theNaval Mission as soon as I gave him aletter.May 3rdWe had a meeting about the case of SamSTEWART. It was decided that I shouldconsult Maxwell about having him raidedand interrogation instituted.May 4thAt Funtington, where I saw John Booth.He is now Intelligence Officer with ourarmoured division. He is quite convincedthat we can only win this war by manufac-turing a very large number Yof tanks.At present we are only turning out about100 a month. It takes 350 to make adivision. Efforts are being made to bringCatalogue Reference:KV/4/187882production up to 300 a month. This willonly ve us 10 divisions a year. TheAmerican tanks are not much g cod atpresent. John's division have just hadtheir cruiser tanks taken away from thempresumably for shipment to the MiddleEast. The ivisional Staff seem to 1be a funny lot - allcavalry Officersclattering into their tanks in spurs.They all sit with headphones on talkingto each other and directing operations.The D. C. occasionally travels in a carwhile taking part in manoeuvres. The caris known as his charger. John does notthink that any force can stand up againstmechanised divisions unless some veryefficient counter-weapon is developed.He said that our mechanised divsions inFrance got right thragh in a counter-attack and waitins 24 hours for theFrench who did not turn up. They wereright behind the German lines and theGermans apparently could do nothing aboutit. It was estimated that the Germanslost one third of their tanks in theFrench campaign. There doesn't appear tobe anything to stop the German armoureddivisions in Turkey if they decide to gothrough. I gather that if this countryis invaded our armoured divisions do notintend to come into operation until aboutthe third day when the enemy has clearlydisclosed the position of his main attack.This seems sound policy. John feels thatan invasion of this country by the Germanswould be a frightfully hazardous operationCatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/1873for them but he feels that it is quitepossible they will try it on.May 6thLL.G has changed his vieNs again. Severalmonths ago he was all in favour of anegotiated peace. He still feels thatwe cannot win the war and that the mostwe can hope for is a talemate and in viewof our recent reverses he no longerthinks thatthe moment is opportune forpeace negotiations. He thinks thereforethat we should speed up our ar effortto the maximum and that having achieveda few successes we should then come toterms With the Germans. He is surroundedby a group who to some extent hold thesame views as himself. The principalpeople are Horrabin, Hore Belisha,&WaroMilne. the whole group consists of about10 people. They are leading the attack onthe government in the House today. Nopersonal attack on Winston is contemplatedLl.G'S ultimate object is to get intothe Cabinet on his own terms. An offerwas made to him some time ago but hewould not go in as he felt that hishands would be tied. He would only jointhe Government if he is to be the bignoise on policy.Donaldson, the dissident Scottish Nation-liast, has been arrested and two otherscalled Hope Campbell and Maig. Campbelwas a deserter evading conscription. Haigwho is associated with MCGibbon was foundCatalogue REferenceki4rian of firearms, 2 or 3884rifles, a few revolvers and some ammunitioThe prosecution was undertaker ken en the666666666666666 instigation of the LordAdvocate.May 7thSnow remains interned and So far has notasked to see anyone. There is a proposalto send Celery to Lisbon to see if he caninduce a German agent called SESSLERto sell out. Rainbow is angling for afull time job but So far the Germans havenot bitten. He has received no pay sinceJanuary. Tricycle arrived back at the endof last month and continues to give thesame very favourable impression. TheGermans have swallowed his deputy Balloonand also FRIEDEL, with whom we hope toopen up. new lines. Tricycle is going onto America. Tricycle brought some moneyfor Giraffe but gathered that the informa-tion of the latter was not regarded veryhighly. Tate has been awarded the IronCross first and second class. Dragonf Lyis still somewhat suspect. We have putover a story about the German Consul inMadrid which ought to cause a good dealof confusion in the minds of the Germans.Mutt and Jeff have been asked to say whatquestions were put to them during theirinterrogation. This presents a usefulopportunity. We are going frame thequestions in such a way as to assist usin sorting out so-callec refugees whenCatalogue thev Reference:kVf4/187 arrive shall try to basethem on the documents being carried byMutt and Jeff and show that they caneasily get away with excuses for nothaving their papers in order. This wehope will lead to further laxity on thepart of the Germans. New arrivals willbe questioned and if they give the answersthat we gave the Germans we shall knowwhere we are.Jock Whyte has interrogated DURRANTthe German agent who was arrested inEgypt and is now interned in this country.There is no doubt that Durrant wasrecruited by SIMON and that he did acertain amount of work here for theGermans before going to Germany. Hewas sent to Egypt with a wireless setbut gave himself up two or three daysafter the outbreak oi war. He told usthat the Germans had shown him a list ofagents employed nere and that oneof thenames was one Conal CARNEY who isemployed in the tank corps. Carney wheninterrogated said that he hadknown Durrantin the tank corps and had taken himon one occasion for a holiday in Ire-land to his home. Later he had receiveda request in a letter from Denmark forcertain information of the strength of atank division. He thought the re uestwas harmless and gave the information,which was not of a detailed kind andprobably incorrect. This had been on hismind ever since and he wasy glad of theopportunity for making a clean breast ofit. Subsequently he had had two requestsfor further information. They were fromCatalogue Reference:KV/4/187s&lDenmark, handwritten in printed formand signed by Durrant. On each occasionE2 was enclosed. Carney had not repliedto either of these letters, and did notreport the matter to the authorities ashe was afraid that his previous actionmight get him into trouble. Carneyappears to have made a good impressionon Jock Whyte. The question now iswhether Durrant can be prosecuted underthe Official Secrets Act or D.R. Pilcherthinks that Carney would be a bad witnessand the case is not strong enough.Mrs. NICHOLSON has been acouitted in spiteof the fact that she admitted that she hadmade mates from the cipher telegrams whichshe had received from Anna WOLKOFF. Herhusband ent i to the box and admitted th ithe had also taken notes. Their excusewas that they thought the P.M. was conduct-ing some intrigue with Roosevelt and thatthe matter might be of importance fromthe nationa l point of view. PatrickHastings made a clever move in puttingthe husband into the box and bamboozledthe jury i to thinking that a BritishAdmiral could not possibly commit anact of treachery and that therefore hiswife must be innocent. The SolicitorGeneral regards the Case as one of theworst miscarriages of justice that he hasknown since he was at the bar. The ques-tion now arises as to whether MrS.N.should remain interned under lob. Theprobability is that she will be broughtCataloguefReterenceAkVI4/8 Committee.$91May 3thAttended a meeting of the XX Committee,which seems to be doinguseful work.The great difficulty is to get theService Dept.S to fall in with ourshhemes. They are naturally reluctantto give away information unless forsomething concrete in return.We had a meeting with Craig,Neville,Harry,Johr Maude and Taylor about theAmerican party. The Navy still seem veryanxious to regard the mission in a rathernarrow naval point of view. They do notseem to understand that if civil securityin the port is not satisfactory theirwork will pe torpedoed. They are L thinkquite prepared to go to Halifax but theydid not fall in with the suggestion thatthey should go there first on the groundsthat on present information securityin the port is almost non-existent.Hims-One of M's people came to see metoday about the case of one JoinMANIFOLD, a lieutenant who has succeed-ed in getting into M,I.8. He is a Lom-munist and intimately connected withthe headquarters of the party. Lennoxis aking enquiries about him, but Igather the W.0. are anxious to get himtransferred elsewhere as soon as possible.I have passed the case to .Division todeal with although as far as I can seemost of the work will have to be done byme. This is rather a typical example ofCatalogue Reference:KV14/187Ss8how the lines cross. I have to protectB.5b's agents and deal with the W.O.because this can be done more convenientlyfrom here than from the country.May y9th thWe brought down 23 German planes bynight fighter yesterday.Charles came up to see the D.G. about anincident which had occurred in the countryAt the daily meeting it had been suggestedby Shillitoe that A. should take a handin Night Duty. Curry had asked S. to givehim a list of A. officers which he subse-uently put forward to Charles with thesuggestion that they might take their turnCharles says most of the people are fire-watchers and only two of them couldpossibly do night duty. He evidentlyresented the fact Shillitoe had beenasked to get the list of names and wasfurther very concerned because whenquestioned S. had said that he had beenasked to do SO at one of "the daily hates"this was certainly an unfortunate remarkbut I do not think it was very represen-tative except that most people in thecountry and here are very worried aboutthe new organisation. The result has beenthat the D.G. has given orders that nofurther daily meetings are to be held inthe country. Curry will only act as aconsultant to any officer! if his adviceis sought. From the point of view of thework this is one more spanner in theCataloguerkefererfce:kV/4/187opec that by holdingthese daily eetings as heretofore officersin the various divisions would be thro-ghly acquainted with each others work.I told Charles quite frankly what I thoughabout the whole thing. I expressed allmy views about the organisatior to theD.G. and 1 did not propose to say nythingmore, nor did I want anybody else to doSO. I should carry out the orders tothe best of my ability, and persuadeothers to do the same. At the same tirif anybody thought that the new arrange-ment which I'd always been told was forthe purpose of easing my burden , wasgoing to fulfill that function I couldonly say that the very opposite was thecase. What curry had t iken off me hehad handed back to me twentyfold. Therewas now nobody in the country to look aftethe various sections and they would haveto work direct to us here in London bycoming up and down.Lennox tells me that the Germans aremassing for an attack on Crete. TheNavy know about this and are quitepleased, as the attack is to take placeby sea and not by air-borne troops.They hope to have plenty of warning.Portugal is said to be full of Germantourists. The Tiger convoy has gotthrough to Malta with the loss of onlyone ship. Part of another mechanisedGerman division is believed to pe inLibya. We put our biggest number ofbombers in the field last night. 560went to Bremen and Hamburg.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/187890May l0thWe have bought 2 blood-hounds and theirkeeper. They will be available to allregions for tracking down parachutists.The D.G. spoke to me about the Shillitoincident. I said that i thought thesignificance of it had been a good dealexaggerated, and I explained to him thereal purpose for which the meetings tookplace. It was regrettable that owing todifficulties in administration in thepast, administrative matters had beenfrequently discussed, as they had inter-fered seriously with the work of thebranch. Undortunately there had been nomachinery for airing grievances anddifficulties and representations made byme and Curry had invariably been ignored.D.G. thought that the daily meetingsshould come to an end and that Curryshould merely be open to sections foronnsultations, if they were in difficultiabout their cases. I regretted this outsaid no more. It is a great pity Ithinkthat Charles did not come to me in thefirst instance when the matter couldprobably have been satisfactorily settledwithout destroying a piece of usefuloffice machinery.Lunched with the D.G. and the Americanparty. They are to leave on the 12th.Lennox tells me that a trawler has beenCatalogue gue Reference:KV14/187 intereepted.sememere in the vicinity ofcalIceland. It has been brought in with itscrew and it is reported that it has onboard the enigma cypher. A notificationhas been made to the press that thetrawler was sunk but that members ofthe crew were saved. This may save anyalteration in the cypher which mayupreventus from cracking it up. The trawler wasengaged in making metereological reports.May llthThere was a heavy raid on London lastnight, and two iombs fell on either sideof the office. A certain amount ofdamage has been done but nothing serious.We may have to abandon a number of roomsfor some time.33 enemy planes were brought down bynight fighters. The moon was full andconditions were ideal.I spoke to the D.G. about the suggestionthat Cecil and I should go over and seeArcher The .Committee want to interceptM.F. signals between the Focker-Wulflong range bombers and submarines whchthey are guiding on to convoys. Theidea was to set up a special receiving setin the offices of Cable and wireless atWaterville. On further enquiry it isquite clear that nothing will be achievedunless machinery exists for D.F.ing thesesignals. This means a wireless mast orpossibly two masts. The proposition istherefore much more formidable and I doubtCatalogue will acdept it.92There is also the risk that they mayleak about it to the Germans. Cecil isseeing nir ice-Marshal Joubert on thewhole question tomorrow. It looks to melike a rather half-b ked plan, particularlysince it is admitted that our convoyscannot even pick up these signals.May 12thSwedish Govt. have put forward a sugges-tion for the establishment of a SwedishAir Line between Stockholm and Leuchars.It may be that the Germans are behind thissince if they intend to invade the IberianPeninsula they will use the possibleservices of KLM pilots. The Air Ministrywish to accede to the Swedish request asthey say that if they don't we shallprobably be refused landing facilitiesin Sweden. There is also the point thatwe may wish to put agents on to thecontinent, and this route would be theonly normal way of doing it.Ned has unearthed several interestingaccounts in the course of his bankingenquiries It is found that one YusufKenal is at present in Hungary and haspaid out notes which have passed throughthe hands of one LESSING who is doingC.E. work for the Germans at Ankara, PUGHa German suspect, POGO, and SNOW. Hehas also found 4 cases of payments tocommunists being made on Lisbon.Catalogue Lt MANIFOLD Reference:KVi4/18 was hit by a bomb on Sat. night993and is temporarily laid out. This dis-poses of our difficulties at the moment.There has been a good deal of troubleabout members of the ungarian L gationbeing allowed to leave this country forAmerica via the Port of Glasgow where agreat deal of important activity isgoing on. I have suggested to Col. .Thorn-ton that he should put up a note onthis to the J.I.C. when probablyCavendish-Bentinck would take up thequestion, of proper provision for anyother foreign Mission, which might beleaving the country.Had lunch withFrost when we discussedthe case of W. We agreed provisionallythat with the exception of one officerW.5a should be linked with .10, that theHolorith should remain in London underB.2, that W.3 less Senter and Arnold,should go to D.Branch and that Frost him"self should look after W.6 and W.7 andany question affecting the B.B.C.May 13th_Todays sensational news is the arrival ofRudolf HESS in a Me.ll0. He apparentlylanded near Glasgow on the night of thel0th. Kirkpatrick of the F.O. hasdefinitely identified him. He has a brokeankle and is in hospital in Glasgow incharge of the military. He seems to havebeen carrying some sort of message to theCatalogue jueReferehce:kt4/18pl HAUSHOFER. We knew894about HAUSHOFER before the war. Hisgreat subject is geo-politik. He haswritten to the Duke immediately afterthe outbreak of war and had sent himanother letter last Sept. saying that ifthere was ever a ch nce of seeing theDuke he could come to Lisbon. This letterwas sent to a cover address and enquirieswere started on the assumption that theDuke's bona fides might be in question.As these led to nothing itwas suggestedto the A.M. that they should get him up1and suggest that possibly he might goto Lisbon in some official capacity.There was a good deal of delay andeventually the A.M. produced his brother.After further delay they got hold of theDuke himself. He explained that he hadknown HAUSHOFER for some time andespressed his willingness to go to Lisbonif suitable cover could be found. TheA.M. eventually decided that it wouldprobably be better not to send him atthe present momert. It is difficult tosay what HESS'S motive is in cominghere. He has probably fallen out withthe party on what ne regards as a funda-mental issue. He may resent the approachto Russia as he was violently anti-Communist and become embroiled in somekind of intrigue. Possibly his life wasin danger and he decided to escape.Alternatively he may have come over withsome kind of peace offer.Y The Germansmay have thought they could only con-vince us of their sincerity by sendingCatalogue eterencekvfarisqingg45The statement in the press about HESSbeing mad would merely have been putover to cover up the fact that theGermans are putting out peace feelers.Personally I doubt this hypothesis verymuch. It seems to me too far fetched.May 14thI saw Swinton yesterday. He told methat Hess's story was that he was stillan admirer of the Fuhrer but that he wasappalled by the slaughter and destructionand wanted to see if there was not someway of stopping it.Lennox tells me that the Liger convoyhave got through to Alexandria with theloss of only one ship which struck a mine.The Italian claims to have sunk a pattle-ship an aircraft carrier and a number ofother ships are entirely untrue. There wasno damage to any of our warships. Asmall attack has developed south of Sollum.It is not considered serious. A strongattack on Crete by air-borne troopsand by sea is anticipated. The Frenchhave allowed 2 train-loads of ammunitionto go to Irag from Syria.I saw Monckton and explained to him ourpoint of view about HESS. I thought thatit was highly necessary that we should bekept informed of what ne was saying andthat there should be some record of theCatalogue Reference:KV/4/187convers tions of the people who visitedhim and of their impressions. I realisedthat the whole business was on a very highplane. At the same time we had a verydefinite interest, since HESS was nomin-ally in control of the S.S. organisationknown as the InnereDienst. An occasionmight arise when the conversation could beled on to this ground. Monckton saidthat he quite understood our point ofview and that he would make arrangementsfor me to see Kirkpatrick as soon as heteturned. I also discussed with Moncktonand Radclyffe certain indiscretions bythe press which had come to light. hirraid damage was being telephoned all overthe country and in particular from Belfastwhere refer nces h ive been made to move-ments of ships. Radclyfie said he would seethe Editor of the Daily Express and get gimto instruct his reports not to send ininformation which they knew could notpossibly be published.May 15thI went down to th country where I met10 of the S.C.0.s who were paying theirfirst visit to HQ. It is I think a goodscheme that they should be brought intocloser touch with the work of B.Branch andwith B. officers. There is no doubt thatfor a long time they have been rather outin the cold. This I feel is'to some extentthe fault of their own branch. If they hadhad a regular conference like the R.S.L.O.Swe should have able to get the variousCatalogue Reference.KV14/187gesection officers to lecture to them.The man from the Phoenix who was to bringTATE his money has been picked up by aWar Reserve policeman at Colney. He wasasking his way to the nearest hospital.The policeman suspected him and on findinghis papers were not in order took him tothe nearest police station. Here he wassearched and a sum of $00 and $1400was found on him. The Supt. having hadhis instructions from our R.S.L.O. aboutsuspicious persons carry ing large sums ofmoney immediately came to the conclusionthat the man was a spy. On being guestionehe said tha t his name was RICHTER, thathe had landed in a boat 10 miles est ofCromer on the previous night and wasmaking his way to the Regent Palace Hotelwhere he had a rendez vous with an unknownperson outside the ba bers shop. Hewas to hand over to this person the sum of1450. He had undertaken this work as hewas formerly in a concentration camp andsaw a. ch nce of getting away to America.It was for this reason that he had theAmerican dollas.Dick tells me that an Irishman reportedrecently at Gt. Scotland Yard and appliedto be taken on in the Army. He explainedthat he had come from Jersey with twoother men, that they had landed somewherenear leymouth and had encouhtered noopposition. They met a man with a double-barrelled gun somewhere near the coastCatalogue Reference:KVI4/187998and told him they had just landed ind askedhim the way to the nearest town. He didnot appear to be interested and directedthem to Weymouth. The Irishman's storyis being checked up and efforts are beingmade to trace the other two men. If thestory is true it doesn't speak very wellfor the coast watching service and verymuch strengthens our view that someimprovement is necessary.May l6thI attended a meeting of the W.Doard, whichhad been called at my request. At a previoumeeting the Board had requested thatCelery should not be sent abroad againwithout their approval. Personally I feelthat in this matter the board are ratherexceeding their functions, but as we wanttheir help and co-operation it is probablybetter to comply with their wishes. Iexplained that Celery's idea was to pro-ceed to Lisbon where he would try and makecontact again with Sessler who had travellewith him to Berlin and Hamburg on hisprevious visit. It will be remembered thatSESSLER appeared to be strongly anti-Naziand quite ready to sell out and go toAmeric if a suitable opportunity could befound. It may have been that SESSLER wasmerely posing as an anti-Nazi in order todraw Celery out and discover his truecolours but it seemed to us that there wasat least a ch once of winning over SESSLERsince he was an admirer of HESS and theoccasion seemed somewhat opportune.Catalogue ReferENCe:KVI4/187caI pointed out however that we were runninga certain risk if we still proceeded onhypothesis I, n amely that Snow had neverdivulged to the Doctor that his traffichad been controlled. If he had not done sothis would account for the continuedconfidence of the Germans in TATE, whichfact had been confirmed by the arrivalyesterday of RICHTER. I explained thatJ.C. and T.A.R. were seeing Snow todayat his request but that if he did not makesome sensation ldisclosure to the efffectthat he had never given the traffic twayI thought that we might profitibly alloweCelery to go to Lisbon. The Doard agreedto this course of action.May 17thWe had a very sticky meeting in the morningwith the Services when the form of ourassistance to the I.S.S.B. was discussed.The D.G. had previously explained in aletter that our sole object was to discoverwhat the Services wanted us to do andwhat we ere able to do and to removea certain feeling which had grown upthat the I.S.S.B. were not anxious todisclose to us more than the barest detailsOn this last point the D.N.I. took uprather an aggressive attitude. He did notunderstand what was implied and he wantedincidents and details. He even suggestedcalling in Airy. The D.G.'said that hehad spoken to 4 or 5 of his officers, allof whom had had the same impression, butCataloguetReference:v/4/i87k and there was noreluctance to disclose to him sufficientfacts to enable him to carry out any workthat was required of the Department hehad nhing further to say. It eventuallyemerged that the position of both hiryand Lennox on the I.S.S.B. had not beenvery clear. While it was said tht therewas no reluctance to communicate the fullfacts to the D.G. through Lennox, hispermanent member of the board, there wasa certain reluctance to imparting informatithrough Airy to Gen. Lakin of the so-calledW. organisation which nobody knew verymuch about. The incident of Parracemewas discussed and it transpired that thisoperation had never been a matter fordisoussion by the I.S.S.B. at all I wasasked for my viewsand said th at if we weregoing to render adequate assistance tothe Services in any of these matters itwas essential that we should come ifpossible in the planning stage and thatwe should be given the fullest possibledetails. In the case oi the Parracombewe had practically no notice and no detailsWe were asked to bend an officer up toLeith and when he got there he found theship had gone on to Oban. If we had knownwhat the goods were, where they were comingfrom, at what station they were to beunlo aded and at what wharf they were to beloaded on the ship, and what dockers wereto do the work we might have been ofconsiderable assistance. Had we knownmoreover that a nysterious Spaniard wasto travel on the ship we could have madeCatalogue Reference him any from trouble. Belfast toqolAs it was the Admiralty lost him and weeventually dug him out of the R.P.S. Therewere various other indiscretions which hadcome to light i the course of our investi-gations at Oban and which might have beenprevented if the S.C.0. had been fullyin the picture. The meeting ended by Col.Thornton putting in a note abo t hisrequirements. These included censorship,the use of the S.C.0.S and R.S.L.0.S andalso of Boddington in checking up onundesirables in the neighbourhood. Hegave an undertaking that the fullest factswould be communicated to the D.G. personallyby his representative on the Board and thatit would be left to the D.G. to disclosesuch facts as he thought necessary to hisofficers who were to carry out the work.D.G. spoke to Harry Allan after the meetingand asked him whether he was in agreementthat any approach on these matters should bethrough this office, and not direct bythe W.O. to S.C.O.S Harry agreed thatit would be better done through centraloffice. The real difficulty is I thinkthat the I.S.S.B. do not get sufficientdetails from the planning section andit is there that things go wrong. Ifan operation is to start from some portthe planners should be in touch with theS.C.O. and possibly also the R.S.L.O.before their orders are made out. Thathappens now is that a plan is made andthe I.S.S.B. SrC.O.s and R.S.L.O.S haveto make the best of it. There are manypoints in the planning which could beadjusted if the competent authoritieswere reconsulted earlier. It was difficultCatalogue ieeReferenceakVi4187at Reference: the meeting si ce402it virtually amounted to a statement thatthe planners were incompetent. Otherspresent at the meeting were D.M.I.,Air AirVice Marshal Paine, GrouptCaptain BlackfordCol.Thornton and Cmdr.Lewis of the I.S.S.4and Commander Besant of the OperationsSection of the Admiralty. The meetingbecame very heated at one moment butcalmed down in the end.Archer has informed us that MARSCHNERhad a photograph on him of UNLAND whomhe was going to visit.May 18thI saw Hopkinson and explained our pointof view about HESS. He said that thematter wasstill on a very high plane andthat HESS was not in the modd to discussmatters on higher-e- our level. He toldme that SO far only Hamilton and Kirkpatrichad seen him. I asked him about microphoneas I thought that a record of his conversa-tions might be interesting, particularlyif some of the appeasers were allowed togo in and see him. He told me that thismatter was in charge of C. and that allarrangements had been made. Hopkinsonpromised to keep our point of view inmind. I told him about the Gula PFEFFERletter and the importance of the InererDienst. I thought that PFEFFER'S lettermight possibly give us the opening wewanted.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/187ap?May 19thRICHTER has broken over the weekend. Itnow appears that he was dropped by parachutnear Hatfield. He was taken to the spotand produced his parachute, wireless setand cryst ls and valves which he wasbringing for TATE. It seems fairly clearthat he is not the RICHTER who was commonlyknown as Clark GABLE. RICHTER had beenworking for a Dr. SCHULTZ In the meanttime we have been on the air and mplainedthat the money has never arrived.Dick tells me that there are indicationsof the existence here of a Hungarianorganisation. I have arranged with Theothat Caulfeild shall work direct to Dickin this matter. The Hungarians seem to bevery active. PLESSING is working for theGermans in the Hun arian Legation at Ankaraand Al MASSY, formerly in Cairo, $$ alsousing a wireless set in Germar interests.Al Massy has recently been ecalled toBudapest and has deposited his wirelessset at a convent. The code word foranybody collecting this set is Alma MateWe have heard from Archer that UNLANDhas peen arrested.I spoke to the D.G. about emergency aceo-mmodation. I said th t in time of invasionI envisaged the possibility of Londonbeing bombed for 5 nights n end and ourfinding ourselves wandering about the streewith a file under our arms looking for aCatalogue Reference:KV/4/187904I had previously ascertained th t S.I.S.had an alternative home already wired upand were looking for yet another. D.G.suggested that I should raise this matterat the Director's meeting tomorrow.May 20thDirector's meeting in the morning. Theouestion of B.l's relations with the RSLOSwas discussed. I said that the presentarrangement by which R.O.F. SecurityOfficers communicated their troubles totheir headquarters in London, thence toB.1 in the country and eventually b ack tothe RSLO who had to take the action seemedto me a very cumbersome procedure. I thoughit would be far better if R.O.F. SecurityOfficers while informing their head officegot into direct touch with the RSLO. Thelatter would then proceed with the enquiryfter informing B.] who would.still he incharge of the investigation through theagency of the RSLO. Harker got very excitewhen I mentioned that on occasion B.1. wrotto the wrong C.C. and that this was pernpasan added reason for writing to RSLO. Hethought this was a most unfair criticismand rather drew a red herring across thetrail. I admitted that instances of thissort occurred in all sections but I feltthat this was not really the point. Thepresent procedure is cumbersome and anti-quated ind needs revising.' D. reservedjudgment until he had seen the regions forhimself. There seems to be a good deal ofCatalogue loguporeterencerrv4aser,Butler RV4ABer,Butler ind alianadsto any change in Alexander's organisation,and lack of appreciation of the very ambig-uous position in which Curry is placedvis a vis B. .1. 1. Personally I think Alexan-der's show has not moved with the timeseither as regards policy or machinery.For many years nobody has really knownwhat he has been doing - He is in a littlewater-tight compartment carrying on hiswork in a rather pompous and eyewashing waywithout any regard for war time conditior for the work of B.4 and B.7 who are farmore competent to express views aboutsubmversive elements in the Forces than heis.I mentioned the question of alternativeaccommodation.I asked me to get furtherparticulars from V.V.Hart has worked out a very useful schemewith the RegistrarGeneral for calling inNational Registration Cards in certainimportant districts. This will enable theR.G. to carry out a check on their validityand will cause considerable embarrassmentto the Germans since they will never k orin what area a check may take place atany time.Cecil has discovered that MARSCHNER isidentical with Gunter SCHUTZ. There seemeda reasonable possibility and the matterwas confirmed by Rainbow without the slignt-est hesitation.We had our first meeting of the joint S.I.S.Catalogue taken over h.Reference committee. Maltby who hasDick, Cowgill and Frost906were presnet. It was agreed that it wasthe function of the committee to co-ordinatthe mutual interests of S.I.S. and S.S.in the R.S.S. It should lay down generaldirectives for the operation of R.S.S. anddecide priorities of service to be suppliedby R.S.-. to S.I.S. and the S.S. It wasagreed that Cowgill should co-ordinatethe interests of the 3 services and repre-sent their views bo the committee. Ifnecessary ad hoc invitations to representatives of the service would be made.Strachey is to be invited to become amember of the committee representing G.C.&c. C.S. Cowgill is to be the link betweenR.S.S. and S.I.S. and Frost between theS.S. and R.S.S. It was agreed to proceedwith a limited policy of snifting incases where intelligenceinformation gaverise to a reasonable belief that an illicittransmitter existed at any known locationin the British Isles. It was finallydecided to appoint Capt. Trevor Ropersecretary of the committee.In the afternoon I saw Mr. Norman RICHARDS,said to be the author of a story which hehad got from Lord Camrose about Navellimploring the P.M. not to send forces toGreece. Richards said that the story hadbeen grossly exaggerated by his mother andthat he had got it from a Miss Hunter, thedaughter of a close friend of Lord Camrose.Hunter was subsequently interviewea andwhile admitting that he knew Lord Camroseintimately said he had never been responsibfor circulating such a story. ProbablyCatalogue Reference:KVI4/187901Camrose had heard th t Wavell was againstthe project and the story had been builtup onthat information.May 2lstCecil and I flew from Manchester to Dublin.to see Archer. The flight which took 12hours was in a blacked out aeroplane anduneventful. We landed at Colinstown anI imagine must have passed straight overLambay. Archer met us at the derodromeand we went to his house to discuss. Hewas highly interested at the identifica tionof MARSCHNER with Gunter SCHUTZ. I gavehim a general picture of our work hereand he seemed to have reached the sameconclusions as ourseles about the GermanIntelligence Service. His experience SOfar is that all the agents who wanded inEire, was that their plans were singularlyill-conceived indbadly arried out.MARSCHNER had been spotted wandering aboutby some woman who kept a hostel for thelocal police. He had asked his way and shebecame suspicious about him. The policewere informed and he was easily roundedup. He had in his possession a wirelesset,81000 in British notes and Americandollars, a small microscope, a photographof UNLAND nd a piece of paper identicalwith the paper on which UNLAND had writtena number of his letters. This paper hadbrown streaks on it and aywhite border.He said that he was going to make contactwith UNLAND and that the wireless set wasto be fetched by some German agent whoCatalogue ReferenGeikV/4/187 England. .Archer doesqo%not believe this story. UNLAND has beenarrested and was extremely evasive whenquestioned. He is admitting nothing un-less the documentary evidence pins himdown. Archer is firmly of opinion thatMARSCHNER was intending to operate hiswireless set in conjunction with UNLAND.MARSCHNER'S passport is a S. African onebut it was quite clear from an examinationof it that the photograph had been changedand that the signature slip underneathit had been signed after it had been stuckon to the passport and covered by theembossed stamp.MARSCHNER had a story of a meeting witha British agent but Archer does not believethis. He thinks the story is put out inorder to make the Eire authorities thinkthat SCHUTZ was not operating aginstthembut aginst this country.Me then discussed the wireless situation.Archer said they had one Y mast near Dublinwhich was picking up a lot o1 unrecordedtr ffic. 1 asked him to get the opeatorto monitor this traffic and let us navesamples on the grounds that we might beable to sort it out for him. He undertookto do this. He told us that he had nevergot the doz. H.R.O. sets which had beenpromised him in the early days of the war.They had been taken over by the army. Heis putting in another indent and will getLulanty to let us know where it is placed,in order th t we can give it a push.He has a station for receiving in Limerick,Catalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/187qoaCork and Athlone but I do not think thesestations pick up very much. He has nothingmuch in the way of R.D.F. although he hadbeen shown the apparatus in .Ireland,or rather it had been shown to one of hisoperators. He would I think be preparedto set up stations on the east coast fordetecting Focke Wolfe planes if we providedhim with the necessary equipment. He hadnever heard of any signals being pickedup between a Focke Wolfe and a submarine.Before we left he asked us whether wehad heard any thingaboot the suggestionwhich had appearedin the papers thatconscription should be enforced in N IrelanWe replied that we had heard nothing aboutit and had not been consulted in any way,as it was, generally speaking, outside ourprovince. He told us that there was greatanxiety in Ireland and that if it wereenforced there would undoubtedly be blood-shed. He could not understand what we hadto gain. There were 400,00 Catholics inthe north and 600,000 Protestants. Sofar 150,000 have enlisted in the Forcesfrom the south and 19,000 from the north.600 a month are corssing the border fromthe southto enlist. Our flying-boats onTransatlantic patrol get up off Lough LrNeevery day and fly over Lire territory solow that itwould be impossible for theEire authorities to say that they couldnot recognise their marking. Troops fromttae north constantly wander across theborder and instead of being interned areCataloguPReference.kv4/187er are moreover aonumber of othert hings which the fire Govt.are doing to render us assistance. Ifconscription is enforced in the north alarge number of the Catholics will refuseto register and if any attempt is made toprosecute them they will go on the runand join the I.R.A. Feeling in the southwill be extremely bad and it seems quitelikely that the Eire Govt. will try andenforce stricter neutrality. We told Arche:that we would certainly represent his viewsto higher authority as soon as we got back.We had a talk with Capt.Taylor at the portof Barton, Manchester, and also with the1.0. Their chief worry at the moment camefrom Irish priests who seemed to old I.R.views and might possibly be acting ascouriers, and officers who went on leave toIreland with copies of their embarkationorders in their pockets. AS THESE ORDERSreferred to secret operations the pr cticeseemed highly undesirabe. The orders hadbeen taken off them and returned to theirC.0.S. I later informed Harry Allan andthe I.S.S.B. for such action as they mightconsider necessary.May 22ndWe returned to Manchester by the 2. 2.30 50plane from Colinstown. Baxter met us atthe airport and showed us round his officewhich struck me as being very efficiently-run. His relations with all the C.C.S seerto be excellent and this was very muchCatalogue Catalogue'Referente:kvi4isrenera Atcherley, theallInspector General of Police who had a highopinion of the value of the N.S.L.O. organis:tion. He thought that something of the kindshould contine even in peace time. Itmight possibly take the form of sending outR.O.S from headuarters rather than h ivingthem resident in the provinces. .u.Lancsjoined us after dinner. I gave him thegeneral picture of our more recent activitie;He was very worried about the .letterrecommending that in certain circumstanceeinformants should give evidenee before theAdvisory Committees. He thought that thepractice was entirely wrong.We took the midnight train for London.May 23rdOn my return to London I found that therehad been a lot of excitement about theHess-Haushofer case. Swinton had writtena rather offensive letter to the D.G.complaining that it was an outrage that heshould not have been informed about thismatter last Nov. when the original etterwas received. He argued that as the caswas one of high politic l importance itshould have been brought to his noticeimmediately. Everybody who was concernedin this Case has been asked to give anaccount of himself. I have expressed theview that though the case was an interest-ing one there was no particular point inreporting it until e had found out whatHAUSHOFEN'S intentions were. There had beena certain delay in the Hir Ministry inCatalogute Reference.kVi4/s7to ander we hadsatisfied ourselves that he was not intriguiing behind the back of the Govt. but hadwe known that he had had a previous letterfrom HAUSHOFER in July 1939 hich he hadshown to the P.M. we might have taken adifferent view and approached him directat the outset. This was one of the disad-vantages of oning St. intelligence.As things had worked out it seemed a verygood thing that Hamilton had not made con-tact with HAUSHOFER. Had he doneso Hesswould probably never have come here, sinceHAUSHOFER would have realised that anyattempt to discuss peace terms wou.ld bequite useless.The Germans have suggested a. new plan forgetting money to TATE. He is to take abus No. 16 at 4 O'clock on a certain datefrom Victoria st tion. There will be onboard a Jap. TATE and the Jap would get offat the first stop and get into the next lobus. The Japwould carry the Times and abook in his left hand. TATe would get alongaide him and ask him whether there is inynews in the paper. The Jap will then handhim the paper which will contain the moneyCecil prepared a noe on Archer's remarksabout conscription in N, Ireland which Lshowed to Swinton. He arranged for myselfand V.V. to go straight on to Anderson whowas seeing the P.M. on Saturday morning.He questioned me very closely about thememo. and seemed to agree in a very guardedway, with the views it expressed.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/187ai3A message came through from S.I.S. to saythat a woman with good legs, not a Portuguewas arriving on the pkanefrom Lisbon.She was a German agnent and had her instructions written into the margin of two $50notes. Some difficulty was experienced atthe port as 3 ladies arriving on the planeappeared to qualify. The most suspectwas a Mrs.Taylor who said She wa thesecretary of PITT-RIVERS but nothingcould be found on her of an incriminatingnature. mi She therefore h/ad to be rele isedShe is the subject of further investigationMay 24thSaw Maxwell about the Sam STEWART case.I explained to him our difficulty aboutpresentng the full facts to the advisorycommittee. Maxwell seemed satisfied thatSTEWART had worked for the Germans andthat he ought to be interned. He saidhe would arrange for me to see the HomeSecretary.Had a long discussion With T. T.A.R R. aboutthe Jap party. We thought that if possiblewe ought to carry out somesort of observa-tion on the Jap after he left tae bus.Have just heard about the sinking of theHood by the Bismark at a range of about32,000 yards. She had only" been in actionfor 7 minutes. She was bracketted by thefirst salvo and hit in one of her magazinesCatalogue CatalogueRefefencekvi4/187rince rince of Wales was hit91in the turret in the first 2 minutes ofthe action.Crete is still holding out.May 25thArnold came to see me about a souadronwhich is not only landing but picking upDour agents in occupied territory. He wasworried about the security arrangementsat the aerodrome. He is going to look intothe whole matter on behalf of the hirMinistry.T.A.R. talked to me about Mutt and Jeff.He wants to find some sort of home forthem both. He would like to get Jeffestablished in the vicinity of Aberdeen.Ned is going to see what he C in do.We had a further discussion about the Japparty when it was decided not to follow.Watch is to be kept on likely people attheir homes and at Berkeley Court and theEmbassy. The S.D.officers who will be onthe bus would proceed to Berkely Courtand the Embassy as soonas the Jap getsoff and .6.will be on observation bothbefore and after 4 p.m. An attempt willbe made to get a photograph.Curry is very keen about pombing the NaziParty h.q. in Germany. We have put thisup to the Air Ministry who say that theyonly do area bombing and that during theCatalogue emReference:kvy4/i8? is out of range.listThey will however tackle both these places.e.Berlin and Munich, as soon as opportun-ity Offers.Accordin to a P/W MUlders, the Germanair ace, had his sguadron visited recentlyby Goering. G. asked him whether therewas anything he would like. He said "Yes,sir, could we be equipped with Spitfires".May 26thLunched with Herbert and discussed withhim and with Hill-Wood of the Censorshipcertain curious bankin transactionswhich had come to light. ili-Wood saidthere were large balances held by theSwiss banking corporation, which did nothave the non-enemy guarantee. He thoughtthat these were German balances but didnot appear to have any very strong groundsfor his conclusions. What seemed moreserious was the fact that large sums ofmoney in securities were being passed outthrough the Swiss banking corporation toAmerica. These sums were said to amountto something like 2 million a day. HiieWood thought that these were prob blysecurities from France, Holland Belgiumand other countries occupied by the Germansand that the Germans were try ing to build u]a nest-egg for themselves in the U.S. A. everthough they might have to realise at aheavy discount.I arranged for a meeting between Hill-Woodand Ned heid as Ned.to whom I showed theCatalogue Reference:k/4h187 probably the seduritie9/6held by the S.B.C. were the property ofFrenchmen who were anxious to evade payingincome tax.e have S cceeded in dropping an aerialtorpedo on the Dismark but she has tempor-arily been lost. She was last seen headingfor the Atlantic.The Jap party was unsuccessful. Nobodyturned up t the rendez vous. We have goneon the air with another scream.HeardMay 27thBismark sunk at 12 noon. I um told thatwe originally got on to her through theinterception of a sign l from a Norwegiantrawler to some Quisling in Norway.She was sighted last night about 400 milesoff Cape Eshant. After the aerial torpedoattack she had reduced speed to about 21knots. During the night 2 destroyers put4 torpedoes into her and when found inthe morning she was going round and roundat a speed of about knots. Her steeringgear was badly out of order. The Germinshad started to move the Gneisenau andScharnhorst out in order to make roomfor her in Brest. Battleships etc. convergeon her from every possible angle and forover an hour were pumping shells intoher at a range of 3,000 yds. The henownthen signalled that she could not be sunkby gunfire. Then came a message that shehad sunk. an attempt was'made to pickup survivors but thishad to be andoned,-as a U boat came up and fired a torpedoCataloguereference:Kv/4/n87 It failed to hit itsmark.qi7Had lunch with Z.O.R. He was in gloomyRussian mood, having been bombed out ofhis home in London. He was anxious ifpossible to get some sort of Govt. workI suggested that he might perhaps get holdof some Soviet papers nd periodic ls andmake a digest. I am also thinking ofputting him in touch with Roger Hollis.I doubt however whether he will b e verymuch use as an informant, as he doesnot move in Soviet circles and is notthe type who would be inclined to do soexcept under pressure.At the irector's meeting today alternativeaccommodation was discussed. We are Iunderstand to move to another buildingpending repairs to No. .58. We shall thenuse 58 as alternative accommodation.I was asked to prepare a list of officerswho could go out to the regions in theinvasion.I saw Wickham in the afternoon. He toldme that conscription for Ireland wasdefinitely off. The whole thing was apolitical ramp, by politicians in.Ireland. They wanted to appear as greatloyalists but in actual fact hoped thattheir suggestion would not be acceptableto the home government. Had it been acceptedthey intended to conscript the Catholicsand leave the Orangemen in the factories.Wickham also discussed the proposal totighten up censorship on the border whichhad been made by Herbert and submitted toCatalogue the RefereEnCE:KV/47187 read Herbert's9(6memo which suggested that the matter shouldbe proceeded with without reference toN.Ireland. Wickham was evidently ratherannoyed about this. He said that it wasridiculous for people to make suggestionsof the kind without prior consultation asthey were entirely ignorant of localconditions. One of Herbert's suggestionswas that the B.Special Lonstabularywho are pure Orangemen, should patrolthe border between various Censorshippoints. He said that he would not enter-tain anything of the kind since it wouldbe certain to lead to trouble if B.Specialswere let loose in Catholic areas. Heexplained that the customs posts on themain roads which were manned from 9 a.m.to 5 p.m. were only there for people whowished to pay their taxes. Those whotried to evade the customs would be pickedup sooner or later by the R.U.C. in theareas behind the frontier. He maintainedthat the police knew ebout every strangerin their area and that as you could notput a fence all along the frontier it wasmuch better to rely on some system in depthwhich would provide you with the informatioyou required. The same priciples he thoughapplied to censorship. He said that it wasextremely difficult to get the militaryauthorities to understand these things asthey were so hopelessly ignorant of localconditions.A message came though for Tate last night.The Jap party is to be repeated on the 29thCatalogue logufReterencerkyt4l187 and 3lst. On the night each of 1 the metre 27-28th long 4 andwith money in the thick end, are to bedropped near Luton. Two 200 1b bombswill be dropped in the direction of Charltorand the birch sticks will fall on thecontinuation of this line at a distance ofroughly 1 to 2 kilometres from the secondbomb crater. The Germans say that thefailure of the Jap meeting was due todelay in tr nsmission which had to go bya roundabout route.May 23thI lunched with Godfrey who is working inPlans at the W.O. He takes a poor viewof the I.S.S.B. He says that they nowget copies of all orders issued by plansbut only look at them from the point ofview of an indiscretion in the wordingof the order. He thinks that where storesare ordered the I.S.S.B. should send some-one down to the depot and follow the orderup to its destination. In this way theymight learn a good de l. This is exactlywhat I have been ying for some time.The Germans cancelled last night's opera-tion with the birch branches on theexcuse that the plane was not ilabie.Severa bombs were however dropped in thevicinity of Luton We had told the A.M.about this operation in case they mightwish to deal with the aeropl ne after itnad left the Luton area. The result hasbeen a ghastly muddle. We told the policethat we were sending down 4y people toobserve what happenedbut in the middle ofthe night a certain Major McCallum turnedup at the offices of superintendent of theCatalogue Reference:KVI4/18790Beds.police.H had an extraordinary storyabout a man who was going to be dropped byparachute in order that he should assassin-ate HESS. He wanted full police co-opera-tion. He said he Came from some anti-aircraft brigade. In order to convince thepolice of his bona fides he took them outto see his Brigadier who was surrounded byhappened A. A. guns to and be Searchlights. doing a night The exercise Home guardand were roped in. Hundreds of men appeuto have been walking about all night allover the country. The C.C.V was not unnaturallextremely annoyed. He rang up Dixon to tellhim that this was the end.. The matter isbeing taken up with the A.M.Long deliberations have taken place overthe Huggins-Rothschilc reorginistion plan.The matter is extremely complex and we aretrying to fit the work to the organisationinstead of the organisa tion to the work.May 29thA small aluminium cylindircal case whichmight normally be used to hold a developedfilm has been handed in to the police. Itwas found on the bank of the Thames atTwickenham after a high tide had receded.It contained a map on squared paper of someharbour. Various buildings were marked bynumbers. The explanation iv n a dot codewas given in the margin and also a message.The map was wrapped in a small piece of oilsilk. Arnold is making enquiries.Catalogue ReferenCe:KV/4/187What would appear to be bomb hits on theport were marked by puached holes.A message has come through to say that Tateis to try the bus party again today, and ifhe fails he is to go to the Jap Embassyto the Naval Attache and say that he is theman from the 16 bus.A man called CRELLIN who holds aresponsible position in the Ministryof Supply has been found to be a crookwith a criminal record. H man calledGORDON visited him and told us thatCRELLIN showed him a plan of our latestamphibian tank. It is proposed to detainCRELLIN under D.R. I am inclined to thinkthat if the staff of the Ministry ofSupply were passed over the CriminalRecords there would be some astonishingresults.Tricycle is to go to America as an importand export merchant, as he cannot get thebacking of his own Legation to proceedas a representative of the Ministry ofInformation. He has nevertheless gota letter from Monckton which should be ofassistance to him.It has been discovered that one ChristineMary BYRNE has recently been makingjourneys from Liverpool to Eire. She isthe you usekeeper of BEPPU, the Jap pConstlin Liverpool who has an office in Dublin.It seems probable that she was acting asa courier.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/187922I am told that the Bismarck was firstdetected:owin to a signal sent out by aNorwegian trawler to some station inNorway. Thissignal was picked up anddealt with by G.C. and C.S.I have just heard that the Jap party hasbeen successful. We got 200 in brand newEnglish notes in series. We took aphotograph of the Jap and he was subse-ruently trailed by two S.B. women to theJap Embassy. There was some anxiety atone moment as things did not go accordingto plan. Tate and the Jap, instead ofgetting off at the first halt, got offwhen the policeman held up the bus at across-roads. They were therefore unableto take the next bus and 4 wen by beforethey could get on board. This was ratherdisconcerting to the S.B. men who werewaiting for them further up the road.Fortunately S.B. had arranged for a champiocyclist to follow up the bus. He saw whathad happened and went on ahe id and warnedall concerned.May 30thI saw Morrison today about Sam STEWART. Ishowed him the messages and I think hewas convinced that the case was a fairlystrong one. I explained to him about ourdifficulties about disclosing all ourinformation to the Advisory Committee.He said that hefinforms theCommitteewouldCatalogue Reference:KV/4/187423at the appropriate moment that he hadspoken to the M.I.5 officer on the case andwas satisfied that STEWART should remainin internment. This of course would besubject to anything that we might subse-quently ascertain as the result of anysearches and interrogations that we made.I told Morrison that I was not at allsanguine about finding any very import ntevidence in STEART'S be elongings. Heagreed to sign an lOB order.There has been a great deal of trouble abouCRELLIN. S.B. had to be brought in and donot appear to have presented the case verywell to Kendal, who insisted on referringthe whole matter to D.P.P. This madeBurtwild. He has asked whether he should puton his mack and go down and see Kendal.Isaid that he could, as long as C nningand Foster saw him first. This he didand Kendal agreed to action forthith.Burt was afraid that if something was notdone immediately CRELLIN as an ex-confidenctrickster would bolt.A major CARTER who looks after the paper'sof the Chief of Staffs Committee in theWar Cabinet, has leaked to a solicitorfriend about the evacu tion of Crete.He S&said that this policy had been decided onand g ive details of the numbers to beevacuated each night. The solicitorrevealed the whole thing to his fellow-fire-watchers, one of whom happened to pea secretary employed at the Admiralty.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/187924I luncned with tevart. He is verypuzzled about Russia. There is no doubtthere is a big move towards the Russianfrontier, and 20 Roumanian divisions areto be mobilised on the Bessarapian frontierHe thought that Crete might have beendefended if we had taken Rhodes, wherewe could have had fighter aerodromes.Cunningham apparently offered to takeRhodes weeks ago.Saw Swinton and told him about Tate'sJapanese party. He seemed very interestedand satisfied.Saw Hopkinson about Mutt and Jeff. I toldhim that we did not wish to disclosetheir presence here to the Norwegians. Hethought that this difficulty could be gotover and promised to make enquiries andlet me know.I have suggested to Harry that D. shouldhave a representative in London. This woulgo a long way to improve liaison ans saveus an immense amount of trouble.May ay 3lstSpoke to the D.G. about Del CAMPO.He was reluctant at first to agree to theplan by which the bogus del CAMPO wouldplant himself on Artaza. He has nowagreed to let this go forward. I amvery gad as Brooman-White and Harris hadCatalogue ogue Reference:kVi47i8?atrouole.925Major CARTER has been arrested and is to betried by Court Martial. Cookie tells methat he is a very decent fellow. He hasrisen from the ranks and has many yearsservice.I spoke to Arnold about the map case. Heis pursuing the matter but has not yetidentified the harbour. I suggestedto Arnold that mining might prove auseful defence for aerodromes. Hethought the idea was a good one and saidthat he would being it to the notice ofthe appropriate authorities in the AirMinistry. Arnold has been looking intothe security of the squadron which isconcerned with dropping S.I.S. and S.0.2people on the other side. Apparently agood deal of this is going on.There has been a bit of a dust-up on theShipping Committee. The Admiralty seemto have been been caught napping by notfulfilling many of the functions whicn thecommittee is now carrying out. Theyare now trying to say that the commitis interfering in their bus ness. Ooviouslthey do not like the committee to get thekudos for something they should have donethemselves.Catalogue ReferenCe:KV/4/187