The Nationa Archives(c) crown copyrightCatalogue Reference:k :KV/4/192Image Reference:73goconversations about a. week ago indicated thatthere was some contact between Badoglio andthe British Govt., and I presume thereforethat discussions have been going on for sometime. A further straw in the wind is thearrival here of Gen. Carton de wiert, untilnow a P/W in Italy. He came to Lisbon withan Italian officer named Castellano.When the latter's suggestions were notfully accepted, Carton de Wiert in hischivalrous way suggested that he should gobac, to Italy. Castellano said however thathe had better stay where he was and proceedto England. He has been spirited away tothe country as he is a somewhat conspicuousfigure, being without one arm and one eye.Fleet St. are of opinion that we are goingto attack Naples tomorrow, though it isnot clear precisely on what they base theirassumption. Theyare somehow influencedby the fact that Winston has postponed hisspeech and that the Pope is speaking onWednesday.Gen. .Martel, our M.A. in Moscow, hastelegraphed to say that there is not a siteGerman division at the front that has a com-plement of morethat 60%. Pome divisions aredown to a mixed lot of 100.We have received information that thefirst escort group was attacked by 13 Do.aircraft at 12.52 p.m. n2th August when ab-out 30 miles west of Vigo."Egret"blewupand "Athabaskan" was damaged but managed toCatalogae Reference9tv14/192e C.0., 4 officers and30 ratings from "Egret" were rescued by"Athabaskan" which herself had 17 casualties,two of whom were fatal. The projectile usedfor the attack is believed to be a rocket-propelled glider bomb which is discharged3-5 miles f'rom the target at a moderate heightthe flight being controlled by radio fromthe aircraft. Some mention of this bomb hasbeen made by P/Ws. They say it can be firedat a distance of 15 kms from the target.The aircraft has to be turned in the directiorof the target at the moment of release. Theobserver keeps the bomb in his electticalapparatus and steers it on its target. Theexperimental flights were carried out atPeenemunde on the Baltic which was bombedthe other day. Jamming is thought to bedifficult as each bomb is steered on a dif-ferent wave length. L believe that we our-selves have been experimenting with somesimilar type of glider bomb. R.D.F. reflectiois obtained both from the bomb and from thetarget. All that the pilot has to do is tokeep the two super-imposed on his screen.Alan seems to think th t jamming should bepossible. He has also suggested the firingof rockets festooned with wire. These ofcourse are already being used by A.A.defencesand might well be applied to this problem.The question of giving the Max material to theRussians is still under discussion. Felix'scontribution has been that since the Russiansare only in part our allies, not havingdecdared war on Japap, we arenot under anyobligation to give them nything. It isdifficult to imagine a narrower or moreCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192Lstupid point of view. I dosnot think thathis viewshare likely tocut much ice sincein principle they are diametrically opposedto those of H.M.Govt.Joe Archer told me about the Mohne Damincident. The bomb used is spherical andcontains about 4 tons of H.E. It is revvedup by a special motor within the aircraftbefore release. When it touches thewater it plays ducks and drakes until ithits the side of the target. It reboundsitis still spinning as it begins to sinkand is gradually drawn in to the side of thedam. When it reaches a certain depth itexplodes. The effect of the explosion iscurious. The chunk knocked out of the damis on the opposite side to the explosion.Wallace, Chief Designer of Vickers whoinvented this bomb, was confident that itwould be successful and that this would bethe effect. He said SO as early as 1940 andhis designs were in fact given to theAmericans. Nobody believed in him. Hebased his opinion on a curious phenomenonwhich occurred at the time of the buildingWaterloo Bridge. Long concrete pylons werebeing driven into the bed of the river witha steam hammer and showed a tendency tobreak off near the top. The reason for thiswas that the force of the hammer-blow recoiledup the pylon, the break taking place at thepoint where there was le east resistance, i.e.above the water and between the top of thepylon and the steam hammer. The same effectis produced in a lateral sense with the dam,the concrete falls away on the far side asCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192l& 3there is only air resistance. four bombswere dropped in all before the dam gave way.The area covered by the explosion was 90ftdeep by 230 ft. wide. The possibilities ofthis bomb in dealing with attleshipssurrounded by torpedo nets is being considereAugust 3lstAt the Directors Meeting today we had adiscussion about travel control. It wasgener lly agreed after a good deal of troublefrom Abbott that we could not at this stageanticipate the conditions which would prevailon the continent at the end of hostilities anthat it would therefore be wrong to commitourselves concerning our future requirementsto meet hypothetical situations. -t wastherefore agreed that any decisions on 18(1)would have to be dependent on the maintenanceof full travel control beteen this countryand Ireland, which would affect both aliensand British subjects. It was for examplequite useless to try and operate the Arrivalfrom Enemy Territory Order if its provisionscould be circumvented by uncontrolled entryfrom Ireland. Lastly it was felt thatthe present restrictions would have to remainin force until Stage B. when we should beprepared to give it further consideration.It was agreed that should put forward ashort paper stating our views.Dy kes came to see me about the possibilitiesof his being used for a Second Front job. Isaid that there might be an opening for himprovided R. could spare him.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/192Frost brought me a paper on W/T security whiche thought should be the subject of discussio:by COSSAC. it contained his views as towhat was required on the Second Front, andhe suggestee himself as a candidate for thejob. I asked him what he was doing about theoffer that he had received from the RadioBoard. He said that he still had it in mindbut that he would prefer to do a job withthe forces if there was one going. Ireminded him that it had taken us a verylong time to get Dixon and Younger intoposition and that there might well be fur erdelays before this particular matter hadbeen settled. I did not for example knowwhat part RSS were going to play and how farsignals would regard themselves as beingresponsible, and put in their own nominee.In any case I did not think the job wouldbe higher than a GS03. I then repeated tohim what I had said before, namely thatF did not particularly want to carry thewar with RSS on to the IB staff. I thinkhe went away somewhat discouraged about hisprospects in an army job. He then asked mewhether the D.G. would be prepared to lendhim to the Radio Board. The significanceof this is that he would hope in this wayto retain bis military rank in what is incta civilian job. His present position isthat he has been lent by the BBC to the Army.If however heE reverts to a civilian statuson the Radio Board, the BBC at the end ofthe war might say that as he had taken avivilian job they did not propose to take himback. He cannot go back to the BBC at presentas being only 34 he would come within theCafaogderefereacesevpl9ed-up. I suggestedto him that he should discuss the questionof his being lent to the Radio Board withthe D.G.Welles rang me up about the meeting of theRSC. He suggested that possibly the ReidCommittee might take over the thorny questionof the communications of allied govts. andthat they might also deal with the non-service communications. I said that L thoughtthis would be perfectly satisfactory providedwe had a representative on the Reid CommitteeIn many ways I thought it would be preferableto the handling of these matters by the RSCsince the chairman of the Reid ommitteewas a highly qualified technician and was ina position to call anyone's bluff on technicalmatters. I also made it clear to him thatI did not think that G.P had any locus standion the Reid committee. He was merely atechnical tool and should take his orderseither from ourselves or from SIS.I saw Istead who isntheirir Force SecurityOfficer for Alactity. He is a not unpleasantbut rather feeble creature. I found it verydifficult to get any sort of spark out of him.He is not at all clear as to what he isrequired to do. I have arranged for Stopfordto see Benady who will be in charge of I.B.matters, with a view to getting the positionclarified.N.Africa have asked for the permanent retentionof John Mair. I told Harry that we had senthim our on the understanding that he wasgoing to plan counter-sabotage and establishCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192would be returning to us within a period of2 months. Had it been the intention of N.Africa to use him in italy he could certainlyhave done a good job. They had howeverturned this suggestion down. I did not thinktherefore that we should entirely give upour elaimeon his services which might bemore usefully employed on the continent.Isuggested that we should agree to his remairin N. Africa until such time as we mightrequire him for other duties.Marcus Heywood tells me that the landing onCalabria has been postponed until tomorrow.Meanwhile there appears from the Press tohave been a Commando Raid.We have been told that segrating facilitiesat the Oratory School's are now ready.Burt tells me that there is further troublein the HOYSE case, which may ultimatelybe turned to advantage. E200 which was givento Bloss by MAP was said to be a loan onthe security of certain shares, valued atthat som. In fact the falue of the shareswas only half that amount. unliffe Owenhas now induced Arthur J.Rank to purchasethese shares at their full value. Both Cun-liffe-Owen and Rank will have some difficultyin explaining this rather peculiar transadion.TAR tells me that Johnnie Jebson and Tricyclehave come to an understanding. PresumablyJebson is playing straight as ISO- shows thathe is backing Tricycle. Jebson's idea isto go out to Lisbon and work there as anCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192186Abwehr official in touch with Tricycle andhis gang.September lstNobody had nything of interest to say atthe Wednesay meeting. Hart's material showsa steady flow of bogus information allegedto be coming from this country. There isnot one word of truth in any of it.I had a discussion withEick,Brook-Booth, MilmoByrd and Gibbs about the sending of dupli-cates of all our correspondence with Americato SIS. We have apparently been doing thisreligiously. 020 reports go to SIS andit is up to them to copy them and send them onto BSC if they think fit. We have come tothe conclusion that we had better leave thingsas they are for the time being except inthe case of enquiries on 020 reports whichthe FBI sometimes putthrough BSC New York.We are going to suggest to Thurston that ifthey have any enquiries to make they shouldpass them through him since it is here thatdiscussion on 020 rpports should take placerather than in New York. The only communica-tions to the FBI which SIS do not see arethe letters which Thurston sends as a resultof his conversations with the various sectionsof this office.I went to a meeting called by Dingle root atMEW at which, Farrer, Geoffrey Gibbs, Robertsof the FO and Lord Drogheda were present. Themeeting had been called on account of a GermanCatalogue Reference:KVI4/192B.J. which showed that Hans SULZER the Swissindustrialist had talked a good deal to theGermans about his previous visit to thiscountry. His attitude now is definitelypro-German and of course pro-Sulzer. Havinginterests all over the world he very naturallydoes not wish to see the annihilation ofGermany. He also feels that from a culturalpoint of view he is closely tied with Germanyrather than with any other country. I saidthat from a security point of view wewere against having him here since owing tohis many contacts he was bound to collecta good deal of information. it did not makemuch difference whether he was pro-Germanor pro-Brtish. At could in fact be arguedthat if he was pro-British he would be likelyto get more information than if he were pro-German. If however it was considered thatthere were over-riding considerations andthat the information he would get here woulddo more good than harm we did not wish tostand in the way of his proposed visit. itappeared however that Sulzer's firm has comeperilously near the Black List since it isstepping up production for the Axis. Onthese grounds therefore objection may be tolrerby MEW. If this is SO he would hardly beacceptable as head of the Swiss Trade Dele-gation a d the F.O. are prepared to say SO.Lord Drogheda point out that the visit of theSwiss delegation would be a matter for theHDSE where the Service Depts, would have anopportunity of expressing their views. Thereseemed no doubt whatever that some delegationwould have to come to this country from Swit-zerland as the matters to be discussed are ofconsiderable importance.Catalogue Reference.KV/47192Marcus uey wood tells me that the landing onthe mainland has now been postponed tillthe 3rd. The Russians are doing extremelywell. The Commando haid on Calabira appearsto have been quite a success. A number ofprisoners were brought back and there waspractically no opposition. The bathing waswarm.September 2ndI went over to see C. about the case ofLECUBE, a Spaniard who was recruited by theAbwehr somewhere in 1941. He is an eX-international Soccer player an ex-Treasuryofficial and an ex-owner of a greyhoundracing track. Whether there was any connec-tion between his appointment in the SpanishTreasury and his greyhound racing activitiesis a matter for some speculation. In 1942he obtained a mission from the Abwehrtoreport on the military forces in the PanamaLone. He was picked off at Trinidad andbrought to this country. While he has toldus a certain amount about his connectionsand activities, he vehemently denies thathe is a German spy and has written severalappeals to the Home Secretary. He writesin typical >panish style: "From my microsopicsignificance L fling myself against thepedestal of your greatness" or words to thateffect, with professions ofyhis innocence.The documents found on him contained a num-ber of addresses which undoubtedly connecthim with the Abwehr, but do not perhaps tothe uninitiated provide an entirely con-clusive case. Unfortunately for LECUBECatalogue Reference:KV/4/192however there were some 90 messages on ISOSsome of which tally completely with his ownstatements of his movements and associates.In order to convince the Home Secretary it isnecessary that he should be acquainted withthe nature of the evidence. I explained thisto C. who agreed.I then told C. about the ZECH-NENTWICH caseand our views. He seemed to think it wasquite possible in the light of other informa-tion that the man was genuine.He then referred to the agent in Switzerlandwho had been handing out German B.J.S rela-ting to GOERTZ and also reporting on certainmessages emanating from Josephine. It seemsthat this agent, who in the first instancemade contact with an OSS representative, maybe something in the nature of a XX, but itis not really clear at the moment. C. wasevidently not aware of the fact that we hadno official knowledge about the Jospheinemessages. I said that we should be veryinterested to know precisely what thesemessages were. He said that of coursewe should be informed. Vivian was presentand I think slightly embarrassed. The factis that every thing is being done by Cowgillto keep this information away from us.However we now have an opportunity of takingthe question up.The Marita case seems to to be devepping in arather interesting way, Marita havingvisited the I.O.M. Bernard PERRIGOE isCatatdgue RefeFenee:kaw49f92nformation about theinternees. One of his recruits appears to beour old friend HORSFALL-ERTZ. There may bean opportunity of finding out more about himand possibly also Mrs. KRAFT.HAFFNER the deserter from Spain who knowsabout Bodden is still in Madrid. Meanwhilecertain ISOS messages indicate that theGermans have been making frantic effortsto get him arrested by the paniards. Atthe moment it looks as if the paniardshave got hold of somebody whom they believeto be HAFFNER and who is alleged to havecommitted suicide. The probability is thatthey have got hold of the wrong man, sincethe latest SIS reports indicate that HAFFNERis still in hiding in charge of our people.I saw the Home Secretary this afternoon. TheD.G. and Jim Hale had seen him previouslyon the question of RUTLAND -hey had suggestethat RUTLAND could do very little harm if hewere released. After half an hour's discussiothe Home Secretary decided to keep him inside.Herbert and I discussed with him the case ofLECUBE and he readily agreed that the evidencewas conclusive. He thought it quite clearthat the man mentioned in ISOS as Espinaand Gomez was identical with LECUBE.I had a discussion with the D.G. and Abbottin the morning about travel control. Abbottseems to have impressed the D.G. that travelcontrol to Ireland could be relaxed at StageCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192A. I made it very clear that I thought thiswould be a mis take and got somewhat irritated.The D.G. decided to have a further meetingin the afternoon, at which Harker,Mi. Milmoand Hale were present. We were all in agree-ment, except the D.G. and Abbott, thattravel control should remain as at presentuntil Stage B. although it might be possibleto relax to some extent within the framework of the regulations. It was finallyagreed that Milmo and should put forwarda note giving our reasons. In due coursethis would be the subject of discussion withthe H.O.A Jap B.J. indicates that prior to the meetingof the Grand council, Mussolini andn hisfriends had the intention of strengtheningthe Party by establishing it on a somewhatbroader basis by gathering round Mussolinimore men both from within the Party andoutside. Having formed a new NationalGovernment they would concentrate the strengthof the whole country under the King andfollow the only course open to Italy, namelyto continue the war. This was theintention underlying ther request for ameeting of the GrandCouncil, and the so-calledGrandi proposals.A report from Wheeler Bennett in Washingtonon the German refugee population indicatesthat there exists and always has existed ahatred of the Prussians among the SouthGermans. There is also a strong indication ofa desire to exculpate South Germany at theatalegrfereffereriteskv/4agzthe sins of Germany92over the last 100 years. As Bennett pointsout, a picture of the peace-loving SouthGermans, tyranrised and dominated by a brutaland oppressive Prussia, is not entirely inaccordance with the facts of history. Whileit is true that Prussian influence was thedirecting force of Pan-Grerman aggressionprior to 1918, the centre of reaction wasshifted to South Germany on the collapseof the Second Reich. Moreover South Germanspredominate in the higher circles of theParty. Hitler, Hess, Goering, Frick, Esser,von Epp, and many others. Munich is thespiritual home of the Nazi Party and of Geo-politiks. The founding fathers of Pan-German ideology, Arndt, Fichte, Hegel,e etc.were none of them Prussians and the greatcentres of Pan-Germanism were not X inthe North but in Mainz, Leipzig and Munich.Equally the proportion of South Germansin the High Command is extremely high,including some of the leading figures, Rommel,Halder, von Leeb, List,Jodl, von Thoma andthe two Keitels. Wheeler Bennett says inconclusion that there is a good case ofsaying that Prussianism originated not inPrussia but in other parts of Germany.although Pnussia may have provided a morereceptive field for the propagation of thisbacillic culture, no part of Germany iswholly free from infection. If thereforePrussia was to be separated fromoouth Germanyit should be done with the confidence thatall the sick in Germany has been isolatedin one area. This like talking about Nazisand Germans, but Prussianism is Germanism.Catalogue Bennett tretericetkea/ig2 that South Germansshould not be allowed to escape their shareof that measure of punishment which is thejust desert of all Germans.P/W has stated that he was posted in theIntelligence Central Uffice at Cologne forthe invasion against England in 1940. Hewas acquainted with the reparations ofAdmiral Fleicher,Naval Cin-C. Channel Coast,on the l6th September. On the 22ndSeptember the whole operation was cancelled.Triciecle is expected back between the 5thand l0th September. He has obtained somefurther details of the agent PBK who seemsto be connected with Ostro. The fact thatJebson is prepared to give us informationthrough Tricycle offers enormous possibilitiesA further delivery of a wireless and sabotagematerial has been promised to Mutt and Jeffat the end of September. The possibilitiesof shooting down the plane on this occasionwill probably be explored.The cover address received by Brutus wasone of the addresses given to the Germanagent Joe K. The name however is different,and other addresses of this agent have beengiven at one time to agents such as the Wormbut taken awayplater. The giving of theseaddresses therefore appears to be consistentwith the interpretation derived from ISOSthat the Germans regarded Brutus has being afree agent up to the time of his arrest butare somewhat nervous about his having fallenCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192THIS IS THISIS ACO COPYORIGINAL DOGATENTF ETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION243 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958youinto our hands as a result of his arrest.The Germans are now transmitting on Father'sold and new frequencies. It has been ascer-tained that the operator working to Fatheron his Indian frequencies is the same asthe one working tu: the important XX. Silver.Father has now been posted to a night-fightersquadron.Shadow has arrived in Lisbon. He have notyet heard whether he has.made contact withWilma SCHULTZ.A further operation of Plan Dream by whichwe expect to receive E2,631 has almost beencompleted.Phipps came to see me. If there was anythinhe could do on the Second Front he would lika job. Unfortunately he has-r no languagequalifications.I have readreport on ZECH-NENTWICH,which is extremely well presented:. The keyto the man's whole make up is that he isobsessed by his status as an officer. Thispoint is particularly emphasised by hisextrme reluctance to disclose that whilehe was in prison he had his face slapped bya representative of the Gestapo. What hedoes not understand of course is that weare fighting German militarism just as muchas Nazism. When this dawns on him a some-Catalogue what e RetePEndiKHAf2nment is bound to set1n. His whole story reads like a filmasscenario. The circumstances in which hegradually drifted into contact with thePolish resistence movement appear to bequite circumstantial and authentic. At themoment SOE are having a look at him.September 3rdWe entered Ltaly this morning at 4.30 butthe moment there is no further news.I had a meeting with TacIver, Eddie Grantand Stopford, There is a certain amount offriction between Eddie and Stopford over thequestion of the running of agents in thePAIR FISHING Co. The information suppliedby Stopford' agents id diametrically opposedto the information supplyed by Eddie throughthe police. The real trouble was howeverthat Eddie had the impression that agentswere being run in his area -without his know-ledge. In fact when we got down to particu-lars, it was fairly clear that Eddie hadbeen given both the files about the agents andalltheir letters coming from Milford Haverwhen he. did the course here some monthsago. Whether he had forgotten about thisor whether he never read the files I do notkno He has since received memorandabased on information supplied by these agents.Clearly it would be quite useless to sendhim all their reports as they came in and infact he had no wish that this should be done.Stopfrod had concluded his reports by sayingthat he thought certain of the Spanish fac-Calalggpeyseferehceoksaariads Catalogie with the heads ofcompanies who held differentpolitical views. the police have madeenquiries into an allegation by Stopford'saagent that Spanish seamen were being fleecedby the local inhabitants. hey had gone toto heads of the companies who had denied thatanything of the kind was going on. Stopfordsays that it is no good going to the headsof the companies who give the police regularpresents of fish. The heads of the companies4who hold contrary political views to the com-painants are in his view notte likely togive their subordinates any assistance.They would naturally pay no attention to theircomplaints. While I am quite ready to believethat the heads of the companies are scoundrelsand that the police know very little aboutpolitical matters of this kind, it seems alittle far-fetched to say that the heads ofcompanies would not support a genuine com-plaint. On the other hand Stopford saysthat his own agent has been paying 45/- aweek for half a bed and no food. What Ithink upset Eddie more than any ything wasthat some suggestion that the HDSE SeamensWelffare section should intervene was putto the HDSE without prior consultation withhimself, or without a further check-up bythe police. In this I think he is right.I have suggested that before we go any furtherEddie should ascertain from the police theexact number of Spaniards involved - I donot think that thiswill amount to more thana dozen - and then find out what they arein fact paying for their lodgings. If wepress the Executive to t ake action and find ththere are only 3 people involved we shall alllook rather foolish.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/192SOE have revived the scare about diamond.smuggling from south and west Africa toGermany and wish to have further discussionswith ourselves and SIS. Everybody is a bitsceptical about this business since certainpeople in SOE have a lively commercial interesSIS have begun by asking for the evidence.If we get it we shall then have a better ideaof where we are. I do not think we can dovery much except to give assistance throughour local representative.called PIASECKIPark of SOE rang up about a Pole/who isarriving from Stockholm. He is said tohave been working as a courier between Warsawand Berlin. He is regarded as somewhatfishy. He will be sent to the LRC forexamination.Erost came to talk to me about his job onthe Radio Board. He is getting it kept openuntil the end of next week. His decisionwill apparently depend to some extent on theresult of the conference of the RSC on the14th.September 4thThe D.G. sent for me and Harry about Harmer'ssuggested appointment to the I.B.( (1) unit forFrance. He said that this was the first he hahad heard of it and I tried to explain thatI had told him of it at any rate in generalterms when we had had a meeting some monthsago with Cowgill and Arnold-Foster, at whichwe agreed to do what we could for the S.I I. (b)unit, ,bearing in mind that we now had aataoguetReeferenceike/e/19om the .B.Staff. We116had provisionally arranged to let Cowgill haveDay immediately. That appointment had gonethrough the official channels and a month be-fore operations Harmer would be employed onD.A. work. Cowgill had made an attempt to get.him earlier but we had sat on it. I quiteunderstood that these appes.could not bemade without his sanction or through officialchannels but there had to be some sort ofdiscussion in a preliminary way on a lowerLevel before official application was made.I had the greatest difficulty in gettingthis out in bits and pieces as the D.G.would not allow me to give him any connectedstory. I eventually said that all we weretrying to do was to assist SIS where possibleand to present the best team that we couldfor C.E. work on the Second Front. The D. G.seemed father annoye ed at giving Cowgill anyonethe more SO since he had just received anapplication from the Services for two MI5officers for Ceylon and for one for India.He then discussed the question of Mair. Isaid that I was anxious if possible not tolose sight of him. I knew the tendency inthe Army to hang on to a good man regardlessof his special qualifications. We hadthought that Mair owing to his knowledgenofItalian was eminently suited to the ItalianI.B unit. Owing however to the fact thatHill-Dillon had been thoroughly impregnatedby Vivian with the anti-MI5 complex about theSecondFront Mair seemed to be stuck in NorthAfrica. They had asked for him for a specificjob for two months. I was not suggesting thatwe should ask for his recall. What I wantedCatalogue Reference:kV/47192was to enter a caveatos that if his specialqualifications were required for Second Frontoperations he might be brought back at anymoment. The D.G. finally decided that Mairshould be allowed to take up the GSO6 joboffered, Harry having assured him that theW.O. would get him back if his services wererequired.I had a talk with TAR about Japaneseespinage when Stage B. was reached. I thothought that we should consider verycarefully how far itwould be possible to sellout netork to the Japs in order to preventthem from building something up themselves.I had in mind the Jebson-Tricycle set-up.I found that TAR and Tommy Harris had beenconsidering the possibilities of sellingGarbo to the Russians at some convenient date.This I think might well be worth considering.I have read Marriott's report on India, whichis extremely good. We have also had a veryappreciative letter from Pilditch, head ofD.I.B. asking us for another officer ofsimilar calibre in addition to Finney. Thereis no doubt that Marriott was an unquali-fied. success.September 6thAir Commodore Chappel came to see me and saygoodbye. He is going as Air Attache toBrazil. I gather that his duties are to betaken over by A/C.Buss, who at the beginningof the war Nas Director ofAir Intelligence.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/192TAR tells me that Starkey is being takentather seriously by the Germans. They haveblocked Calais harbour with concrete shipsand have laid extensive minefields outsideBoulogne. they have also brought down 4-6destroyers, tvo of which are said to be inDunkirk harbour. There are a large number offighter aircraft in France but SO far it hasbee extremely difficult to get them up.According to the Press, Stalin has receivedthe Bishops of the Orthodox Church. The sig-nificance of this move may well be a desire onhis part to take the wind out of the sailsof the Catholic Church, whose adherents areextremely worried about the possibility of aBolshevik invasion in Europe.At the Press meeting today Tangye statedthat Barker Benfield had held a press meetingat which he had explained the whole significanof Starkey. TAR knew that the press werebeing informed that Starkey was an exercise.He did not know however that they were goingto be gold that its main purpose was todraw the Luftwaffe. Tangye also knew aboutthe negotiations with Badoglio and Carton deWiert. The story in Fleet St is that we aregoing to attack Naples on Wednesday and thatthe Italians will sue for peace shortlyafterwards.The D G. held a further meeting on tr avelcontrol at which the paper prepared by MilmoCatalogue Reference:KV/4/19220was accepted for discussion with the H.O. Weare opposed to the abolition of sections18(1)-75) until Stage B. We are howeverprepared to consider certain relaxationswithin the frame-work of the D.R.Joe points out that the fact that the Germanshave gone over to fighters as a firstpriority gives them a certain advantagein production figures. Normally it takes8,000 man hours to make a fighter asagainst50,000 man hours to make a bomber.I visited the American GeN Strong, head ofG.2. who is over here for a short time.He is a man of, I should say, about 65, nofool but filled with a tremendous sense ofhis own importance and very slow of speech.I should say that if his stenographer coulddo 3 words a minute she would suit himadmirably. I explained to him very brieflythe organisation of the Security Service andthis caused him to give me an account ofthe all-embracing functions and efficiencyof G.2. It was G.2. who had been res-ponsible for catching the 8 saboteurs inthe USA. One of his officers had recogniseda German whom he thought he had seen inBerlin many years ago. He infommed the FBIand it turned out his hunch was right. Thisis the first time that I have heard thisstory. It may or may not be true,but it iscertainly not the FBI'S version.I then talked about Civil Security duties inthe British Army. I explained that we hadbeen carrying these duties here for the armyCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1922D2and that for the Second Front we had now beenasked to supply a certain number of officers,although we were primarily a eivilian depart-ment. He said that he had always thoughtthis rather a curious arrangement. In theUSA G. 2 were thoroughly equipped to deal withall civil security matters. The transitionto field work therefore presented no diffi-culty. The fact is of course that they haveno training in civil security duties and area constant source of irritation to Mr.Hoover.This prompted me to ask him what the positionof OSS was in the field. He made it quiteclear that OSS could not operate in the fieldwithout the full concurrence of G. 2. fromwhom all their directives would come. Hethought that the corresponding unit to I.B. (1)would probably receive its secret intelligencefrom G.2. in London.Gen.Strong then told me that he had seen theAmerican Chief ivil Affairs Officer andfound that he was relying on G. 2. to supplyhim with a large number of officers toperform police duties. Gen. .Strong had nointention of doing anything of the kind andsaid so, neither does he intend to co-operatewith any de Gaullist organisations in thezones of the armies. I explained to himthat we were expecting to put a GSO 1 withC. C.C.A.0. and also to supply other officerswho would control districts under theCCAO'S organisation. I pointed out howeverthat 11 these officers would be under the.B.staff of the Force Commander. Securitymatters as distinct from police matters wereconsidered the business of the army. We thenCatalogue Reference:KVI4/192208passed to questions f deception. I explainedto Gen.Strong that we had a network of XXagents here, that we used them primarilyfor an insurance against penetration, andseoondarily as a means of deception. Weran a committee which met weekly and consis-ted of fficers of the 3 Services, ivilDefence and MI5/6. The traffic, which vasbased on information obtained on the spoteither by the agent himself or by one ofour officers, was approved by all concerned.Gen. Strong told me that deception neededvery special qualifications - dramaticinstict and imaginative intuition - it wasvery rare that such qualifications could befound in one man. I knew of course what wascoming and was not in the least surprisedwhen it was made clear to me that the com-bination of these qualifications was to befound in the person of Gen. Strong alone,although he did say that he also consultedthe naval authorities.The meeting was very friendly throughoutand ended by Gen.Strong aying that if hisorganisation could at any time be of assistance to us it was entirely at our disposal.I said that possibly we might have an officereither resident in or visiting the USA andthat I thopedt it would be possible for himto make contact with the General in WashingtonCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1922otSeptember 7thAt the directors' meeting today the DG.said that Furnival-Jones had returned fromthe CCAO course and he thought that itmight be a good idea if he gave a talkto our second front officers.Lennox gave us the Quebec decisions, whichare roughtly, to knock Italy ouu of the war,after which the second front takes priority.There is still however a possibility, iftheItalian situation is satisfactory, that wemay try and enter the Balkans through Durazzo.Seven divisions are to return in Novemberin preparation for second front operations.Provisions are also being made for a possiblebut improbable early collapse of the Germanswhen it would be necessary to rush a forcethrough to Berlin. Second priority comprisesthe open ng of the Burma Rd. and attacks onAkiab and Rumree e arly next year, followedby attacks, on Rangoon, Sumatra and bingapore.ombing of Germany is to remain firstpriority.The Communist are prqaring a second frontdemonstratior for Winston's return. Stepsare being taken to meet this situation.Plans for an armistice with Ltaly have beenapproved by the Russians and a conference isto be held by American,Bri British and RussianSecretaries of State for Foreign Affairs inLondon in October.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/192105Walter Bell came to see me. He tells methat Dick Ellis is on his way back. He doesnot think however that his views will bevery helpful as he seems to be unable to lookat the whole problem in an objective light.He is rather inclined to say that it has nowbeen conclusively proved that Hoover neverhad any case ag gainst Security CoOrdinatioVivian seems to be rather on the upgrade ais producing a certain amount of order inAmerican affairs. His whole policy howeveris governed by a rooted prejudice ag inst anyencroachment by the Security Service onAmerican soil.I attended a meeting at the H.0. with SirJohn Moylan in the chair to discuss the sec-tion 18(1)-(5) on Travel control. The H.O.appear anxious to get rid of some of theseregulations at Stage A whereas we feel thatthey should be maintained at any rate untilStage B. I pointed out that it was diffi-cult to consider these regulations inde-pendently since if travel control ceased tooperate between this country and Eire weshould merely be closing the front door ancopening the back. We had good reason tothink that the Japs were attempting to buildup their espionage organisation and that theywould probably make use of the remnants ofany German organisation apart from theconnections that they already had withPpanish organisations. There would moreoverstill be a Jap Legation in Fire.Catalogue Catalogueareference.Vf4/192 regards theBritish subjects ito6was pointed out by Jim Hale that the Govt.would be made to look extremely silly in theeyes of the House if they had to say that allsouts of renegade British subjects returningfrom Germany and occupied territory arrivedin this country without any sort of examina-tion. This view I think had a considerableeffect as indeed do all views which suggestcriticism in the House of Commons.As regards Eire there was a strenuous attemptto abolish 2(a)b which prohibits entry ofa British subject from Eire. It was pointedout that this restriction could be avoadedif people liked to come in via the continentwhen they would only be subjected to therestrictions under the Arrival From Enengyterritory order. These resboictions did notamount to total prohibition but merely gavefacilities for a detention of up to one monthMilmo ably defended this para by pointingout that it would be impossible to deal withthe large flow of traffic between this countryand Eire unless there was a permit system.If there were no permit system there would beno suitable opportunity of ascertainingwhereer a British subject had been prior tohis arrival in Eire. This would mean thatextensive interrogation would have to becarried out at ports with all the consequentdelays. The position would very soon becomeuntenable. Apart from this there were certainBritish subjects and of course Eire nationals83Catalogue Reference:KV/4/192of a highly undesirable kind who had beenresiding in Eire since the beginning of thewar. It was essential to have powers todeal with them.On the question of exit it was pointed outthat conditions in Europe and elsewhere mightbe extremely disturbed between Stages andB. and even after B. It would be a consider-able embarrassment to us if British subjeccould travel to allied territory and maketrouble. They might also wish Lo travel toPalestine and there might be cases of dis-affected persons wishing to proceed to neutralterritory in order to agitate for an earlypeace with Japan. There might be manyother cases of a similar kind where powerswould be needed to prevent exit.As regards para. (5) Milmo pointed out thatsome amendment would be necessary since wecould not even howndeal under the Arrivalfrom Enemy Territory order with Britishsubjects coming from Sicily. It was there-fore necessary to make it clear that para 18(3) of DR should apply to any territory Wwhich has been occupied by the enemy since thebeginning of the war.As regards exits, the argument was advanced byHill of the H.O. that territories concernedshould be held responsible for dealing withour nationals and that we should throw theonus of refusing entry on the foreign orcolonial governments. It was pointed outthat this depended very largely on the extentCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192to which they could control their frontiers.Access to Palestine was for example an easymatter. Equally zones occupied by the armiesmight not be very rigidly controlled.On the whole our arguments appeared with somereluctance to be accepted thought they maynot all be embodied in the H.O. recommenda-tions. We have however an opportunity offighting them again in the last stage beforetheir presentation to the Home Secretary.Roger tells me that there was a note inSPRINGHALL'S diary on a certain date whichsaid "See Ann Gresson and Ray Milne.A look-up resulted in our seeing that onehad vetted Ray Milne for SIS. There wasnothing against her except I think somevague reference to the fact that at someformerr date she had been connected withPeace Pledge Union activities. She was thedaughter of a Post Office official. Shewas interviewed by Roger and Felix Cowgill.She admitted that her friend Ann Gresson,who is of course a Party member, had intro-duced her to SPRINGHALL on one occasion. Thelatter had asked her what she was doing andshe said that she was employed on highlyconfidential work in connection with the war.SPRINGHALL then said that if she saw anythingthat she thought would be of interest tothe Party would she kindly let him know.She said that the would but with no intentionof doing nything about it. In act she hadCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192been rather shocked by the proposal. Shewas still more shocked when she learned aboutSPRINGHALL'S prosecution, but she did notsay nything because she assumed that hewas working for the Russians who were ourallies. Had she thoughtthat SPRINGHALLwas working for the Germans or for anyoneopposed to the interests of this country shewould have mentioned the matter.She admitted that she was a member of the Partherself and that she had a dual loyaltyto this country and to Soviet hussia.Igather that she works in Section V and is righin the middle of ISOS and everything else.She is regarded as an extremely efficientand hardworking girl. The dilemma is to knowwhether to retain her services or whether tokick her out, when she may do serious harm.Victor tells me that in the raid on Stuttgartonly 33 out of the 350 Fortresses reachedtheir target. 48 of them were brought downand 175 members of the crews were pickedup in the drink. Frotress crens are extreme-ly brave but their navigation is undoubted-ly bad.The DU-Gerat scare has been intensified owingto references to it on ZIPS. It seems thatthe Germans intend to clear an area in theBaltic for experimental purpesea and thatwhen the rocket guns are established on thecoast they will be surrounded by a smoke-screeto prevent them fra being seen, and bombed.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/19221DItaly has surrendered unconditionally, thearmistice having been signed as early asSept.3rd. The delay in announcing the armis-tice was agreed between ourselves and theItalians in order to give us an opportunityof getting a firm footing on the Italianmainland before the Germans had the chanceto occupy the whole country. Badogliohas stated that he will aesist any aggressionother than by allied armies. The Germanwireless is filled with accusations oftreachery and Bolshevik plots. It willbe interesting to see whether the Germanstry to occupy Rome or whether they only attempto hold the line of the Po. I gather thatin Harris(s view the bombing of Germany fromItalian airfields is not particularlyfavourable owing to the difficulty of gettingaccurate met. reports about the weatherconditions over the Alps.St the weekly meeting Hart again showed thekind of false information circulated by theAbwehr from Lisbon and Madrid which purportsto come from this country. All of it isfantastic and totally inaccurate.A report dated 5th Sept. was made by the S.D.in Rome to Berlin and stated that Badogliohad expressed the view that he would prefera British landing to a German invasion.The Fuhrer gave the S.D. 6 hours to verifythe information which he evidently regardedas of the highest importance.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/192The British deserter William .HEAP is tobe trained by the Abwehr in Faris for somespecial mission.TAR mentioned that Garbo had succeeded inbringing over another German Recce planeto Scapa.I saw Duff at 5 o'clock with the D.G. Hewished to discuss America. He was anxiousthat Mills should not return: to Canada untilthe whole question had been settled. Ste-phenson is now coming over again ostensiblyon a visit in company with Donovan. Clearlyhowever he is afraid of what Denham isgoing to say when he reaches this country, andwants to be on the spot to deal with anycounter-measures he thinks necessary.Duff is toying with the idea of putting Millsas our representative in Canada with the rightto go to Washington where he would be underthe auspices of the British Embassy. Herather takes the view however that thisarrangement must be accepted by Stephenson.I warned him that Stephenson would probablymake trouble about Mills because heis aware that Mills knows too much aboutBSC. Ithought however that it would be agreat histake to give way to him on thispoint since Mills had undoubtedly made agreat success of his mission both to theRCMP and to the FBI. I saidy that i1 thoughtit was essential to keep Mills out of thegeneral wrangle over America. He agreed.The D.G. said that the arrangement with MillsCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192912would be quite acceptable to him subject toanything Denham might have to say on hisreturn.September 9thTAR tells me that Starkey has been a completeflop. He has been up at Fighter Command.Although the visibility was not particularlygood the Germans must have seen our bargeswhich went in to with in 3 or 4 miles ofthe coast. We had 250 fighters in the airbut not a single German plane showed up.Presumably they have orders not to take theair until we actually make a landing, rhelsethey were already informed that the wholeoperation was a blind. This would not besurprising since the press were all givenfull details a few days ago.I had a talk with Kemball Johnston and Bluntabout the former's memo on the peace propa-ganda of neutral governments and missions.He had bem prompted to write this owing tothe case of SULZER. He thinks that thefact is not sufficiently appreciated inGovernment circles that from now onwards we mumust expect all neutral governments and theirmissions to be hot appeasers since althoughthey wish for Germany' defeat they do notwish to see her annhilated, owing to theirvarious financial and commercial assets inGermany. They are therefore likely to succumbto German propaganda about the Bolshevikbogey. Johnston does not think that we areCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192913suitable equipped to meet this danger. Heis in touch with a Left wing Swedish socialDemocratic journalists called Ava ANDERSEN,who he thinks would be willing to go toSweden and take on a mission to find outprecisely what the various trends of opinionsare in Government and other circles. Heoffered this man to SIS some time ago butgot little response. I have told him tomake out a note about the case which L wiltake to C. My suggestion is that the manshould be allowed to go, make no contact withSIS in Sweden, and report here on his return.We would then supply SIS with the informationI have also suggested to Kembal Johnston thathe should have a talk with Loxley on thelines of his memo.The americans have landed at Naples andJeghorn. Our fleet is in Genoa. According-to M.S.S. the Germans are marching on Rome.The Admiral of the Italian fleet has givenorders that ships are not to be scuttled,but those at Taranto should proceed to Maltawhile those at Specia are to put to sea.German submarines are out to interceptthem.I attended a meeting at the H.0. ith CarewRobinson in the chair, to discuss D. D.R.S S.The most important were 18B and l8B(a).As regards the former we pointed out that if iit were abolished a certain number. of knownGermanspies would have to be released. Thiswould be embarrassing, but we would not beprepared to advance this argument for theretention of the There wasCatalogue Reference:KV/47192another more important consideration,namelythat if 18B were abolished the Home Secretarywould have no power to deal with a Britishsubject engaged in espionage on behalf of theJapanese. We thought therefore that Section 1of 18B should be retained and amended toexclude "hostile origin or association"."recently concerned in acts prejudicial"should be retained. with some difficultywe got agreement that these suggestions shouldgo forward. As regards 18b(a) we pointed outthat we had some 20 people interned who hadbeen brought ack from Trinidad. A goodmany of them were Spaniards and it Nould beextremely undesirable for them to be at largebet een Stages A and B. Furthermore weanticipated that there might be an increasein this category of enemy gent. Weexpressed the view that it was essentialthat these people should be brought back tothis country where their stories could beexamined in the light of further informationobtained. It came out during the discussiorthat the regulation originally cameinto forceon humanitarian grounds, namely that it wasundesirable to keep a white prisoner in acolonial prison and in an unhealthy climate.This argument would I think carry more weightthan our own since if 18b(a) goes it necessi-tates the keeping of British subjects in prisdin undesirable conditions.Other less important regulations were con-sidered with the Service Depts. present.A reluctance on the part of the 1.0. toretain those regulations dealing with photo-graphy drew the retort from the AdmiraltyCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192artrepresentative that their Lordships did notconsider. the war in the Far East a matter Wwhich should be pursued only during leisurehours on Saturday afternoons. This gavethe H.O. quite a jolt.I went after the meeting to see Duff Cooperand left with him the P.M.S report and thereport on ZECH-NENTWICH.I referred to our discussion yesterday aboutMills and asked him whether he envisagedStephenson remaining as M.I.5 representativein the Western Hemisphere. He said that hethought that this might be possible even ifMills had independent right of communication.He admitted however that a somewh t awkwardsituation would be created and Stephensonwould probably object. I said that Ithought the point was an important one, sinceHoover could well understand that owing tothe territorial divisions between ourselvesand SI S we had been unable to place apermanent representative in the USA U. but heNould not understand our appointing arepresentative who was not persona grata w'hwith himself.Duff told me that the original offer of peacehad originally come from the italians and thatit had been an offer of a complete turnoverand active assistance to theydllied armies.We had held out for unconditional surrenderas a first step. Duf'f cannot explain pre-cisely why we had let the italians down bygiving away the fact that the armistice hadCalafgueikeferencesRet4/ozSeptember 10thThe .Brooke-Booth and I had lunch withthe Belgian en.Ganshof and Lepage. Gen.Ganshof found himself on the 25th June 1940at Bordeaux. He had previously been respon-sible for the arrest and internment of allBelgian Quislings on May 12th 1940. Hehad heard that his subordinates in Belgiumwere going to be held responsible for hisactions by the German authorities. He there-fore considered it his duty to return toBrussels. Nobody paid any attention to himfor a week or SO but ultimately he was visitedby the Gestapo and taken to prison. Heremained some weeks without being interro-gated at all. When questioned he took theattitude that he had merely acted in accor-dance with his duty. After a period ofinternment of some 7 months he was releasedbut kept under very close observation.Through contacts in the Post Office he knewthat his telephone conversations were beingintercepted. Agents Provocateurs asking forassistance of one kind or another were constan-ly being sent to him by the Gestapo buthe knew how to deal with them. Meanwhile hewas actively concerned in building up Bel-gian resistance movements. He was arrestedagain in 1942 and kept in prison for somemonths. The Germans really yhad nothingconcrete against him but were merely suspiciouIn May 1943 a parachutists who was carryingimportant despatches crashed on landing. InCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1929consequence Lepage sent him a warning. Hewas got out of Belgium with the assistanceof SIS about 2 months ago, having previouslybeen released by the Germans. He probablyknowsmore about Belgian resistance movementsthan anybody in the country. He makes anextremely good impression and I believe isby far the most outstanding personality inthe Belgian Govt. here. He is ostensiblyhead of the Dept. of Military Justice butcarries far more weight than his officewould imply. I told him roughly what theset up of an .B.staff on the Second Frontwas likely to be. It seemed to me that theI.B. 2 officer should have the closest liaisonwith the General who could obviously give himmore guidance than anyone else. Gen. Ganshofhad been responsible in May 1940 for thearrest of FANTO who was later closely asso-ciated with Gen. von Falkenhausen. He knewof FANTO'S presence in this country andobviously felt somewhat apprehensive. Hesaid he would be pleased to give usall the detailed information that we mightrequire. During the conversation Lepagementioned that he had a highly importantArgentine agent who had the confidence ofthe German S.S. in Madrid.. This agent hadpaid visits both to La Linea and Algeciras.He had mentioned this fact to Col. l.Danseyand offered to make use of the agent in anysense that might be advantageous to SIS.He had had no response. I said that we shouldbe extremelyinterested to know about this manand the ground that he covered since we werevery anxious about sabotage activities inCatalogue Reference:KV/4/19228Gib. It might be that he could help us.Lepage said that if we would send an af ficerdown he would be very pleased to give us thefullest details. This seems to me a typicalcase where Dansey in his general distrustof the Belgians has turned down an offerwhich he should either have accepted himselfor at least passed on to Section V.I had a meeting with Frost and Dick to gointo the question of signal security whichis to come up at the meeting of the RSCon Tuesday. There is first of all thequestion of the security of communicationsby non-service organisations in this country.It is agreed that we should have a repre-sentative on the Reid Committee and the JICseem to think that we should be responsiblefor bringing to the notice of the Reid Com-mittee breaches of security by non-serviceorganisations. On the her hand Vivian takesthe view that we could only call upon theservices of RSS to monitor these communica-tions provided they have the discretion todecide when they can spare their equipmentand time from the demands of their normalwork. Vivian seems to think that RSS is anSIS organisation and is apparently unaware ofthe fact that they were originally set upfor the purpose of detecting illicit wirelesscommunications from this country and as thetechnical tool of SIS and ourselves. Wetherefore have a perfect righy to makedemands upon their services. If they cannotfulfil these demands it is for them to showcause to the Chairman of the RSC. FrostCatafogue ttafogueeferce:k4/i2 own personnel could2do most of the monitoring required andthat the rest of the problem could be solvedbyclose personal relations with the non-servicorganisations concerned. We have to someextent been carrying this work in the pastbut we have never really had a charter.The other question to be decided is thesecurity of the communications of alliedGovts. This C n be divided into 3 parts:allied forces, allied diplomatic and alliesecret service. Vivian takes up a rathernon possumus attitude on this question bysaying that monitoring of the services ofallied forces can easily be evaded by thetransfer of the traffic to diplomatic channelsIf this possibility exists, and obviouslyit does, we should monitor the diplomaticchannels. All we are really asking is aclear st tement of the facts. The servicesare supposed to be responsible for the sec-urity of the signals of allied services.What i fact are they doing about it? TheSecret Service communic tions of alliedGovts. are supposed to be the responsibilityof SIS. Have they the eyphers? Do they knowthe contents of messages? If the cyphersare insecure what steps have been takento warn the governments concerned? Do SISever take it upon themseves to refuse to sendcertain communications? If SO is it open togovernment concerned to have them senteither through military or diplomaticchannels? Our sole locus standi in thismatter is that when a leak occurs we may wellbe looking all over the country for a bodywhereas in fact the informaion is going outCaldfoguehketerence:KV/4/192September llthWells has raised the question of puttingsomething in the monthly .0.police reporton the subject of Bunbury. He is reluctantto do this because he feels it wrong thatthe H.0. should mislead the police in anofficial document. I pointed out to himthat we had faced up to this question longago and made up our minds that in spite ofthe difficulties the question of thepossible leakage of the truth had to bethe first consideration. I discussed thismatter with TAR and Victor. We eventuallydecided that provided Hughes did not thinkthat the Suffak police would be astonishednot to read of the incident in the bulletinwe should keep it oat, and give a directiveto RSLOs to the effect that they should,if asked, explain to CC.S that the item hadnot been put in owing to the inconclusivenature of the investigation. Wells saidthat the Executive did not always put casesinto the Bulletin and that they could there-66re defend themselves in this particularcase. He also said thi the Bulletin wasgenerally read by the Head Clerk who tookan intelligent interest in a matter of thissort and would almost certainly bring itto the notice of the C.C. Hughes telephonedlater to say that he did not think that theomission of the Bunbury item in the Bulletinwould cause comment from the local police.It was therefore agreed that with the D.G.Sapproval this line should be adopted andRSLOS if approached should say that the Ciseatsogbereferencekviaingzto its inconclusivenature.Caulfeild,Brooke-Booth, Dick and I discussedthe case of Haldane Porter. Caulfeild andBrooke-Booth think that he really ought toremain attached to the Yugo-slav missions inthe Mid East and that he could be of moreuse in SIME than in ISLD. it was decided toascertain first of all what relations ISLDhad with the Yugo-slavs and what plans theywere making for Second Front activities inthe Balkans. We would then consider allthe pros and cons and telegraph to H-Pfor his views. It might be that havingvisited Istanbul with Milicevic and havinggot accustomed to the climate his ideasabout staying in Egypt might have changed.the D.G. does not intend to press him tostay in Mid East if he does not want to do SO.If he comes back here he will be yet anotherwho complains that they have not got enoughto do. Even the D G. himself seems to berather at a loose end.Victor came in to tell me about a Czech calledBLACEK who arrived here some 3 weeks ago.The first we heard of him was that a reportwas received that the Americans hadarrested him at an aerodrome near ColchestIt seemed that BLACEK had strolled on to theaerodrome and asked whether he could betaken for a flip. He made a short flight withan Americar crew, and even handled the controlLater when the machine was being revved upone of the crew got hold of a rubber reservepetrom feed pipe which when pulled down showeda large cut. Everybody's mind turned at onceto the Czech, who had by then of coursedisappeared. He returned however some daysCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192222later and asked for another flip.TheAmericans thereupon arrested him.Wheninterrogated he said that until a shorttime ago he had been serving in the GermanAir Force and he had joined the L Iftwaffein 1939. and had always had the intention offlying one of their planes to this country.He eventually found himself on the RussianFront. The pilot of a trainer plane in whichhe was flying had lost his way. BLACEK tookthis opportunity of directing him to Turkeywhere eventually the plane had to land.The occupants were interned but BLACEKsucceeded in getting an interview with theBritish Air Attache. In this way he wasfinally shipped from Smy rma to Mid East andenlisted in the Czech forces. He arrivedhere as a Czech soldier and of course inthis way evaded examination at the LRC.B.5 are investigating his case.Tricycle is endeavouring to extract a bonusof $2,000 from the Germans as a fee forbringing their wireless set with him.September 13thI had a meeting with the Frost andDick to prepare for the meeting of theR.S.C. tomorrow. The D.G. is more or lessagreed with the line we are adopting. After-wards a m eting was held to review ourdecisions up to date on D.RS. It was agreedto pur forward to the H.O. our arguments forthe retention of travel control as put forwardat the meeting at the H.O. We would actin asimilar manner as regards 18B and 18B(a).Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1922?3It was felt that if we did not go on recordour arguments might be rather badly presentedto the senior officials of the H.O. who willhave to make a decision on the policy to beadopted.Maunsell is arriving on the 16th, also Denham.Peter Reid brought Commodore Holland, headof Admiralty Signals, to see me. Hollandwished to state that he attached con-siderable importance to the security of alliedsignals. I explained to him the positionas far as I knew it and said that I hopedthat we should get some clarification attomorrow's meeting.I dined with Ned and Peter. Peter was quiteinteresting about the new glider bomb. Hesays that research SO far does not indicatethat this new weapon is a particularlymenacing one. It is not worked through anywire attachment. It is controlled from theaircraft but must be kept under visualobservation through a sight. This has beenfairly clearly demonstrated by the factthat it is not always accurate, sometimesfalling short and sometimes going over thetarget. It could not be used at night likethe apparatus with which we are at presentexperimenting.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/19229.4September 14thNews today from the Naples front is not toogood. We are having a particularly toughtime. Attempts are being made to put infresh forces. The possibility is envisaged ththat we might have to withdraw from theSalerno front. Forces from the south arepushing on but are still 130 miles fromNaples.At the directors' meeting today Hale raisedthe question of our sponsoring S.0.E.cases for internment. It was agreed that weshould only take up the dudgels on behalf ofSOE with the H.0. if general security wasinvolved. If the case was merely one ofdiscipline within SOE it was a matter forthem to deal with the H.0. direct. They havein the past been inclined to get peopleinterned merely because they were disgruntledand if released might talk about SOE'S workand organisation. In case S of this sortthey should put their own cases to the H.O.Pilditch of D.I.B. came to see me. I toldhim as much as I could about our work. Hisreal purpose was to see whether if possiblewe could not give him two more officers. Hesays that at present he only has two peple,Jenkins and Finney, who are well acquaintedwith our type of work. Since the XX networkextends all over India it is necessary to havesomeone who is constantly moving about.This throws too great a burden on the officerleft behind. I said that at the moment weCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192were in rather a difficult position. We hadaccepted certain commitments to supplyofficers to the I.B.Staff. We do not yetknow quite the extent of these comitments.We had been told that we might have tosupply as many as 15 officers. If this werethe case we should be extremely hard put toit to find bodies. If we sent someone toIndia we should want to send a reallyefficient and well-trained officer, andat the moment I could Bot see quite wherehe was coming from. I promised to keep thematter in mind. Pilditch seemed to thinkthat the situation was fairly well undercontrol in India in spite of many opportunitieoffered both to the Germans and Japs tocash in on the general unrest. All the Japspies had been caught but I think only inone or two cases. have the transmitters beenused. In one instance they had heard thatthe Japs were anxious to check up on thereliability of two Bengalies, who hadoffered their services. They had entrustedone of the parachte parties with this mission.The set on this occasion was used as a blownset, ie. the call sign or transmission indi-cated in accordance with a pre-arranged planthat the agent was under control. With thisset they replied to the Jap enquiry that thetwo Bengalis were splendid fellows and shouldbe regarded as absolutely trustworthy. thenatural inference of course wouidbe that theywere British agents and it is hoped that theyhave been dealt with accordingly. The onlyreally successful case is the Silver case,but D.I.B. realise that it may not last forCatflEgue'RRefefencereip4e92nxious to establish226other lines if possible.I attended the meeting of the R.S.C. thisafternoon. The follo ing points emerged.Allied secret service communications arecontrolled by "C" except in the case of thePoles. Polish wave-lengths and call signsare known to "C" but he does not know any-thing about the contents of the messages. Heis not anxious however about their securitysince he argues that if anything was goingwrong there would almost certainly have beensome repercussion on other services. Thismay or may not be SO. It was agreed thatthe security of the signals of allied serviceswere a matter for the British service. Thesesignals were closely supervised by the Lavyand Air Force since naval and air force unitswere integrated with the British. In thecase of the armies however there was nointerna or external supervision. It washoped howe er that as soon as the BritishArmy put its own signals security in orderit would be able to pay attention to thatof the allied armies.As regards the diplomatic communications ofthe allies there appears to be no real super-vision. It was felt that to monitor andbreak these communications would impose toogreat a task on GC & CS, who were alreadyover-burdened with operationl work. It wasagreed that we should have a permanentrepresentative on the Reid Committee, thatCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192277we should continue to look after the securityof non-service bodies, but that the results ofthe monitoring of the communications of non-service Govt.Depts. should be sent by RSSto the Reid Committee and not to ourselves.Frost attached a good de l of importanceto it being sent to ourselves. PersonallyI do not think that it matters. As regardscompanies, any monitoring in these caseswould be reported to us and brought by usto the notice of the Reid Committee. Weshould also bring to the notice of the ReidCommittee any further breaches of securityby civilian Govt. dpts.Victor lunched with Carton de Wiert. He wasimprisoned in some castle by the Italians,together with Generals O'Connor and Neame.All three attempted to escape. With kniveswhich they managed to purloin from theirmeals the dug a hole 12 ft. deep and thenburrowed their way out of the castle grounds.While doing this they kept fit by climbingthe stairs of the casthe to the tune of 2,000steps daily. They had saved up a largeamount of food which they carried with themeach pack weighing about 40 lbs. Theywent over the Appenines ind reached thevalley of the Po before they were caught.They were challenged twice previously butmanaged to get a way with it.In August Carton de Wiert was told that hispresence was required in Rome. He had noidea of the reasons, all news having beenkept away from the prisoners. On arrival hewas told that his services might be requiredCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192THISIS AC A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION2283 (4 OF HEAPUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958innconnection with certain nregotiratromregarding Rome being declared an open city.He accordingly agreed to do what he could.He was extremely well treated, getting largemeals with champagne and red wine. It Itwas wasimpressed upon him that the mission would bea secret one and that he would thereforeve to change into civilian clothes.Acdilor was summoned and the clothes werereidy within 24 hours. He left by planefor Lisbon with Gen. Castellano. He Nas toldon the way by the General the real natureof his mission, which was in connectionwith peace proposals. While on the planeCastellano nudged him and pointed out thepresence of a curious passenger who wasapparently travelling for personal reasons.This was Grandi, with his beard shaved off,was on his way to Lisbon. On arrival inLisbon Carton de Wiert was given permissionto approach the British Embassy. They wereastonished and please to see him and learnof the Castellano mission as another Italiangeneral who had already been in Lisbon andhad been given peace terms had apparentlynot yet arrived in Rome. For some reasonthis emissary, carrying the armistice termsand a wireless set, had thought fit to returnto Italy via Germany. There does not appearto have been any sinister motive in thisrather stupid move, and he did eventuallyreach Rome safely. The British Embassy werepleased to see Castellanc since they wishedto make certain alterations in the terms.These were handed to Castellano who was sentCatalague atafagueReferencekf41g2 Eisenhower in Sicilyde alert was allowed to proceed to ungland.THIS ISORIGINALDO RETAINED$AIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSTAR tells me that ASCY9S& has arrived.There seems to be a tacit understandingbeteen him and Johnnie Jebson, thoughnothing has been said in positive terms.He has brought a wireless set, 12,600 and$2,000, in 3 Yugoslav diplomatic bags.We shall have a full report before long.September 15thI saw ZECH-NENTWICH with Dick atlast night. I am absolutely convinced ofthe man's sincerity but he is undoubtedlyfanatical in his outlook.introducedus as Col. Elphinstone and Capt. Mallaby-Deely.After we had got over this the meeting bec imequite informal and ZECH, otherwise NANSEN,gradually got into hisstride. It became quiteclear to me how the accumulative effect ofthe Nazi regime in Poland brought him tobreaking point. He was horrified by theatrocities, the drunkenness and the generalbehaviour of the Germans. Having offered hislife for his country and having been woundedin a dozen places he began to wonder whathe had been fighting for. His naturalinstincts led him to correct injusticeswherever it was within his power. This soonbecame known and attracted others to come tohim with their troubles. Gradually he becamemore and more a focal point and more and moresympathetic with the local inhabitants. Hisconduct could not escape the notice of others,particularly the Gestapo who began to wonderwhy he received SO many friendly greetingsfrom Polish citizens in the street. GraduallyCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192ORIC AINEDIN DEPARTMEN UNDER SE ION2303(4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.2eo0he came to the point where he decided to givactive assistance to the Polish resistencemovement in spite of the fact that heregarded most of those concerned as highlyindiscreet and some of them as not antogethe:disinterested from a personal point of viewin connection with large sums of money theywere obviously receiving from abroad. Assoon as they got the funds, the tendency wasto get drunk and talk about their activities.Although he liked women, he made up his mindto keep out of all love-affairs with womenmany of whom he admired for the part theywere playing He gave a graphic descriptionof the incident when he was wounded on theRussian front. He lay out in No Man's Land3 nights and 2 days and was in fact turnedover by a Russian patrol and left for dead.He was finally picked up by a tank during aGerman counter-ittack. number of dead wereplaced on top the tank and he was placed ontop of them. The tank then turned round andmade for the German lines. Shortly afterwarit received a direct hit. He was blown intothe air and wounded again. When beingremoved from the dressing station he hadce ised to feel any thing from the waist down-wards. He had the impression that his legswere being left behind and Sid SO. He wasonly reassured that his legs were still partof his body when his coat was pulled up andhe was allowed to look at them. He showedus his wounds atspecial request. HeCatalogue Reference:KV14/192had one on his forehead, one in his neck,5 O 6 on his back, one on his hip and the2'31remainder on his legs. It seems almost amiracle that he could have survived for 3 nighand 2 days lying on the ground during aRussian winter. He does not think a greatdeal of the Russian infantryman but has tre-mendous admiration for the Russian tank, whichapparently has double armour, with a spacebetiveen the outer and inner shell. A dirohit does not therefore usually incapaciticta tank. Even if the chains are damagedthey can be removed ind the tank can beoperated on its wheels. The Russians haveenormous numbers of guns which are firedby some radio-location apparatus with greataccuracy. The location of enemy guns appearsto be detected both by sound and by flash.Zech talked a certain amount of Himmler. Heregards him as a sadist and slightly mad.He is not intelligent and can easily bebowled out in argument but he has a great dealof peasant cunning. His father was theprincipal of some schooland he himself receiveda very good education. ZECH has heard himtalk about the English andrtheir colonialpolicy. He paints the English as people whawalk about cracking whips and referred toan incident in India where it was alleged thatan Indian had struck a British subject. Alllocal inhabitants had apparently been madeto crawl on their hands and knees through thevillage. These incidents are held up to theGermans as something to be learned from theBritish as the correct method for the Herren-volk to treat an insybordinate nation.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/192232ZECH said that he hoped that we would not thirthink that he was merely concerned with givingus amusing and interesting details regardinghis experiences. His mind was running onmuch bigger things. He had gone through anappalling time, both physically and mentally.He had t aken the deeision to act as he hadand hoped that we would make the best possibleuse of him. He said that most people inGermany deplored the atrocities but thatvery few of them were prepared to do anything.He referred to his circle of friends at homesome of whom listened to the British wirelessand longed for the overthrow of the Nazis,but always said "Well, we must wait and seewhat happens. One day it will all come to anand". He was convinced however that if wetreated Germany too leniently all those peopleand also the army ould make preparation forawar of revenge. The whole country neededre-educating from top to bottom, otherwisethe glorificition of war and prowess on thebattlefield would once more recreate a GermanArmy or movements which would be as bad asthat which had been experienced during thelast ten ears.I was surprised to hear him say this, as it hahad not beenclear to me from the report thatin spite of his reverence for the honour ofan officer and the decent feelings of mostofficers in the Wehrmacht they were in factjust as great a menace as the Nazis. ZECHhimself is only 27 but he sees all this quiteclearly, and is ready to do nything withinhis power to put it right. I am quiteCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192convinced that some use ought to be made ofhis services. He himself I think envisagesthe possibility of being able to get intotouch with his former colleagues in theWaffen S.S. and to assist us in the finalstages of the war when we occupy Germany. Hethinks the struggle will be very bitter andviews with considerable apprehension theorganisation of the whole country in Gaus,for the purpose of civil defence. He thin'that when that stage is reached he shouldbe close at hand to advise on all the variouspersonalities connected With the Party andthe Army. He would be able to distinguishbetween those who should go and those whohave certain remnants of decent feelingon which it would be possible to work.ZECH was extremely impressed by the treatmenthe had received from Sutton-Pratt, our M.A.in Stockholm. It took him some time to getaccustomed to the fact that a lieutenant inthe Germany Army could speak on equal termsand frankly to an officer of the rank of Lt.Col. This was something which he had neverexperienced.A meeting was held at Kinnaird House todayto discuss with SOE the case of INGRAO.This character who had been brought over fromthe USA had gone bad on SOE and was proposingto publish details about their organisationand also about certain of our spies whom hehad probably heard about at Brixton. Thereal fact is that the case was badly handledby SOE in the first instance.Noblameattaches to us who were called in at a laterCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192234stage. Senter raised the question of intern-ment of both men and women when it wasdesired to keep them incommunicado. Thisquestion is to be pursued independentlyby SEE and the H. H.0. 0.I had a t talk with Duff about ZECH-NENTICH.He felt th t if possible some use ought to bemade of him. I told him that I was going onleave, but that I could come back if necessaryfor the American wrangle. Bill Stephensonarrived at Prestwick this morning. He iswell ahead of Denham and having got his viewswill doubtless be taking the necessary counter-action before his arrival.I have gotout a note for the D.G. on what I think shouldbe our objective at the next conference.Ve should aim t getting Mills establishedin Canada with theright to visit Washingtonwhenever he wishes under the auspices ofthe British Embassy.Maunsell is finding difficulty in gettinga passage but hopes to be here before long.The news is not frightfully good but not asbad as it might be. We have a good bridge-head immediately south of Salerno. Our righthas however gone back almost to the beaches.The German are said to have driven a wedgebetween ourselves and the Americans whichruns right do n to the coasty The Americansare back on the beaches. We have succeededin landing a certain number of reinforcements.Meanwhile Monty is pounding up the boot ofItaly and is about 65 miles fra Salerno. IfCatalogue Reference:kari4tp92 next 3 days we shall235be all right.Dixon came in to talk about the Second Front.His interview with Hoyer-Miller of G.S.I.E21st Army Group was not very satisfactory.H-M evidently had no idea how sections 1, 2 and3 were going to work. His view seemed to bethat everyone would collaborate. The pointto be decided however is who does counter-espionage. The original charter indicatethat this is done by the S.I(B) unit, whereasD. D.D.M D. M. I. (0) in his charter, which is of morerecent date, puts down counter-espionage andcounter-sabotage under I.B.(3). this is ofcourse where it should be, the positionbeing analagous to that in this country.S.I.S. provide is with the information andwe on all the facts presented take the action.The I.B. (1) unit should supply this informatioto the I.B. (3) unit who would use as itsexecutive arm the F.S.P. located in I.B. (2).September 27thReturned from leave at 2 o'clock today witha shocking cold contracted on the last dayI gather that the D.G. was expecting me toreturn on Sunday night and was rather worriedthat I was not available for consultationtoday before the meeting with Duff Cooper andC. on the question of America. Butler hasshown me the decisions which are the outcomeof this meeting. They are as follows:Catalogue Reference:KVI4/1921361.In future there will be no specialrepresentative of M.I.5 in Washington.2. Mr.Denham will complete his tour in theCaribbean and then return and report.3. Ar.Mills will return to Canada on specialMI5 work.4. M.I.5's relations with FBI will in futurebe restricted to communications through Mr.Thurston and, possibly, to special visitsas in the past. Such visits will only takeplace with the knowledge and agreement ofB.S.C.Dutler went over again to see Duff thisafternoon in order to get the correct inter-pretation of para 1 which seems somewhatambiguous. Duff however assured Butler thatit meant our representation by Security-Co)Ordination had ceased. As regards thelast para he S aid that he had compliedwith the D.G.'s ish that it should not bestated that we could only visit the FBIwith Stephenson's knowledge and approval,and had substituted the word "agreement".If Stephenson did not agree, Duff wouldwant to know exactly why. He thought it betteto leave the wording as it was as he anti-cipated that C. would have considerable diffi-culty with Stephenson. Personally I thinkit is a pity to have resolutions which areambiguously worded and are open to the mostconvenient interpretation by either partywhich has to work on them. As they standStephenson may well claim that he is stillour representative in NSH York. Some colourwill be given to this by the statement thatwe cannot visit the FBI without his knowledgeCataloguerrelerence:KVI4/192237While I have been away Denham has seen buffand C. C. I think was somewhat shakenwhen Denham showed him a eppy of his firstletter to the D.G. in which he spoke of Viv.in glowing terms. C. also admitted thatwhen he same to the second meeting underDuff's chairmanship he had not read theresolutions of the first meeting wherebyit had been made perfectly clear thatwe were to establish some sort of separaterepresentation in the USA. Meanwhile Lgather Duff has spoken to Cadogan who is verysurprised to hear that Stephenson had not beensacked 8 months ago. He said that he knewnothing about his high politic l reports.Even if they existed at all, Cadoga doesnot appear to attach much importance to them.It would be interesting to know who does.Stopford came to talk to me about thesuggestion that he should go with Alacrity.He clearly does not want to go and I gatherfrom Dr. Page that his health is not par-ticularly good. He seems to be in a some-what nervous state apart from other ailmentsbut there is nothing really serious whichwould prevent his going. The question tomy mind is whether he can perform any usefulfunction which could not be performed byany of the existing staff. I am told thatne is to go in a purely advisory capacity.When the expedition was first mooted he wasto proceed to Ponta in order to make allthe necessary arrangements for the co-operatiorof the Portuguese authorities. Under presentarrangements this is apparently to be handledby Paul Mathews and the diplomatic represeh-Catalogele ReterendetkV/4/19zough he has instruc-238tions to assist the Force commander, is notunder his orders. He is a civilian attachedto the consul. When the nature of theexpedition was changed it was decided that weshould train Maj.Dartford to do the job whichwould have been done by Stopford. 11 furtherchange necessitated the training of an nirEorce officer, Lt. Istead. Harry Allen saidthat if this officer was not satisfactorywe would say SO. He has in fact Said SO, andafter a fortnight's delay we have been askedat the llth hour to send Stopford. Benadywho is in charge of Air Force security onthe expedition says that he does not knowwhat he is going to do. The Force commanderI gather is only going on the advice ofAir Commodore Buss who thinks on principlethat there should be an officer of theSecurity Service on the spot. The D. G. hassaid that Stopford is to go. I have spokento Harry Allan who cannot enlighten me muchand does not seem to be prepared t t ke anyaction. L have however suggested thatwe should try and get Stopford's charterdefined, though by whom L really do not knowsince none of the Air Force seem to knowwhat is required.September 28thSpeir told me that the 1.0. and nir Ministrywere now taking the view that, Stopford wastaking part in Alacrity purely because weanteergip to fF8m thgeirsexplained tact phisthat under existing conditions there was notvery much that he could do. It is veryCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192239difficult to get at the truth. Eventuallyhowever L spoke to ir/Commodore Buss, nowD. of I. He sadd that he had just spokento the Force Comm nder and that quitedefinitely they wanted Stopford to go withthe expedition. They did not think there wasanybody really qualified to deal withsecurity matters. I said that thought Stopf-ford's usefuIness lay rather in his powers asa negotiator with the Portuguese authoriti4He spoke the language and already hadexperience of the Portuguese police. Oncehe had obtained their full co-operation, theordinary prophylactic security measurescould be dealt with by any common-senseperson. I saw Stopford and broke the newsto him. I said that I thought that as wenow had a definite request from Buss andthe Force Comm nder we had to send somebody.We could not call upon Dartford as he belongedt M.I. and the expedition was no longer amilit ry one but an hir Force one.The D.G. had considered the matter before goinon leave and according to Harry haddecidedthat Stopford should go. I do not feeltherefore that I can. intervene unless specialdircumstances arose. I arrangedofor Stopfordto see Buss and the Force Commander.Mills has gone back to Canada. I have givenhim a letter to Commissioner Wood more or lessexplaining his position.I had a t Lk with Maunsell who is graduallyworking his way through the office. I thinkcatalogueiperereice:kvi4h92 he has seen.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDI DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION240(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.2000He is I think a little worried about HarryAllan's visit to Mid East. Harry is beingsent out by the Chiefs of Staff to mikerecommendations about the distribution ofnon-operational intelligence. Maunsell hadquite lot to say about his difficultiesith SIS. On the whole things are workingairly well, due almost entirely to thefactthat Maunsell and Bowlby have more or lesssigned an agreement not to fall out whateverte state of affirs may be in London.One of the bones of contention is thatMaunsell is penetrating the Balkans. thereis apparently very great anxiety about this.Maunsell has had a talk with Lowgill whichhas left him in some doubt as to whetherCowgill's fears have been allayed. Theposition in Mid East is exictly the Same asthe position here on the Second Front. Maun-sell is anxious to have a talk with Dixonwhorl gather has progressed considerablysinde I was a ay on Leave. I expect I shallbe seeing more of Maunsell. It is difficultto form an opinion of him at the moment,although I should think that he certainlyhad the power of putting things across.September29thPenetr tion of the Services by the CP. C P. isbecoming rather serious. Ray Milne has beensacked from SIS and it hasnow been discoveredthat she has a man friend in SOE in the Bal-caalgeerriefereneeikyisifoze"e member has admitted of the middle firstlTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.touuthat Hay Milne told ni she Was indexing all tthe members of the German I.S. and secondluthat having been approached by SPRINGHALLhe told the latter about the organisation ofSOE and about the attitude of the BritishGovt. towards various irregular forces inYugoslavia. He will probably be prosecutedand tried by courtmartial. There is anothecase of an officer who has given informatinrto the Hussians through SPRINGHALL and hasin fact been in touch with the Russianshimself. his is under investigation.At the Wednesday meeting Hart mentionedthat ISOS showed the preparation of 3.agents. One is described as an Englishagent destined for England and Canada. deis to trivel as the representative of aSpanish business firm created for the purpose.The second is an Argentine, Ernesto HOPPE.who is to go to S. America to work for theWirtshcaft. He will be taken off at Gib. whenhis ship calls there en route. Lisbonstates that a Belgian, who Hart thinks isprobably MAMPEY, is to come to this country aran agent under cover of joining the Forces.Milmo mentioned thecase.Thisman landed in a small boat in a remote bayin Iceland. The americans took him to theirhearts and treltec him as an honoured guest,and made us promise to treat him in the sameway when he came to England. Therman isobviously a spy and is now at the LRC thoughit is intended that he shall go on to 020.Cdtalsgaerefeeyice:hay4/192sgu square this with ourpromise to the americans to treat him as a242friend.Hart mentioned that thurston had shown hima report the latter had received from the FBIin Brazil about the arrival of a Germanagent with a negro operator in a small boatcalled the "Santa Barbara". Hart said thatfrom his sources it was known that the Germanswere preparing expeditions of this kind underthe code name "Mercator". Mercator I hadalready taken place, and this was MercatorII. Le Havre was the originating point.The agent is being turned round by the F.B.I.who have, in order not to blow the case,allowed the "Santa Barbara" to return tourope. Hart thinks this was a pity andthat more value would have been obtained byretaining the boat and crew, one of whomwas LANGHORST who could have given us agreat deal of information, nd the skipperBill NISSEN, already known to us as involvedin similar previous cases. We have handedThurston an appreciation of the report anda questionnaire dealing with points whichaffect us.Bavin of Security Co-Ordination came to seeme. I think the real purpose of his visitwas to explain to me about his dismissalfrom the RCMP. He took over intelligencefrom Rivett-Carnac and had a row withAsst. Commissioner Tate as a result of whichhe was aacked by Wood. He did not go intoany details. He said however that he hadsince made it up withWood and that theirrelations were satisfactory. I said that3we had a great admir tion for Wood and theCatalogueReferencethoyng2it was a pity thatin approaching the question of Port SecurityBSC had rather allied themselves with thenaval,military and air force chiefs. Itwould I thought have been quite possible to-get the commissioner to do all that wasrequired if he had been approached in arather different way. There was no doubtin my mind that Stephenson has been oncemore playing an extremely cunning game.HHe realised that as Denham was returning tothis country his presence here was desirable,to act as counter-weight and give them thenecessary start. He therefore arranged toarrive here shortly before Denham, bringingwith him both Stone and Baxin. Stone ofExternal Affairs was the person who wrotethe testimonial for Stephenson in which itwas mentioned how good his rel tions werewith the RCMP. Since his arrival here he hastaken the trouble to insinuate to Duff thatMills is not really persona grata in Canada.Similar insinuations have been made byBavin who has been one of the causes ofcomplaint by Commissioner WNood againstBSC. Stephenson L know does not want Millin the western hemisphere, firstly becausehe thinks he may encooaeheon his preservesand secondly because he knows that Millsis fully coneious of all the difficultiesof BSC. When he was here last Stephensonsuggested to me that it would be better. notto send Mills back as he would be tarredwith Denham's brush. I endeavoured to pinhim down on this by saying "What exactly doyou mean? Have you got ything againstCatatogue Referene4/gz rather embarrassed by244this question and assured me th t he hadnothing against Mills. It was merely aquestion of being tarred with Denham's brushthough precisely what was meant I could notdiscover.Dick Butler and I went over to see Duff aboutthe resolutions of the last meeting atKinnaird House on the subject of America. Weshowed him the draft of the letter intendedfor Hoover which Ne thought should be signedby the D.G. He agreed with the draff sub jectto the omission of the para.about Denhamvisiting Hoover. He agreed with us thatthere would be hound to be a certain amountof off the record talk which would only stirup the mud. Duff also cut out one para.about regular visits by Mills. to Washingtonwhich he thought might upset C. hadwouldalmost certainly see it sooner or later.Duff's whole idea seems to be to have a some-what weak and vague compromise by which weshall be able to carry on a fairly satis-factory liaison with the FBI. Personally Ifeel this is a mistake and that we have beenwrong to pander SO much to Stephenson'ssusceptibilities. Duff's position howeveris a difficult one since he has no realauthority over "C". He is merely a negotia-tor and therefore has to work for the bestcompromise.I mentioned the 9 uestion of Denham going backto the Caribbean. It seemed to me that theprinciple object of his visit had been tosee how far intelligence in the CaribbeanCatalogue eferenceiKV/47192th the MI5 organisationwhich it had been proposed should be set upin Washington. since we were now to haveno pepresentative the raison d'etre forfurther exploratory visits seemed to fall tothe ground. He said that he had seen Denhamin the morning and that as he understood itthere was work to be done there on behalf of tthe C.O. and also Denham had ideas aboutworking for Stephenson in Mexico. We waidthat whatever the final decision was wethought that it should be definitely laiddown before Denham departed exactly what hewas going to do and to what body he wasresponsible for his various actions. Other-wise there was likely to be a good deal oftrouble and confusion. It seemed to us fairlyclear that Denham wanted to get a job of somesort in the western hemisphere. He could thencombine his official work with keeping hisbusiness interests warm.Duff mentioned that the JIC were preparinga paper in which they express the view thatthe war in Europe would be over within thenext three months. I said I felt this viewwas a bit sanguine, although a suddencollapse was always a possibility.Sefton Delmar is very impressed with ZECH.He is going to put him on the air for a seriesof talks alleged to be coming from some foreigcountry. He will speal to the German Armyand open with the words: "Here speaks theGerman officer".Catalogue Reference:KV/4/192246September 30thA scheme has been put forward by By ron of theISSB advocating that all communications shouldbe severed for 5 days before OVERLORD. Thepurpose is to prevent leakage of informationafter the troops have been told about theirobjective. Apart from the impracticabilityof the scheme it obviously pinpoints thewhole operation. We have now been asked toput forward our viens as to how securitycan best be obtained, Byron's scheme havingbeen turned down by the Chiefs of Staff.The matter will need very careful considera-tion. Personally I think we should relyvery largely on our powers of deception.If plans are carefully made anything that wesay should cause casual leakage to be dis-counted. One thing is certain, namely thatthe concentration of barges and other prepara-tions cannot possibly be concealed from theenemy.Thurston and Cimperman came to see me in orderto find out what the final settlement had beenwith regard to our representation in the USA.I said that we had drafted a letter for theD.G.S signature to r.Hoover and until hehad pproved and despatched it I could notsay very much, since it was obviously improperto divulge to him the contents of a letterwhich my chief was sending to, his. I wouldhowever show him a copy off the record as soonwas as I away got on the leave. final draft I told from him the that D.G. Mills who wasreturning to Canada and that L hoped the FBICatalogue would be Reference:KVI4/ able to make much use of him asthey had before. I said th t our main channelof communicatior would remain through himsefand that we hoped to make periodical visits.We should have no representation in the USA.We ill regretted this but for reasons which 1was not at liberty to state it had beenfound impossible to accede to our wishes. Thepresent arrangement was a compromise whichI hoped would work well. Thurston then askedme whether he could have copies of thephotographs in Gwyer's Who's Who for the FBIrecords. I said tha I would look intothis. In SO far as our own information wasconcerned he might have everything. I shoudhowever have to see how far SIS recordswere involved. I said th t this also appliedto the question d cover addresses in Lisbonabout which I understood there had beena certain amount of discussion. He saidhe quite understood our position.I had a long talk with Herbert about vettingwhich I am sure is an extremely importantaspect of the work performed by this office.We are not judged by nything that is donein B.Division. It is only on the irritatithat we cause to the public or outside depts.that our efficiency is assessed. It is there-fore extremely important that these mattersshould be dealt with promptly and intelligent.ly. Vetting has perhaps got us into moretrouble than any other duties we perform.First of all we have to consider the diffi-culties which beset us at the outbreak ofwar. The only people really capable ofexpressing an opinion are those who have beenCatasgeBRefefenee:kvyatiing up the information248in the files, in fact, largely D. Division.At the beginning of the war B. .Division hadabout 6 officers tryingto train 150 rawrecruits. avetting section was formed whichwas passing some 50,000 names per weekover the records for one purpose or another.The effect of this was that the investigatingranches could not get at the files whichwere required for more urgent and importantpurposes and that the information in the filewas inadequately assessed because those whohad to express an opinion did not know thevalue to attach to the reports. Since thebeginning of the war the position hasimproved to a large extent. In certaintypes of case a policy has been evolvedind in others there has been the necessarymachinery for referring to the sections con-cerned. It would now in many cases bepreferable if vetting were done within thesesections, subject to carefully co-ordinatedgeneral policy which would need to be keptconstantly under review. There are manyfiles which contain extremely nebulous,inconclusive and in many cases unreliableinformation. The question may arise as towhether any importance should be attachedfor example to 1. report about a man receivedfrom, say, ,Athens in 1935 to the effect thathe had frequented a house known to be occupieby an enemy agent and that he was believed thold pro-Nazi sentiments. there is no possibility of getting back on the origin of thisinformation or of assessing its reliability.Should it therefore be totally ignored? IfCatatloeoke Rebereqetkyi4/ie2individual is found40 14 WAm0 was honnTHiS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDuaIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958. Dcouobe open to serious Criticism. On the otherhand if we make use of it we may be doingthe individual lasting injustice. Should weconduct a minute enquiry about the man'santecedents, and bona fides de novo? Thiswould obviously take a considerable time andinvolve everybody in a great deal of work.It might also well be i conclusive, particular-ly if we could not confront the individuawith the original informtion. Otherquestions/vetting policy which arise concernthe category of employment. If you let aman into an organisation who you would notrecommend far confidential employment you haveno control over his subsequent movements.You may well find 6 months later that he isdoing highly confidential work. His nameis not re-submitted before promotion.These are some of the many problems which Ithink should be carefully explored by someonelike Herber t Hart. The difficulty is to knowhow to get this done. I am proposing to havea talk with old Bacon and L shall try andpersuade him that something of the kind isdesirable. If we are successful I will tatalk to Harry Allan and then to the D.G.Stamp and I went over to see Gen. Crockatt abouthe Icelandic subjectwho arriveda short time ago in Iceland ostensibly fromBodo. His story was obviously a poor one andwhen reported tothe SIS man hecommunicated with his headquarters. Wealso expressed doubts and said we thought itwas desirable that the man should be sent here.Catalogue Reference.KV14/192THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS1.570ACT 1958.240uoThe Americans however took a diitereht view.They elieved inand very reluc-tantly agreed to us having him sent to thiscountry, provided he were treated Ss a guestand remunerated for the information that hehad provided. There appears to h ve beensome undertaking of this sort between theAl ican General in command and the BritishAdmiral who was responsible for bringing himto the country. When we got him to the LRCand heard his story Baxter was quite convincedhe was a spy. Taxed with this he collapsedand has now made a full confession. de wasin f ct dropped by submrine from Bergen.Hehad a wireless set, $ 5,000 and a code andinstructions all 01 which he had buried inIceland. He has pinpointed the place wherethey are hidden. We broke this news to GenCrockatt who called in Col Calvert and alsoCol. Stevens who recently arrived from Icelandand was conversant with the case of obveb.It seems thtwas to communicatewith his masters by wireless and would thenbinformed how to dispose of the money. Hewould be given the name of a contact, whoit is almost cert tin would be Cobweb. Weimpressed upon Crockatt and Calvert that byvirtue of the large fund of informationcarefully indexed here we had a very definiteadvantg over any intelligence people inIceland. We thoght therefore that somearrangement by which characters of this sortwere put on a plane at once and sent herefor examination would be profitable to allatalogud,RetereneenkV4/19ince the time factormight on occasion be important. In thisTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED251IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT1958.particular case for examgue T0 would be foronsiderabion whethershouldbe turned round. Crockatt and Calvert Neremore than co-operative and said that theywould be delighted to fall in with anyrecommendations that we liked to make.Imade it clear that the disposal of the bodywas really a matter beteen G. 2 and SIS sincethey operated in Iceland and ve did not.Wwould let them have a full report on thecase at the earliest possible moment.I had a longish tlk with Denham about hisvisit to the Caribean He is bviously veryput out at his treatment and also by Vivian'sbehaviour. He has sent a stiff note to C.suggesting that Vivin should withdraw anote that he has circulated to Stephenson ofthe D.O. etc. about His (Denham) fishing introubled waters etc. In fact he points outthat Vivian has done exactly what he wronglyaccuses the D.G. of doing when he circulatedthe gist of Nood'S letter to Stephenson of theD.O. C. has sent a rather non-commtttalreply in which he expresses the view thatit would be better to let things drop, butasks whether Denham approves of his letterbeing shown to Vivian. Denham had already saidthat he nould have no objection and hasrepeated this in a further letter to C.Hedoes not intend to let the martter drop.Meanwhile he is thinking of completing histour in the Caribbean, though what preciselyhe has done there already L do not know.He certainly caused a certain amount ofcafarogatipefetencerattengthoug though I do not thinkamounts to very much. Denham is very252insistent on the point that the peoplereally to matter in the USA are those whohave the backing of the State Dept. He isquite sure that Hoover has the State Dept.well behind him, and that anyone who fallsout with Hoover is making a gre t mistake.Stopford has left tonight on Alacrity,having had very satisfactory conversationswith the Force Commander and other personnelon the expedition whom he knows personally.October lstAt 4 a. m. today a man calling himself HANSENapparently a Norwegian was dropped by parachutnear Frazerburgh. He said that he had comefrom Farstadt and was a stevedore or labourerwho had been in jail for stealing cigarettesand had then been contacted by the ermanIntelligence and sent to this country. Hehad attempted to come ast Monday but theweather had been too bad and the aircrafthad returned. The aircraft left Nawvay at10.55 yesterday evening and was to havelanded HANSEN at Lllon but in fact landedhim near Fraserburgh. The man had twowireless sets, one of which was dropped withhim and the other dropped separately. Hisinstructins were to give himself up with onewireless et after he had buried the other.He was then to express the desire to jointhe Norvegian Forces and in 2 or 3 monthshe was to return to the other wireless setand start operations. He had been trainedin Oslo and carried E60 in alo and 15 notes.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/192The smaller notes were Scottish banknotes.He thinks thattaofurther packet of money is wiwith the other wireless set which has notyet been found. HANSEN, subject to the con-sent of the Lord Advocate,is being sent to 020This man is presumably identical with anISOS character who was mentioned some weeksago as being trained in Norway for a journeyto this country.J.C. C.,Marriott and Hugh Astor came to see meabout the case of Lipstick. Lipstick is togo over and see his masters in Spain on theexcuse of a short holiday. He wishes to takewith him certain documents from the Catalanshere. to their headquarters in BarcelonaHe also wishes to fix up some arrangementby which the Catalans can correspond withthis country in secret ink. The Catalanaspect of the business presents considerabledifficulties since both SIS and the F.O.have been anxious to keep clear of Catalansor any suggestion that this country isfostering the Catalan movement I havesuggested that Lipstick should thke the chancewith the micro-photographs which he mightconceivably have made himself with aLeica camera, and that as reg regrd rds the corres-pondence from pain to the Catalan organisa-tion here arrangements should be made forthe letters to be sent to a cover address inPortugal and there collected, The secretink in which they are written could be provideby Lipstick himself from stocks which hewould demand for his own purposes from theGermans. If the correspondence was detectedCatalogue it would. give the iprrSSsion that the Germans235451and not the British were in fact givingassistance to the Catalan movement. Itappears that Dansey has rather thrown coldwater on the proceedings as might well beexpected, and we may have some difficultyin persuading C. that the project which hasthe approval of the Twenty committee is agood one.Charles, Ede, Dick and L had a talk withMaunsell who outlined to us his proposalsfor the future of SIME after the war, Hethinks that SIME in a reduced form shouldcontinue, but points out that it will haveno responsible head if there is no longera General Staff, a Defence ommittee or aResident Minister. He thinks that it shouldbe a joint show but that it should be largelybased on MI5 London. He thinks that weshould have control in Egypt,Palestine andIrag while SIS should be in control inPersia, Sy ria and Turkey. o-ordination wouldbe assured through SIME. One all agreedthat it was right to advance the theorythat at the periphery at any rate it wasessential that the two shows should be united.This may help to convince people that asimilar amalgamation was necessary in London.Maunsell is going to put this view to thevarious departments that he.sees here.I went over to see "en about. two suggestions,one that Kembal Johnston's Swedish agentshould go to Stockholm in order to discovermore about compromise peace movements. "n ag-reed that the agent should go and that he shouatalogtieRefefenceRv4/19zy the bill which may55amount to something between 3-4 hundred poundsThe other project was that another Swedeshould go to Stockholm to discuss with thelocal TUC the possibilities of getting theFinnish TUs to make a move for peace.According to this Swede they are ripe for peacproviding they can get a guarantee of foodsupplies. "C" thought that this was reallya matter for the F.0. He was very much infavour of somethi g of the kind being doneboth for strategic reasons e.g. safety ofour convoys and the use of Petsamo as aport, and in view of the coming nussian nego-tiations. He suggested that L should havea talk with Cavendish Bentinck."c" told me very confidentially that from hisbest source he learned that there was adefinite move within the Army to take overfew control. months Something ago had not might the have bombing happened of Berlin aled to the decentralisation of a number ofministries. He is replyir ing that he hasheard a great deal about a coup d'etat inthe army before but that nothing happens.If they are really genuine they shouldget on with their dirty work as a proof oftheir bona fides. He particularly does notwant a wordsaid about this as previous attempthave always been fristrated by newspaper pub-licity which has made verybody very nervous.He entioned the JIC paper but said that hehad not as yet seen it. He did not quiteknow on what they were basing their extremelyoptimistic view though he felt that things inCatalogue Reference:KVI4/19216Germany were undoubtedly serious.I had a talk with him about the Tricyelecase. He told me he had been extremelyinterested in the reference to the informationwhich the Germans vere obtaining trough ourarny sign ls. ile said he was quite convincedthat this wwas true and that Travis had told hhthat army signals security was absolutelyrotten. He was quite prepared to go beforeany committee and say SO. the trouble washe could not get DMI to move in the matter.E asked him wheter he thought it would doany good if I took the extract from Tricycle'sreport and rubbed the DMI'S nose in it. Hesaid he thought it might be well worth while.I was surprised to find "C" taking this wholematter SO seriously, since when we originallyraised ithe had been quite prepared to acceptGambier -rarry's view that there was nothingto worry about. He told me that I could tellthe DMI that he was extremely concerned,that tae whole of thae deception plans couldbe jeopardised by this serious breach ofN less discipline which in spite of therecommendations of the neid Committee Nasstill going on. He asked mem if I should lethim have a copy of the report, which Ipromised to do. I told him that i was sendinga copy of the extract from Tricycle's reportto Reid and impressed upon him that Reid wasan extremely able fellon and totally dis-interested as far as he himself was concerned.His one aim and object was to get the messcleaned up. He was however in a difficultPatalogne RefEferice:Q/47f92S the army and otherdepts. were concerned he nad no executiveTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958. Dec 200authority. The fact was that at the momentnothing eilly effective had been done. Thearmy was still trying to get the necessarypersonnel to put their house in order. "C"said he thought the DMI really ought to takethe matter up with the VCIGS.I told "e" aboutde was verpleased thit the incident had occurred as hethought it would be an extremely ssalutaryand much-needed lesson to the americans.I also told him about the arriv l of HANSENthis morning.October 2ndThe question of the use of the C.S.W.BlackList has arisen. Ne had a certin amount oftrouble a short time ago since in Palestinethe inclusion of a name was regarded as beinggrounds for internment. the black Listhas never been intended to. act as more thara pointer. I am anxious to know preciselyhat its value has been. It is supposedonly to cater for individuals who may visitthe U.K. It does not therefore in a generalway include enemy nationals. the suggestionhas NOTT been made that people of the type ofWilliam JOYCE should be included, but suchpeople are not likely to arrive until afterthe war if at all. The question thereforeto oe considered is what. is to be the futurethe Black List, and whether we should startCataloguevRiefemence:kV$4/192ic would come intooperation on the cessation of hostilities.159This is a major problem which will have to becarefully consid ered. As a first step Ithink we should ascertain from all recipientsof the Black List how far it has proved tobe of any practical value. Some of the nameson it seem to have been included on prettyflimsy evidence particularly when the actionhas been taken at the instigation of SIS.Maunsell Came to talk to me about his future.He has been in Cairo for the last 15-20 yearsand does not wish to remain there indefinitelyHe would be quite content to stay on tillthe end of the war and possibly for a furtherperiod in order to establish SIME on apeace-time basis. If he does however he wouldnot like to be forgotten. He would if possiblelike some job at home. If not, he would takehis pension, if any, and retire, as he hasacertain amount of private neans. I told himthat it was very difficult to foresee thefuture, that a possible amalgamation withSIS might provide a number of oepenings. Iwould however bear in mind what ne had saidand if tit came within my power do my best tomeet his wishes.Gibbs came to talk to me about american affairHe said that information from the FBI relatedmore and more to activities of the Abwehrin S. America. This was due largely to thefact that they find it easier to operate inS. America where the laws were more drasticthan in their own country.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/192The effect of this was that the FBI and SISwere both sitting in on the interrogation ofAbwehr agents with the local authorities inBrazil or Chile. The FBI having got thestory, trasmit it to Thurston for observationshere. Thurston finds he can get a far moreintelligent answer from us than he can fromSIS. When he asks SIS a question he gets avery dry reply which is confined strictlyto his particular request. If he comesto us, he gets a general appreciationand a whole lot of link-ups which he findsfar more valuable. On the other hand SIShave or should have considerable recordsabout activities in the western hemispherewhich are not available to us. Hart canon occasions put him on to these but he meetswith very sppor response. All this pointsto one thing only,namely that our resourcesought to be pooled with those of SIS. Beforelong we shall probably get into trouble forgiving Thurston the relevant ISOS material.HANSEN has arrived and a statement taken fromhim by Cookie. He came absolutely cleanand there is no question of a prosecut ion.His spare wireless set has been found in atree.A German airman deserter called HOEFFELS isdue to arrive from Stockholm.Victor came to talk to me about security inthe Persian railway. His scheme for improvingsecurity seems to nave gone the way of mostthings that have to pass through the militaryheirarchy. We shall have to consider ways andCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192260means for getting the question out of a rut.He is also writing a memo to Harry Allanabout counter-sabotage, pointing out that atthe moment there is no proper machinery fordealing with counter-sabotage activities inthe field. Such planning as there is isconcerned with Overlord. Meanwhile it ismore than probable that problems are arisingin Italy. There is as far as we know noprovision either for counter-sabotage or forcivil security duties. Presumably theauthorities are as usual waiting for a crisisto arise, when they will send out an SOS.On the other hand things maybe happeningabout which they are totally unaware. Der-tainly the IB staff have no instruction incounter-sabotage duties at all. Harry Allenconfines himself to suggesting that nothschildnote should be sent toCossac and to M.I.11,who have a standing committee considering thework of I.B.1,2 and 3 in the field. It seemsincredible that the W.O. have not wakened upto the fact that the situation for which theyare laboriously preparing in connection withOverlord is one that has already arisen inItaly and for which they have made absolutelyno provsion.October 3rdStephens rang me up to say that NikolaiHANSEN'S cover name is HEINI, This definitelyidentifies him with an ISOS character. Some-how this fact had been missed both by theSIS and BIB registries. His case is notquite SO good as it originally appeared. HeCatafogtfekReferentcerv4r1ozd brought any secret2blink. He said that he had but that he couldnot remember whereit was. Finally he said thait was concealed in one of his teeth. Hewas then asked whether he had any coveraddresses to which he replied in the negative.It was pointed out to him that if he hadsecret ink obviously he would have an addressto which to write. He then said that he wouldwbe given the address onlycafter he had got.into wireless communication. The argumentaas then advanced that his sole purpose forcarrying secret ink was to use in the eventof the wireless set being danaged. It wassuggested that he should think again. Hefinally produed an address in Stockholm towhich he said he had been instructed to write.His excuse for not giving this informationbefore was that he was afraid we should make amess of things ind that his wife would getinto trouble. 020 are not quite certain atpresent whether this excuse can be accepted.I have SO informed Cookie. The secret inkwhich was in a little rubber cover was placedin a hollow tooth and cemented over. Hansenhad been instructed to pick it out himself,and if unable to do SO to get the toothextracted by a dentist. Having got him tosign a statement to the effect that he waswilling to have the secret ink extracted fromhis tooth by a Britush officer, Wynnpf 20who isa qualified dentist, removed the cementand found the rubbber casing with certaincrystals inside.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/192262Dick Butler has been down to see the D.G. andhas brought back a signed letter for Hooverand also a letter for Winant, about ourrepresentation in the western hemisphere.Theletter is I think a satisfactory one. TheD.G. is generally rather worried about thewhole Americ n business and in particularabout what I thought of the agreement. I amglad to say that Butler reassured him thatI felt that we haddone the best we could andwould simply have to accept the situation.Denham is in a considerable state of irrita-tion. He is proppsing to go back to Americaon Tuesday week. He has seen Stephenson andtold him that he was proposing to see Hooveron his return in order to expiain to himwhat had happened. Stephenson was dead again-st this unless Denham was accomp nied by oneof his officers. Denham said that on noaccount would he see Hoover in company withone of Stephenson's officers. On the otherhand he would be quite prepared to see Hooverwith Stephenson. I do not think this ideasmiled on Stephenson either. It wouldcertainly create an interesting situation.In any case all are agreed that if he goesback to American Denham must have a definitehcarter from ouseves, C.0 and SIS in whichit is stated precisely what he is expected todo. Walter Bell whom I saw last night isthoroughly disgusted with the whole state ofaffairs. He says that Vivian, having spent3 weeks in USA, thinks he knows all aboutevery very thing. Bell who has spent 12 years thereand knows all the pessonalities intimately,iscatalogueReterence:KVlarrgzile relations withvsthe Americans here are going from bad toworse. Only in Section V is there any sortof integration but this is hedged about bynumerous restrictions which are changed con-stantly. The Americans have therefore gotthe feeling of being received but notreceived. This may of course be in part dueto the machinations of G2 and ONI but itcertainly needs taking in hand.I had a talk with John Marriott aboutGwyer's Who's Who going to the americans. Itis inextricably mixed up with SIS informationand it is difficult to see how we can give itto them in part without its being misleading.On the other hand I do not see how I can givenit to Thurston in its entirety withoutcontravening the very definite agreement reach-ed between C.s.S. and the D.G. a short timeago. I propose to have a talk with Philby.October 4thThurston came to see me at my request. Ihanded to him the letter from the D.G. toHoover which he will send to Nashingtonby safe despatch. I also showed him acopy of this letter. I impressed upon himthat this was for his personal informationsince it would obviously be improper forhim to have prior knowledge of its contentsor for any action to be taken on the otherside until the official document had beenreceived. He said that his office had beenbadgering for some time about the discussionsover here. He read the detter: and seemedCatalogue Reference:KVI4/192satisfied with its contents. He read betweenthe lines what the difficulties had been.He quite underste d that they were not of ourmaking. I think it likely that Mills willreceive a request before long to visit theBnreau. It will be interesting to see howhis visit to Washington is received bySecurity Co-Ordination. Duff vooper hastold Mills that when visiting USA he is notexpected to do o-more more than call in on DSC andinform them roughly of what he is doing.L think however that we should get some clearidea as to what action he is to take if thesuggestion is made that he should be accom-panied to the Bureau by someone from BSC.I propose to discuss this matter withDenham.At the daily meeting today Herbert mentioneda character named PALO, an Linz Marine agentbeing prepared for this country. There wassome indication that he might have made hiseparture about Oct. lst. Our view about theparachute spy HANSEN is that his explanationabout not telling us about his secret inkand cover address is probably a genuine one.it would be difficult to prosecute him as notonly has he told us that he isa spy but nehas also told us that the Germans told him totell us he was a spy. I do not think thatwe shall use him. His case Nill probably goto the D.P.P. as a matter of,routine, butwill not be recommended as one suitable forprosecution.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/192Felipe appears to have a wireless agent inAmerica. Thurston is making enquiries aboutthis to see whether he is controlled.I san Cavendish-Bentinck with Hugh Astorabout the Lipst ck case, in order to get r.0.sanction for the taking over to Spain ofthe Catalan document and for arranging commun-ications between Catalans in Barcelona andCatalans in this country. The purpose ofthe Lipstic visit is purely a counter-espionage one, but since Lipstock's heart isreally in the Catalan movement his missionhas a dual purpose. Any thing to do withCatalans is extremely embarrassing to the F.O.Cavendish-Bentinck finally agreed that thedocuments could be sent over in the bag andhanded to Lipstick Nhen he goes to PCO Madridto get his return visa. He also agreed thatLipstick could obtin ink from the Germansand give it to the Catalans for purposes ofoommunication with this country by means ofcover addresses in the U.K. He undersookto speak to C. on this matter and assure himthat the plan had F.O. sanction.I then spoke to him about the project whicnClark of F.Division had put up. It relatedto the sending ef a Swedish trade unionistto Stockholm where he would make suggestionsfor an approach to the innish T.U.S whowere anxious for peace. Cavendish Bentinckthought that this was undesirable. TheGovernment line was that the inns had tomake their own peace with the Russians. IfCatalogue Reference:KVI4/192766they approach us officially we should ofcourse communicate with the Russians. On theother hand any underhand intrigues wouldalmost certainly come to the notice of theRussians and be misinterpreted. He thoughttherefore that it was better not to sendhim.At the Press Meeting Tangye told me thatcommunications from the Press line to theEvening Standard had been discontinued andthat in future individual passengers knownto the Evening Standard represent itive mightbe used. This is satisfactory since wehave been searching the crews of the Lisbonaircraft. This action has evidentlyproved to be a satisfactory deterrent and thechances are that we were on the right lines.Marriott and Tommy Harris told me th t JohnnyJebson is now talking to Benton in Madridabout Garbo's organisation. This createsa somewha awkward situation. If Jebson isgoing to tell us about our XX agents he willrealise their true position if nothingresults from the information which he gives.It is therefore desirable to try and put himoff the track, but we must of course expresssome interest. Tomy Harris has worked outa plan for drawing Jebson off the scent.We have also decided to tell Benton thatalmost certain Jebson when Speaking of theKuhlenthal organisation is referring to Garbo.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/192v7I talked to Roger about M's organisation.He seems to think that there is a tendency,and rather an unjustifiable one, to run itdown. He thinks M. has done good work inthe past and he says that he has a certainnumber of quite competent agents. He is tryinto get others in on a low level but findsdifficulty owing to the fact that most peopleare employed on other things. He think'sM'S failing is that he lives too much inthe past;of these movements have changedconsiderably in the last few years, a fadtwhich M. in his isolation in olphin Sg.does not reglise. He ought to get round andtalk to people much more than he does.We then got on to the Marita case, and Rogertevidently does not like it. He cannot getout of his liberal mind that this is a seriousform of provocation. In a very mild senseit is, but in the absence of any other methodsI do think it is desirable to ascertain some-thing about evilly-intentioned persons.Roger's view is that the country is full ofevilly-intentioned persons but that there isno necessity to drag them out of theirholes. They had much better be left torot in obscurity, and will be swamped bythe common sense of the community as a whole.Hughes mentioned at the 12 o'clock meeting to-day that he had had 4 or 5 Cyises of allegedillicit wireless activity where registrytraces had shown that the individual concernedhad some sort of connection with communist orpseudo-communist circles. L said that heataloguERRferEACE.KV/49192y and to have a talk266with Hollis before taking any action.October 5thCol.Hill of SOE who is on a visit from Moscowcalled and was seen by Dick ind nyself.He brought with him John Senter and to othermembers of SOE who pre umably deal WithRussian affairs. The main purpose of hisvisit nas to discuss our liaison with theRussians. I asked him to give us some kindof account of his work in Moscow and thedegree of confidence or otherise that hehad established with his opposite numbers.He said that he worked on a very high level, hhis contact being BERIA who is head of thatsection of the NKID which deals exclusivelywith SOE matters. Like ourselves, all thesevarious departments are inclined to ork inwater-tight compartments and to some extentin an atmosphere of rivalry. BERIA'S repre-sentative over here was CHICHAEV. Col. Hillhowever did not think that he would bequalified to speak outside the scope of purelySOE activities. Even if we did establish aliaison with him with the approval of Moscowwe should not stand to get very far. Hillhad apparently been able to make some pro -gress in spite of numerous difficulties.It was in the Baghat Ran or Silver case thanthe best co-operation had been achieved. TheRussians had been however very much averseto the introduction of anyone from DIB India.They preferred to deal through one channelonly. In exchange for the informatior thatthey gaverd they had hoped to get informationCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192wuabout the Far East. In fact we had beenunable to assist them because we had noinformation. This they had found verydifficult to believe. Co-operation had beenachieved also in Persia where there seemedto be a good understanding between theBritish officer, named Spencer, and aRussian from BERIA'S department. Hill hadbeen ubjected to the usual tactics ofprovodation. The Russians had sent him aman who had worked for him in 1920, and whohad made suggestions about working for himagain. Hill did not fall for this butimmediately rang up the NKVD. The man wasremoved from the National Hotel where Hillstays with apologies. Three or four monthslater however he made another approach.Hill then became exceedingly annoyed. Theman disappeared agin and Hill was told thathe had been suitably dealt with. The wholething was an obvious plant. It was oweveran interesting example of Russian distrust.Hill had never made any attempt to disguisehis past activities in Russia which were ofcourse well known to them owing to thepublication of his book. He thinks he wasaccepted because he was regarded as a pro-fessional. The Russians have a liking forprofessionals and experts. Hill assured usthat he had been inno way responsible forthe instructions which CHICHAEV had receivedfrom Moscow not to hold official conversationswith U.35 He said he thought the Russianswould assume that CHICHAEV was under some kindof routine bservation in this country andhe particularly asked that if it came to ourCatalogue Reference:K\270knowledge that CHICHAEV was conductingundesirable activities such as espionagethe complaint should go through the channelof Hill's mission in Moscow. propos ofthis he had thought of making some capitalout of the SPRINGHALL case in SO far asthe facts had been published in the press.Dick expressed the view that in additionto CHICHAEV'S SOE work, he was engaged inmaintaining contact ith the Czechs, possiblyin order to obtain information as to Polishmovements. I explained to Hill that theRussians with their long record of collabora-tion ith the Germans going back 20 years, shoshould have a great deal of information aboutGerman intelligence matters. We should ifpossible like to tap this information. Dickpointed out that the Russians were very slowand unsatisfactory in dealing with questionsaffecting the identification of their prison-ers who arrive in this country from time totime. We felt that if any progress was tobemade in the future it would have to be adevelopment of Barclay's wor'k in Moscow andcome in the form of a request to the Russiansto send someone here competent to deal WithCE ma.tters. e told SOE that our contactNould not go further than a purely social one.I saw the DMI about Tricycle's informationregarding signals security. I told him thatI had discussed the matter with C. who feltthat the position was seri us since it clearlymade nonsense of our deception plans. TheDMI agreed and asked me to put the matter inwriting to him and also to the other Ds of I.I said that I brought the matter to his noticeCatalogue Reference:KVI4/192271since it seemed to indicate that the situationbrought to light by the Reid Committee hadnot changed. I understood that there werecertain difficulties about getting person-nel but I thought that this conf irmation ofprevi us reports might stimulate activity.I told DMI that I had sent a copy of theinformation to Capt Reid.I had a meeting with Maunsell,Barr Dixon,Dick and Barry. the primary purpose wasfor Maunsell to explain the vorkings of theI.B. in Mid East, with particular eferenceto their preparations for supplying fieldunits when operations comenced in theBalkans. He thought it highly important thatI.B.1 and I.B.3 should work either as oneunit or in the closest possible cooperation,and that something in the nature of SIMEshould be established in the rear Of thearmies at the earliest possible moment.Dixon produced a rought draft of a nebe onthe relations bet veen I.B.1,2 and 3 whichhad been prepared after consultation betweenhimself, Hoyer-Miller, Kenneth Younger andCowgill. This note did not seem to mesatisfactory since it referred to I.B.1having a special room of its own whichwould clearly not be accessible to I.B.3.Ifelt very strongly that it was wrong toperpetuate the divisuon bet een 5 and 6 with-in the zone of the armies and th t somethingshould be done towards the total integrationof L and 3. Barrow seemed to agree with this.In fadt everybody thought it desirable, al-thoughsome doubted whether in the presentcircumstances this ideal state of affairswould be reached. The inal suggestion wasCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192277that I should rite a memo on ae subject forDixon, and either see whitefoord or writehim a person letter.October 6thEde talked to me about Denham's visit to thearribean. "hile he did not feel veryenthusiastic about it he regirded it asinevitable. I said that I thought it wasimportant that his charter should be definedand that Stratton should be informed.Ede feels a little that if the Carribean needsreorganising it a job for OC rather thanfor some entirely independent person whois not acauainted With the work of thisoffice.At the veekly meeting Hart slid that therewere three men waiting for visas for the UK.They are coming ostensibly as volunteersfor tne Belgian forces. All three are noto us as having been recruited by the GermanI.S. to work as agents. One of then has inct confessed but the position as regardsthe other to is not yet clear. The self-confessed agent is a Belgian named BERTRAND,otherwise known as COMMET. He was connectedwrith the Technical ir Section in Brussels.The seond is de RAPPARD, of Belgian origianbut Canadian ny naturalisation, He ha's workedfor the German I.S in Spain since Nov. 1941chiefly in Barcelona but does not appear tohave given satisfaction. The third is namedRaymond LALOU, and comes from the bwehrstation in Cologne and is to correspond inCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192This IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION193 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958. DouoThere was the usua spate Oi inaccurateinformation referring to affairs in thiscountry which is believed to be fabricitedin Lisbon and Madrid.I sa Duff Cooper and took him over the MTEreport. I alsogave him an account of theHANSEN andcases. e had a shediscussion about America when I informedhim about Denham's conversation withStephenson, when Denham suggested visitingHoover. I thought this rather significantas it mght imply that Stephenson wouldalways insist on Mills being accompanied tothe Bureau by a representative of SecurityCo-Ordination. Dufi said that if such asituation did arise Miills was to say that herequired no introduction, but if DSC insistedhe should telegraph nome for instructions.Butler nas written to Mills in this sense.I told Duff about our difficulties inconnection sith I.Bil and 3.I said thatthis was a matter on which Ishould like toinvoke his assistance but I felt in thepresent stite of aftairs it would be betterif we could settle the matter on a lowerlevel. The difficulty in all these matterswas that if "e C led in higher authoritywe antagonised everyone on the loer levelwho Nould think that we were trying to usethe big stick. While expressing his readi-ness to held in any way ne could, he quiteunderstood the position.Lennox brought me his suggestions for theCatatogueyReterencelkw4/192ney amount ta ageneral tightening uo of the orginary easures2244at present in force but not bey ond the pointwhere they would be likely to cause anycomment. We later had a discussion underthe chairmanship of Harker, on the variousproposals. Dick felt, and I think the meetingagreed, that the authorities should makeup their minds to rely upon deception ratherthan any drastic security measures. Theenemy would undoub tedly know that an attackwas coming, but it was desirable to concealfrom them the exact date, time, targets andnumbers of troops involved. From the pointof view of leakage the dangerous momentwould be about D-3 when the troops wouldbe given their final instructions. We werenot SO concerned about the troops themselvestalking in pubs as about the danger of someleakage in high quarters which might gothrough neutral diplmts.October 7thSpent the day in bed.October thI produced a memo on IB L and 3 in which Idrew attention to the definition of functionslaid down by the military manual. BrieflyIBl corresponds to MI6, IB3 to MI5 andIB2 acts as the executive arm of either orboth in addition to its military securityduties. I then showed the respective functionof MI5/6 pointing out that in 5 items theywere more or less identica. but that it wasthe experience of MI5 to translate informationCatalogue into terms Reference.kV4/192 of to take the necessarycounter-measures.It seemed to me thereforethat the organisational division betweenMI5 and MI6 which existed in quasi-miviliancircumstances and caused both confusion andirritation should not be perpetrated in thezone of the armies. I showed this note toHart, Speir and Harry Allen. They all seemedto agree that the policy was sound and th tthe definition of the MI5/6 functions wasfair and accurate.A Jap B.J. showe that the Jap Ambassador inBerlin has been told by the Germans th thit therocket gun is likely to come into actionabout mid-December. It is said to have arange of 400 kms and to be able to shootwithin a km. over or short of the target.Stuart Hampshire of RSS has produced aninteresting memo on the extension of theS.D. wireless network, which is now consid-erable.I have put in a suggestion to Harry Allen thatDick should go to Italy and report at firsthand on the ork of IB both in the fieldand with Amgot. There is very little infornation at the moment, the general attitudebeing "Improvisation is going on. Whenthings settle down we will let you know".It is a rem arkable thing that a commit'teeat the M.0. should be discussing the rela-tions of IB1,2 and 5 for the purposes ofOverlord, while nobody in the MI Directoratappears in the le st worried by the fact thatin Italy no provision for IB3 has been made.Catalogue Reference:KV/47192Meanwhile we learn Hill-Dillon , who has21Cnon been in .Africa for a year, that herequires a GSO. IB to control ports in additionto the officers we h ve already given him, andthat he has promoted Mair to the rank ofGSO2.IF and placing him more or less in con-trol of the SI SI(b) unit. He says t e MI6officers are good people but individualistsand need a staff officer to ollate andco-ordinate their work. This is of courseprecisely what we have been saying for thepast to years. What he really means isthat people are running in to him constantlywith bits of ISOS, reports from agents etc.and suggesting action. Hill-Dillon himselfbeing busy hasno one to collate and assessthe valueof these reports or to take thenecessary counter-measures. These ire purelyMI5 functions and he has taken a year tocome to the conclusion that he will appointan MI5 officer to deal with them.Denham told me about the t ll he had withVivian yesterday. Vivian has agreed towithdraw the letter that he wrote to theD.0. and the D.G. about Denham fishing introubled waters. He will submit his letterof withdrawal to Denham for his approvalbefore he sends it out. Denham says hethinks that Viviin is sodistraught by thevarious intrigues that he has really losthis balance.The Russian T'rade Unionists who attended theconference have objected to their papersbeing examined by Censorship prior to theirdeparture. By the special request of theCatalogue ReferencekVf4r192 has agreed after217consultation with ourselves, to waive hisrights. There is no real reason why thepapers should not be examined but I amquite sure that the Russians wili merelythink that we are stupid. It is an entirelymistaken notion to think that incidents ofthis kind jeopardise diplomatic relations.Prince Milo of Montenegro wants to comehere from Eire and later to go to Russia.We know that he has been in touch with theGerman Legation in Dublin and there is nodoubt that if he got here he would be anuisance. Lord Lutton is sponsoring hiscase. We have recommended that he shouldbe told to stay where he is.Brooman- hite is going up to Madrid beforehe returns here.The German Committee in Russia which consistsof German Commurists, Left Wingers and officerP/Ws, is proclaiming a somewhat peculiarpolicy. It almost indicates that the Russiansmight be prepared to treat with the GermanArmy. The Russi ns may of course bepermitting this propag nda merely becausethey consider it to be a disintergratingforce. There are endless rumours aboutRusso-German peace negotiations. They: arehowever thought to be without foundation; whois putting them about and what the object isis not clear. There is little doubt thatRubbentrop would be prepared to come to termswith the Russians but Hitler is still ancatalogleReference:kv/4/f92anxious for a settle-778ment as they think it would help them to savetheir skins. The Russians probably do notmind this propaganda as they may imaginethat it will stimulate the Second Front.Meanwhile the Russians are forging aheadand look like getting icrOSS the Dneiper.It will be interesting to see what nappenswhen they reach the Polish frontier. TheGermans will clearly make capital out of thissituation and try to win over the Poles indefence of their own country. This willthrow a real spanner into Polish politicalcircles here which are already very muchdivided on the question of Russia.I dined with Dick Ellis, Hoare and WalterBell. e had a very pleasant evening dis-cussing everything except America. At 10.30p.m I said that since I was under theimpression that we had met to discuss thesordid subject of our relations with the USAperhaps then told we Ellis had better exactly get what on with our aims it. and Iobjects were. I said that for 4 years wehad somehow not been able to arrive at asatisfactory liaison ith the F.B.I. withwhom owing to the analogy of our functions,it was ooviously desirable that we should bein the closest contact. Stephenson had askedme why we had not given him2 or 5 firstclassofficers to conduct the li son when we appoin-ted him our representative. I explained toEllis that we had never been able to get theagreement of SIS to our corresponding directwith Security Co-Ordination on matters whichaffected the FBI. They had insisted thatwe should correspond via Section V. BeforeCatalogue Reference:KV14/192a final decision had been reached Thurston hadarrived. This had altered the whole positionand we then had to wait for Stephensonto come over. In any case I did not thinkthat 3 people were neces ary. All we wanted Wwas one man with a thoragh knowledge of ourwork and office sitting in the Bureau. Itwas a matter of indifference to us whether heunfortunate worked under relations DSC colours, between but oving Stephenson to theand Hoover he could only work effectively ifhe were constituted an MI5 liaison officerin direct touch with ourselves. EIlis saidthat he would be only too glad to help in anyway that he could to improve matters. I saidthat if he thought that I could be of anyassistance L would readily pay a visit to theWSA. I do not think however that such avisit could have any real effect at the momentsince the crux of the problem was Stephenson'srelations with Hoover If Hoover could bepersuaded to think better of Stephenson allmight be well. The talk was thoroughlyfrank and friendly throughout.The position of Johnnie Jebson seems to besomewhat prec irious; have done our best tourge him to stay on. He apparently thinksthat the Gestapo are on his tracks and ashort time ago he wrote a suicide letter whichhe deposited with an Ab wehr official now inMadrid hom he took into his confidence. TheS icide letter WaS intended to stage a coverfor Jebson's evacuatior to this country. Healso told this bwehr official that Tricyclewas working for the British. There is noCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSSDACT 1958.00 Doorreason at the moment to suppose tat theofficial has passed the story on to nissureriors. In the meantimeL has beenpassing apparent-y ccurite information toSIS in Madrid.hus non conmitteohimself to being conscious iniormant. Hehas put is in the somewhit embarrassing1position of giving information nich wouldcepoear to relate to areo.If-ae gives ussufficient information tu enable us toidentify Garbo he vill be able to work cut fcrhimself that Girbo is under control. He aretherefore trying to getamay fromMadrid to Lisbon. In connection tita oneof his Abwehr activities it nas been suggestedthatshould see Adiral Canaris Whilethe latter is i Madric a:d this may wre-sumaply bring matte..s to a head one way orthe other. Meanmhile Tricyale has beenappointed to bein London. Ballcon hes netionally gone toCanada and the dbvenr have agreed to makehim a further payment subject to confirmationfrum the senior officers no visiting thethrer.Joseph's courier Irma has returned fromLisbon bringing a letter from the Jap asst.N.A. thanking Josepn for his or, sendingnim further instru tions and inciuding L190in payment for his services. Tne letter alsostated that the Japs were doing teir cestto supply Joseph "ith secret ink and ardio tr nsmitter. Joserh will shortly bereturning to Lisbon himselfCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192Mutt's transmitter and sabotige niteriil areto be dropped about the I5th October. SIShave now established direct touch withOctober 9thAn Italian tanker named the Olterra hasbeen lying at Algeciras for some time. TheChief engineer has now informed the Britisnauthorities tht this ship is specit layequippee for sabotage activities and hasbeen responsible for some of the outrages com-mitted at Gib. At the moment it is try ing toefface all r.aces, and if ansuccessful mayscuttle itself. There is a Spanish cre onboard. Both ourselves and the Admirityare anxious to get this ship to Gib.Octooer lithAt the 12 o'clock meeting Hart mentioned the C:case of a man whose name is given as DRAKE.It seems that nis initials may be D.C. He isan agent of Einz Marine wno is apparentlyrecently returned to the Fennnsula from thiscountry. de is to be met by an Hbeirofficil in Lisbon. The suggestion is thathe may be either 3 Dutchman or a Belgian.Attempts are being made to identify thisindividual through I.I. and other sources.The questien.of the custody of deserters wasalso discussed.Unles3 min deserts in thefield the F/department disclaim custody. Theyhave oever been somehat inconsistent inCatalogueReference.kVf4/192 that all deserterswho reach tais country via neutril or British282territory should be closely examined bythe Security Service, we think tha if theycan be proved to be soldiers they shouldultimately be taken over as P/W. I haveasked Milmo to put up a case for discussionat a special meeting called by DuffCooper.The D.G. has returned and Denhim is leavingtonight.I had lunch with Max Knight and talked tohim about his organisation. I hoped thathe would discuss Jimmie Dickson who I gatheris causing a good deal of trouble, and isthought to be going slightly Fascist. Idid get on to the subject of staff and Igathered that M. felt that Dickson h d notthe necessary qualifications to take overthe organisation in an emergency. Dickson,in M's view, suffered from an inferioritycomplex. He will probably return to the Min.of Labour after the war. Bingham will alsogo back to journalism, as he normally drawsa salary of about E1200 a year. M. has a highopinion of Bill Younger. I told M. whatwe were doing about the Marita case and heseemed to approve. I emphasised the necessityof getting woman agents into subversiveorganisations with a view to their becomingof use in a couple of years time. He saidthat he was doing his best but that at thepresent stage of the war it was hard to gethold of reliable people.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1922662I had a meeting with Dixon and Harry Allenabout I.B. Harry thought that my memo shouldbe put through Barrows Committee rather thanthrough Whitefoord. Personally I am indiffer-ent SO long as we get what we want. Dixontold me that he had had a long talk withCowgill Whom he thought was quite amenable.He kept on saying that I.B.1 ere in nosense executive. On the other hand he saidthat I.B.] could only communicate itsinformation to the GSIB. Dixon said that thiswas unworkable and that there ought to belateral communicatio beteen I.B.1 nd 3.Dixon thinks that Cowgill might agree to this.I told him that he would have to get it downon paper otherwise things were apt to gowrong, since Cowgill had not a very goodsense of the meaning of words. I doubtwhether he is conscious of the fact himself.It often happens however that he gives acompletely different account of a meetingto what actually took place.Cookie's blood-lust has been aroused by theHANSEN case. He thinks that we should prose-cute and wants to inderview certain ofthe officers at Ham. Stephens is bre thingfire. We have however tactfully persuadedCookie that before he does SO the questionof principle must be decided.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/192October 12thCookie came to see me about the HANSEN case,and said that he was putting up for a rulingbefore proceeding further.At the D.G.s meeting Adam gave a short accountof his visit to the USA which seems to havebeen appreciate by the Americans and theCanadians.I am arranging for Herbert to lecture the C.( .Cson German espionage in those areas whichwill be occupied by end front armies.I gather that there is a possibility thatthe Commissioner, who has broken his thighand his 67, may retire, and that if he goeshe might be succeeded either by Hordern orSillitoe. Personally I would prefer Hordernwho I am sure sould make an excellentCommissioner. He is moreover a staunch allyof this office.I have suggested that Cussen should look intothe Marita Case and give an unbiassed viewon its merits and future conduct.Maffey and Dev are apparently arranging forthe escape of 20 interned British airmenwho came down in Eire when on a practiceflight. Those who come dowwnyduring opera-tional flights are apparently to remain ininternment. The airmentwinl be moved toanother camp and during the course of themove will be allowed to ascape. This isCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192rather a sign of the times. All neutrals arebeginning to realise which side their breadis buttered.Cecil has made a precis of the case of CharlesBernard Compton Phillips, an Irish solicitorwho was working to the Abwehr in Hamburgbefore the war. His cover name was Tipper-ary. He started working in 1937 whe'n hemade an offer to the German Ambassador andlater he received instructions from one P.vanZUIDEN of Amsterdam who sent him 115 andasked him to go to Cologne. In 1938 Philliosmet Dr.Pfeffer at Osnabruck. He ent toHamburh in 1938 and again in March and June1939 where he met a Dr.Lutz. He was toreport on the military dispositions in theUK and N. Ireland. He does not appear tohave done very much. He sent over presscuttings from "Flight" and "The Aeroplane"and a map of N Ireland with A.positionsmarked. He had secret ink and a code. Hereceived his money from Kol &c Co. of Amster-dam, who have featured in a number o1 otherpre-war spy cases. Had the necessary Link-up been made of Kol he might have beendetected at an earlier d te. PHILLIPS isthought to be unbalanced. A number of hisrelatives are in mental homes.Horrocks discussed vetting with Hart andmyself. He seemed to think that on the wholethe subject was adequately covered since caseswhere a refusal was made would now be referredto the sections concerned. He is going tolook further into the matter and suggestsCatalogue that I should Reference:kV/4/19z have with Bacon.October 13thAt the Wednesday meeting I mentioned thequestion raised with me recently by Groganof giving information about Axis secret inksand their reagents to the Belgian Congo.This raised a somewhat difficult questionsince the Congo officials would clearly giveit to the Belgian Govt. We have L somewhatanalagous situation in N.Africa where werefused to give inform tion of the kind owingto the lack of positive informatic aboutthe reliability of the personnel. My feelingis that Ne have to look ahead to the time whenwe occupy the continent. We should considerfirst of all how fir secret ink would be afactor. Milmo suggests that even if it isnot used between the continent and this countryit may well be used behind our lines bet tweenenemy agents ind wireless collection centres.It therefore seems to be desirable that isfar as possible consistent sith security weshould imp rt our information to allied Govts.In addition to ourselves,SE, SIS and theAmericans are concerned. It is proposed there-fore to have a meeting about it. As a prelim-inary step Briscoe has been asked to inalyseour existing information ind give (1) thenames and substances which we know or suspectthe Germa ns to be using as secret inks (2)the methods and technique employed by the Ger-mans and their agents in the use of thesesubstances as "protection" of' secret writing arthe oreparat of cover letters, (3) methodsemployed by British and US Censorships intesting for these substances and in tryingCatalogue letters Reference:.KV/4M192 ink is found. Theimportant points to consider before impartinginformation to allied censorships are:(1) What is the source of the information?(2) is there any evidence that the Germansknow that we are awre of it? (3) will itbe to ourdisadvantage on balance if they doknow that we are aware of it?(4) is itimportant that our on testing method shouldbe concealed from the enemy? If So could wegive the allied censorship a practicalalternative of less technical value to theenemy? We must envisage that allied censor-ships are likely to be established in France,Belgium,H Holland, Norway, Norway,Denmark and Polindas and when these countries are liberated.Frost c me to see me today. He told me thathe had seen a cert in Col.Jefferies of the W.Owho had asked him whether he would be preparedto go to the Balkans. Frost S id that whenhe asked what the job was Jefferies gave himto understand that it was exploratory. Frostdid not think this satisfactory and thereforeturned it doNn. The fact is I think that hedoes not want to go to the Balkans. He toldme that the Nork at Barnet had been reducedto very low proportions and that it wasdifficult for the staff to justify its exis-tence. He thought it would be a good thingif the vireless personnel did a militarycourse. With this I agree since they may beuseful as wireless operators for XX agents ifthey do not have to come into operation withthe Mobile Units. Mearmile I learn fromDixon that he has had L visit from G-P, whotakes the view tht Mobile Units should notcross the ch nnel until RSS have detected anCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192illicit transmitter. Both Dixon and I thinkthis is unsatisfactory since there wouldbe obfficus and dangerous delays before theset was finally run to earth. (D should saythe mobile units should cross the channel assoon as a bridgehead has been established.Ne know positively that a number of stationswhich are to be left behind in time of invasiare coming up for testing, and there may alscbe parachutists.TAR and JC had a long talk with Felix Cowgillabout the role of XX agents in the field.Felix seemed to think that Harmer would besufficient to run the whole outfit. He washowever a little disconcerted hen TAR saidhe was proposing to send two agents into thefield, probably Mutt and Garbo. He had notenvisaged this possibility nor the necessityof having trained wireless oper ators torun the agents. He. considered the duties-o:the I.B.l unit to receive material from secresources and to pass this on if they thoughtfitto IB3 via the G. l.IB. He said cate-gorically that it was not the duty of I.B.] itake executive action. Then he was askedfor his interpretation of civil security, orthe duties of 1B3, he said rather vaguely0ag port control etc. TAR then said that hethought logically any. unit sent into thefield as part of the IB branch to run-XX ageshould ewithin the fram oe IB3 rather rtharIBL. Felix did not agree. By the time TARhad sketched out his plans for a XX networkon the second front. it was clear that FelixCatatogueReferenceykV/4i192 work and that hewanted us to supply the bodies which he woulTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONyu3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958200ocontrol. TAR said he had peopie fully trainedfor all these types of work and it would bepossible for us to supply them. aHeralsoundertook to train any people in XX worknominated by Felix. During the meeting itwas absolutely obvious that Felix wasworking to the original charter of MI5/6,namely the 3-mile limit and it was clearomvarious remarks he made that any XX agentrunning in i theatre of operations imnme-diately became a section V commitment.TAR did not argue this point, hor the questionof whether the XX agents section should beunder the IB branch or under the Controller.If it is in the .B.branch he thinks there isa clear case for its being in IB3. Ut wasagreed that a small sub-committee consistingof Foley,Davies, TAR and JC shouldconsider the problem of how many peeple andwhat types would be required to go into thefield to run a XX section.BrookBooth came to see me about a proposalthat German P/Ws of Polish origin wishingtserve in the Polish forces should be allowedto come to this country from the continent.We have allowed them to come here from N.Africa because we thought that oing to thequick termination of hostilities the Germanswould not have thought out any plan forinfiltration of agents through this channel.If it could be avoided we would mueh rather nothave these Poles for whose reliability weshall have to be entirely dependent on theCatalogue Polish RterEHCE:KVI4/192YOUL clearly be no290use our interrogating them at the LRO. Thematter is to b be discussed on a higher levelwith the F.O.Canaris has been doNn to Madrid again wherehe has seen both Vignon and Jordana. Thegiestion of British protests about BermanS.activities in Spain was discussed. Itwas agreed that while certain outward adjust-ments would have to be made the work would goon as usual.The Olterra has been brought to Gib. with theagreement of the Italian authorities. It issuggested that Victor and Lewes should go toGib. and assist in the interrogations. Itis possible that the evidence obtained mayprovide the basis for a first class protestto the Spanish Govt.A man called Dudley TAYLOR employed in CCOhas been discovered to have a very peculiarbackground. In addition to being a bigamistand something of a crook, he contracted anobvious marriage of conveience with aNoman called SLAZONEK who before the war wastravelling about in very suspicious circum-stances. She is now in California. Burtand Spooner are going to interview DudleyTaylor.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/192wlOctober 14thThere has SO far been no solution of theDRAKE problem.ISOS shows that one HELMUTH who is connectedwith Ramirez's government in the Argentine,is going on a secret mission sponsored by theS.D. to see Himmler. It has been suggestedthat he should be taken off at Trinidad.I have read through an extremely interestingcase of the SOE agent KNIGHT. It disclosesa lementable state of affairs in the FrenchSection of SOE. KNIGHT is a deplorablecharacter who Should on no account have everbeen furnished with any information Whichif divulged might endanger the lives ofothers. We already had certin records ofhim before he was taken on. SOE said they askeus to vet him but there is no record hereof such a request. The point is not verymaterial since KNIGHT was already committingthe gravest indiscretions during his periodof training. He went on a special missionwith others to blow up some factory or powerstation in France. The mission failed andKNIGHT went on to Paris. Here he was be-friended by to members of the resistanceorganisation who got him to Lyons. Herehe behaved with the gaavest indiscretion andcontrary to instructions frequented bars,etc. In addition he wrote several caras toa girl friend. He eventually got himselfarrested, betray the people in Paris andalso the man who had taken him to Lyons. OnCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192THiSIS A COPYIN ORIGINAL DEPARTMENT DOCUMENT UNDER RETAINED SECTION3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 Dec DOhis way back to Paris he says ne escaped.His story is extremely phoney and he has liedSO often tht L doubt whether he himself nowknows when he is speaking the truth. Afterhis return here which was never notified tous until a much later date, he was allowedto wander about out of control. Finally whenwa wanted toset him interrogated eitneratS tland Yard or Brixton, SOE objected on thegrounds thathe would first have to have hiscommission withdrawn. A delay of some 19 daysensued during time KNIGHT evidently came tothe conclusion that we had little informationagainst him. The psychological moment hadpassed to break him dow although we knowpositively from the two people in Paris whohave since escaped, that he betraye them.The whole case is one chapter of blunders andindiscretions.The position ofnow knon asArtist, seems to have improved. The Germanshave given him a passport visad for Portug l.There is nothing to indicate that his positionVh the Abwehr has been impaired. Tricycleis to go to Lisbon and will probably bringJack his wireless operitor. Balloon has hada letter that had 5 duffs on it, givin g acode for informing the Germans about imminentoperations. This in spite of the fact thatne has already told them that yhe is leavingfor Canada. It seems thai the letter wasprepared long before it was sent Off sincethe instructions speak of the possible invasiorin September. The letter 0 aly reached hereataloouetRefrengetkv/a9 has at last gotME.Ine Germans are beingasked to drop another Nireless set for Muttand Jeff on the 21/22nd or 22/23rd. MeanwhileMutt is going to report the irrivil of HANSENat Frazerburgh and complain to the Germans abo:their wasting their time when he is waiting fo:much needed materi 1 and help. Lipstickleft Lisbon by air on the lOth October.Dragonfly is still without funds, althoughhe has been ssured ta. every effort isbeing made to effect payment. It is expecthat some valuable jewellry will shortly besent over by the Germans and they are stilltalking of sending a money remittance fromSwitzerland.October 15thI went over to see Newsam about the LOEWYcase. The suggestion isthat we should getcertain Czechs over here who could take acontrolling interest in the firm and supervisethe activities of HAFFNER who is thoughtto be going slow and sabotaging the war effortby agreeing to the construction of preesesof faulty design. The Min. of Supply ilnot support the visas as probably they donot like to admit there is nything wrong.The H.O. do not normally grant visa unlessthey have the support of some govt, dept.Newsam NaiS very sympathetic and said that henould ste k personally with bouglas of theM. of S. of whom he is a friend.We then had a long discussion about the office.Newsam said how relieved he was to think thatthe relations of MI5 and the 1.0. hd improvedCatalogue Refererceks/a/lgae ne said when every-Ihlo! HlsSAco A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION2.3 (4 OF THE RECORDSACTbody in the MI5 and when theybelieved th t everyone i n MI5 nated t.e H.0.He made some reference to the D.G. being a bitold and tired and wondered who would succeedhim, when he retired. i said I had no idea.He then said he had very revolutionary ideasabout the future of intelligence hich hewould very much like to discuss with me. Isaid I also had revolutionary vie'Ns of a kind.BS for example quite convinced that CE oughto be under one head. I think that Newsam'smind is probably working on the absorptionof investigation oi subversive movements bythe 9.0. If SC he has probably forgottenthe Russin espionage side of communism, ir hewas ever aware of it. He is certainly notaware of the extent to which this is going onat the moment. It ould i think be quiteimpossible to separite the O. He probablysees the rest of MI5 amalg imated vith SIS.However I shall go into this later.Adam I gather is a source of some irritation.He thinks he is a nice old man but far toodogmatic, and uncompronising. I told Ne samthat I fully realised that the prestige ofr office with the public and govt.depts. depended not on investigations into espionageand subversive movements but on the efficiencyof our norkiin matters such as vetting,portcontrol etc. If an SCO as rude to an 1.0.or to an incoming passenger, or somebody notrecommended for employinent in confidentialwork on rather flimsyevidence, te stock ofthe whole office immediitely went don to zero.He said tht this was absolutely true ind thatit was extremely important that the routineCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192and boring side of Security Service workshould be done sith great efficiency. Wealso discussed registries and the importanceof registries staffs being able to use theirintelligence. Newsam said that in the old'-days he could get an extremely look-upbecause there were clerks who had made acareful study of the cases and rememberedthem. Now however it was quite impossibleto get nything linked up intelligently.He therefore had to make ad hoc decisionson cases as they arose.October l6thCussen and Orr came to see me to discuss thecase of corruption with which Orr has beendealing at Room 055. It had reached a pointwhere he wanted an 80a warrant from me toget information out of a chartered accountintWe explained to Orr that it was undesirablethat we as an office should appear in theseCases, although we Nere quite ready to giveour assistance to the proper authorities.The case had reached a stage where it shoube handed to Burt who on the authority ofthe Yard would bring the matter to t.heDIP if the case was established.Orr then went on to talk about certaininformation which had come to his noticeabout Duff Cooper. He said that Duff'sATS chauffeuse was extremely incenseda atbeing asked to drive Lady Di na and her boyabout London ind then to take Mr.Duff Cooperand his mistress to shops in Bond St. OrratalggkedReference:ks/4g? if there was anychance of the chauffeuse blowing up and296lodging an official complaint, as this wouldclearly be undesirable and we should wantto do something about it, by way of droppinga hint in the right quarter. There was ofcourse no evidence that what the chauffeusesaid was true.Cussen told me that he wanted Milmo to tell020 that when HANSEN said he had secret inkin his tooth they should have stopped theproceedings and taken him to the OratorySchools where a 6fficial tatement couldhave been taken. Cussen agreed that therewas no case against HANSEN but on the otherhand there might have been.At the daily meeting Hart mentioned the caseof HELMUTH. The F.O. have agreed that heshould be taken offnat Trinidad. This ishowever a ase in which we should give theAmericans the opportunity of interrogationDifficulty arises owing to the fact of thesource of the information being IZAK. IZAKshould have been passed in camouflaged formto the FBI who by order of G.2 are notallowed to see it in the original. We shouldlike to sey to Thurston that on the basisof the information controlled by G.2 and byONI we know that HLEMUTH is on his way to seeHimmler and that we propose to take him offat Trinidad. As in the case of Perez GARCIAit would be desirable if time permitted toget this man back tothis country. If on theother hand we could not arrange transport heshould be as thoroughly interrogated as possib-le at Trinidad oh a brief telegraphed fromthis country and the information passed to theCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192707FBI locally. I do not know whether SIS willagree to this.October l8thA meeting of certain RSLOS was held today todiscuss security measures for OVERLORD.We first of all dealt with the suspect lists.Opinions varied somewhat. Reading thoughtthere was no danger from those featuringon the commissioner's list or.the H.O.listex-18B cases who had not been listed at all.Southern Command had been CO sulted and agreedHarlequin had produced no reaction frominvasion list characters. Bristol thoughtthat the bad cases on the commissioner's listshould be interned as they might possiblymove to other areas. The suggestion was madethat 1841 orders might be issued. The enemyaliens on the d.O.list list should however inReading's opinion be cleared out as thepolice in his area were not really capableof exercising proper supervision at a timeof crisis. There was 168 persons in thiscategory in his area. He thought they mightperhaps first be interviewed as a resultof which perhaps some discrimination couldbe made. Tonbridge would like to remove thoseon the commissioner's list but did not anti-cipate any trouble with those on the H.O. list.Cambridge was in favour of discriminationand the internment of certain people both onthe commissioner's and 1.0. 0. lists. Cardiffthought that there should be discriminationand reinternment in cesbain cases. thegeneral view seemed to be th t a very smallnumber of people should be removed from theCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192area and that if ways and means could bedevised for preventing their return or entryinto another coastal area the case would bemet. It was felt generally that C.C.s andArmy Stafis would agree to this.e then discussed a visitor's ban within anrea of 15 miles from the coust from aboutthe Wash to Penzance and also for a limitedstretch in the Bristol area. Views as tothe value of this ban were: 3 for the ban and2 against it. It was admitted that the banwas not easy to operate effectively but itwas felt that it did in some way act as-adeterrent, and enable action to be takenwhen undesirable people were found in thearea.Lastly we dealt with coast watching. TheNavy are to be asked to step up coast watch-ing. Latterly they have been removing theirpersonnel. It was thought also that theHome Guard might assist. If this was approv-a a scheme for reporting back therarrestor whereabouts of a possible agent was to begone into in detail:RSLOs are meeting the ISSB this afternoon:At the press meeting Tangye said that theinformation given out by Brendon-Brackenabout he:rocket-gun caused a considerableamount of consternation in press circles whereit had been taken very seriously. the state-ment was made in view of the factCatalogue catalogueRetereneek4(9z ua apout the rocket-gun had.appeared in Sweden.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED09IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.eDudley Clark came to see me today. we dis-cussed the possibilities of deception forOVERLORD. Dudley Clark thought that itought to be controlled from COSSAC ratherthan from 2lst Army Group. He agreed withour proposals that it would be a good thingto have fairly complete organisation to putinto the field. He felt however that theController's organisation was not big enoughat the moment to cope with the situation.Dudley Clark controls quite a number ofpeople at Army H.Q. Q. in Italy who are respon-sible for the actual movement of units ordummy units to support deception.I saw Kenneth today. He appe ars to bea fervent supporter of the integration ofL.B. and 3. He came out With it withoutany prompting from me. He says that fromwhat he can gather the CCAOs organisationon the continent is likely to be drasticallycut down and to be reduced to little morethan a liaison mission. It seems that theFrenchar and other allied governments are liyalyto have their own country organised and todo it better than anyone else within avery short time. It will however i think Suillbe necessary to have IB officers in touch withlocal French authorities. Kenneth thinksthat the IB officers get progessively betteras they decline in rank. He has a very pooropinion of Barker Benfield and not much ofan opinion of Hoyer-Miller.Youngof SIS came in in a great statepataggHe who had recently been gott.out ofabout Qf KAATF92 Actually two FrenchTHIS IS THIS IS ACO A COPYINDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION ED3o03 3(4 OF THE PUBLIC ICRECORDSACT 195820uFrance. He thought they ought to have asecurity examination and had therefore takent.hem to the LRC by arrangement throughWhen they got there they were keptwalting 3 4 hour and then taken to an I.O. whowanted to know their real names and the methodof their landing. He seemed to be in a greatstate about the whole thing, and was rathertaking the attitude that if that kind ofthing happened he would not take unaccreditedagents to the LRC. I told him that that wouldnot do. If there had been a blunder at theLRC we would deal with those responsibleIt would be fatal to try and wriggle roundthe regulations because sooner.O or later itwould be found out and there would be a row.an It amicable was far better way. I to gather settle that ese-things this was inthe first occasion on which he had been tothe LRC in spite of my urgent request to himsome months. agc to make the acquaintanceof his opposite number and of Baxter.October 19thAt the .G. S meeting we discussed a paperwhich had been prepired by the H.O. suggest-ing that certain clauses in the amendmentsto the Aliens Restrictions Order should becancelled. The principle items were thecurfew, right to have a camera, motorcar orbicycle, motor-launch or speed boat, obliga-tion of all citizens to report the presenceof an alien who sleeps in their house. It seeseemed that after consultation with theCataloguerReference:kw/Aei92t these restrictions. I do not the know abolition whether of301I had agreed to any thing of the kind, but wastold afterwards by rook-Booth that the filewas marked to the effect that Dick had discus-sed the abolition of these restrictions with mme and that I had agreed. I made two generalobservations, firstly that the abolition ofthese restrictions was based rather on theassumption that they were framed to de l withinvasion and that as the possibilities ofinvasion had now lessened they ould be-ddone away with. It seemed to me that thiswas rather an unfortunate moment to considertheir abolition since we had just beendiscussing ways and mean of tightening upsecurity, particularly in those areas fromwhich the Second Front would be launched. Wedid not mind very much.about the curfew,the motorcar was governed by the lack ofpetrol, a motorboat could not be used withouta permit from the Admiralty, but the bicycledid seem to be a rather important matter.Lane had told us only yesterday that he had168 names of enemy aliens who were within15.miles of the coast in his area. He thoughtthat most of .them should be removed beforethe Second Front opened. If they went outside the area and had bicycles it wouldbe quite a simple matter for them to ride donnto the coast whenever theyliked without muchchance of being caught. Further, bicyclesincreased movement and spread the area of-leakage, which might be important in theperiod between briefing day and D.day. Lastlythe troops might well feel at this stage whenthey are being specially urged to takeprecautions against leakage, the civil author-Catatoguse Refereneeiky/4/192 restrictions. Ithought that if it could possibly pe arrangedwe should try and get the security executiveto postpone the discussion on the o.paperuntil views had crystallised as to what res-trictions would be necessary for Overlord.It would obviously be extremely troublesometo all concerned if we took of restrictionsand were then subsequently forced to put themon again. Harker was asked to go over andsee SirHerbert Creedy as a result of whichI learned later that discussion had beenpostponed.We had a meeting on Censorship to which Bris-cow,Collins,Grogan Dick, Milmo, TAR and BobbieMackenzie came. A request had been receivedfrom Henschie of S.African Cersorship forinformation about secret writing and reagentsto be passed to censorship in the BelgianCongo, whose organisation was improving. Therewas also the possibility of a visit shortly froLesmaistre of .Africa Censorship who hadalready suggested an interchange of iniormatiorregarding secret writing. We were all agreedthat we had to look rather further ahead andconsider what we should be prepared .to giveThe allied governments when the Second Frontopened and they established Censorship unitsin territory now oceupied by the enemy, sinceit seemed clear that although possibly there mmight not be much use of secret ink eteenthis country and the continent, there mightwell be communication with wireless reportingcentres behind our lines on the continent.Briscoe said that Censorship now had about35 reagents or methods of throwing up S/W.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/192303Seven of these were he thought highly secretbut vere more in the nature of technicalprocesses which had thrown up one particularink and might quite possibly throw up othersabout which we at present knew nothing. Itseemed important to us all that these shouldbe safeguarded at any rate until the SecondFront opened. There were one or two which,either because they disclosed our own offen-sive inks or indicated out superiorefficiency, it might well be wise never todisclose to anyone. Those left numbered 28.20 of these had already been handed to theFrench at the beginning of the war and wereprobably already in the hands of the Germans.We felt that as the Belgian Congo was perhapsof decreasing importance owing to the openingup of the Mediterranean, there was no partic-ular point at this stage in giving themmore than the 20 reagents that we nad alreadygiven the French. We thought however thatthere would be advantage in giving N. Africathe full 28 while retaining the seven. Assoon as the Censorship on the continent gotgoing we would consider what furtherassist nce we could give. It was agreedthat a note of this should be prepared andshould be endorsed by all the parties concerned, namely ourselves, SIS, and SOE. We wouldthen approach the Americans ind obtain theirapproval.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/1923o4October 20thAt the Wednesday meeting dart mentroned thata certain di ficulty was being experiencedin getting HELMUTH back to this country. Ifwe can get him to Bermuda he can come on aBritish warship. Unfortunately there is noplane available from Trinidad to Bermuda un-less we get a Catalina sent down to fetchhim. Efforts are being made to arrange this.I talked to Badeley about the case of oneFAWCETT. Just before the war FANCETT W Sgiven a month's imprisonment for failing tosupport his wife and before going to jaildeposited a tin box with a shopkeeper. Thebox was found to contain a number ofletters received from a certain HOHNLEIN.They clearly referred to espionage or contem-plated. espionage. The documents were photo-graphed and the box returned. Meanwhile aHOW had been put on FAWCERT. Nothing trans-pired before the outbreak of war when AWCETTwas interned under 1OB. The case then,rather characteristically I'm afraid, wasnot pursued and only came to light whenit came up for review by the Advisory Commit-tee. There had been no interrogatior on theletters iniorder not to give away the shop-keeper. Efforts are now being made to ascer-tain whether the shopkeeper would be preparedto allow interrogation on the basis of theletters. Meanwhile the AdvisoryCommittee haverecommended FACERT'S release. Badeley hashowever suggested to them that if we can getCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192305the shopkeeper's permission, some interrogatioshould be carried out and that, as the casewas, so to speak, sub judice, the AdvisoryCommittee should question FA WCETT. Thismeans of course that the Advisory Committeeare doing the NOrk of MI5. We re not in avery good position to protest since we havevirtually done nothing for 4 years. On theother hand, knowing what we do of the Ad-visory Committee's proecdure, there is notmuch chance of getting FA CETT toconvicthimself. However we do not feel very hotlybut the case, firstlynbecause four yearshave elapsed and secondly bec use FAWCETT hasdone a period in a mental home. He is fairlyobviously one of Rantzow's fish though atthe momentwe have no proof.I had lunch with Jimmy Dickson. He seems tobe very disturbed in his mind.He told methat he had had a bit of a row with Max Knightover the case of Mrs. Gladstone. He thoughtfirstly that she was using one of the officecars for personal reasons and secondly thatshe was rather slack in her dealings withthe agents. He put up several reports to t'isthis effect to M. and eventually somethingwas done about the car. Mrs.Gladstone thenresigned but was persuaded by M. to stay on.Later the incidents of slackness occurred andended in a row, when both Dickson and Mrs.Gladstone went on leave. I gather thatthelatter is not returning. Dickson said thatafter these various incidents he had theimpression that he had become the subject ofsuspicion. One member of the office had infact been asked to keep and eye on him, andCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192306stage a teaparty with his wife, I suppose witha view to getting Dickson's reactions. Some-one else had told nim that Max did not like toget rid of him as he thought he mightpublish a book about his experiences. He saidthat these incidents had entirely destroyed hisconfidence in Max and that one or two otherswere feeling the same way. He wanted my adviceas to what he should do. He did not wisn tolow his own trumpet but he felt that if heleft the agency in other hands it might goseriously wrong and that a number of theinformants might throw their hands in. Whenhe returned from his leave he found h imselftaken off the agency work and placed on M'sstaff where he had practically nothing to do.Then Shepherd fell ill and they had to send hinback to the agency as there was no oneelseto work it. I told him that clearly thepresent state of affairs gould not continue.He would have to get those who had given himinformation to allow nim to out his cards onthe table to M. and talk the whole thing out.I thought that possibly there was quite alot of misunderstanding on both sides.Ifas a result of this talk he still felt thate no longer had any confidence in M. it woudbe better for him to go back to the Ministryof Labour. While I thought that the runningof the agency was extremely important I didnot think it was any good his continuingthat work in the present atmospnere. If hepreferred it I sid I could spe k to M. andtry to find out what the trouble was. He saidthat he would prefer to fine epeak to M.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1925o1himself in the first instance.The D.G. has written a letter to Frost in whichhe has told him that he thinks his contractshould terminate at the end of November.Frost himself had told him that he was tryingto get another job and that he had very littlework to do. D.G. did not therefore feel thathe could justify the appointment any longer.Orr rang me up to say that a photographernamed Nigel LAWREBCE on the Daily Mirror nadcalled to say that he was being sent toCardiff to get into touch with local D.M.representative who would indicate to himwhere Rudolf HESS took his walks in the viciniof Abergavenny. The camera had a telescopiclenz and presumably the photograph would betaken at a considerable distance withoutanybody's knowledge. I spoke to C. who saidthat HESS was no longer under his chargeand he suggested I should have a word withLoxley and then with DPW. I spoke to Loxleywho agreed it was undesirable that thephotogr phs should appear. I then talked toa Major Crawford in the absence of Col.Evelyn Smith, who I was told had HESS'Scase in hand. I told Crawford the story andof Loxley's suggestion that the best movewould be to keep HESS in b arracks for a weekor 10 days or until the incident had blownover. I should probably be in a positionto let him know when the coast was clear.After the whole incident had died down we couldthen consider the issue oi a Notice sinceit was the intention of the Mirror to pblishCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192308the photograph without reference to Press andCensorship. HESS is at present detained atAbergavenny.Burt tells me that Barry of DPPS office wasasked to go and see nlexander about theHOYSE case. Alexander made hima. long speechsout HOYSE and what a good fellow he was.He had often stayed with him. He then suggestthat as there was a security .angle to thecase it might be a good thing to hold theproceedings in camera. He them drew attentiorto the fact that a bomb had been dropped atSouthampton on Sunday.. Burt has ascertainedtha't this bomb was dropped about 8 miles awayon the docks. Clearly it had nothing to dowith any report on the HOYSE case that hadappeared in the papers. In any case it wasa matter for MAP and Sir Stafford Cripps hasexpressed the view that the fullest pubicityshould be given to the case.October 2lstI saw Duff this morning and showed him certairJap B.J.S. I also left with him two filesrelating to the Cases which we have investi-gated for SOE, one of them containing Wetheredreport on KNIGHT. I said that while the-caseof KNIGHT was a deplorable one and showed anobviously bad state of affairs in the FrenchSection, jufI Should bear in mind that wealway S get the sticky end of SOE and that theymay be doing extremely good work in otherCatalogteoreferente!kVi4/192 never, remarkable inthe case of KNIGHT that SO much should haveTHISISACOPY COPYORIGINALIN DEPARTMENT SEOTIONsou(4 OF THE PUBLICRECORDS THEtaken place without ACe khonleage of a seniorofficer. One of the great troubles aboutSOE was that their records were SO badly kept.It was often extremely difficult to find outprecisely what had nappened when things wentwrong. I pointed out to Duff that the sugges-tion had been made that perhaps the case ofKNIGHT might be taken uo on a high level. Thedifficulty was that if SOE thought we werexposing them to high authority we shouldhever hear nything at all about casessuch as that of KNIGHT.I talked to Duff about signals security andtold him precisely what I had done aboutTricycle's report. I asked him whether, whenhe saw the P.M. and handed him the M.T.5.report he could draw his attention to thatparticular item. I thought that it could dono harm and might do good. lie said that hehad tried to see the P.M. but he is apparentlyvery busy and SO he was thinking of sendingthe report instead of delivering it in person.David Boyle came to see me, firstly tonsathat he thought Hornung's grandeon due Boulayof M 0.2 who according to had inbishis. cups blabbed about the Azores to thePortuguese Minister, should be quietly removedto other spheres. It has been left to me tosuggest this to the D.M.I. We, also discussedthe Swedish Naval and Air Attaches. There isno doubt that the latter lS getting 3 lot ofinformation. He is accompanied on all hisvisits by an Air officer but the latter doesGatalague not him very closely once heIVaval Attache Seems3ioto have been more nosy, and the other daybounced a midshipman into allowing him tosee something on board ship. He told himthat the Captain had given permission.This was untrue. I thought that a papershould be prepared and presented to the JICon the dangers of imparting information toneutral attaches. The matter had been raisedbefore but there would be no harm in raising iit in rather a big Nay. We should also putin a warning about talking to diplomats.D.B. agreed and I have asked antony to preparea paper.I gave D.B. a brief resume of our discussionon secret inks. He agreed With ourdeicisionto give cert in informution to the BelgianCongo and rather more to the French in NorthAfrica, while withholding certain vitaltests at any rate until the Second Frontopened, when the matter could be reconsidered.Harry Allen came in to see me to say goodbyebefore going to Mid East. de told me thatfrom his conversations with Jock Whitefoordhe gathered that the latter wis a littleworried about Dixon. He did not know whetherDixon was getting on or whether he was doingany planning. Isaid that 1 felt Dixon was inan extremely difficult position. It wasalmost impossible for him to start any plan-ning until the Barrow Committee had decidedwhat the relations of I.B.1,2 and 3 were to beand what functions each section was to perform.In fact we cannot even give them a lecture,Catalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/19231since the first question they will ask isWhat are our duties and responsibilities?Equally the whole position of CCAO seems tobe in the melting pot, and lastly nobodyknows what the operation is to be. It seemedto me that either Dixon, Younger and ourselvesought to settle this matter or the BarrowCommittee. Harry,while appreciating thesedifficulties, seemed to think that Dixoncould do something. I think the only thingis for me to go and see Jock Whitefoord.The D.G. came up a little later and repeatedwhat Harry hadsaid. I told him what I hadsaid to larry. personally I feel very strong-ly about the hole matter, which seems to meto have been grossly mishandled from thestart. I had the utmost contempt for the.I.Directorate who for 18 months have beendeliberating on the question ot I.B, and seemetotally incapable of making up their minds.If I were the DMI I should be gravely concernedabout what is going on in Italy, but i doubtvery much whether the question has everentered his head that no proper provisionhas ever been made for IB3 duties there.Harry said nothing about Dick's visit, but Ilearn from Dick himself that he has, as infact I always thought he Nould, written toHill-Dillon. The answer is almost certain tobe "Things in Italy seem to be working quitewell but we cannot let you have a definitereport until matters settle down. We do notthink it necessary for Dick White to visit theArea". Of course the DMI ought to have senta telegram to Kenneth Strong, saying thatCatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/1923i2subject to Eisenhower's approval, he proposedto send vick White to get first hand experienceof I.B.duties in the field in order that theBarrow Committee might have a better ideaas to what will be required for Overlord.We are getting a stream of reports from SISon the state of morale in Germany. There seemsno doubt that all but a small minority havegiven up hope of winning the war.Therearestill however a cert in number who think thata compromise peace would be possible. There isa gre t fear of the Russians. Rumours arestill current about Russo-German peace moves.There does not however seem to be iny realevidence. The Japs,Turks and Spaniards areundoubtedly anxious to get peace negotiationsbet een Germany and Russia started. Ribbentrowould I think like to do the same. Hitleron the other hand is opposed to anything ofthe kind and there is no indication that theRussians view such a proposition with favour.Turkey is anxious about the conference betweenMolotov,Ede and Hull in Moscow. She thinksthat Britain,Americar and Russia may come tosome agreement about concessions in the Medit-erranean at iurkey's expense, and wonderswhether it would not perhaps be worth herwhile to try and settle any outstanding pointswith Russia direct before the conference comesto an end. This is only the idea of theTurkish Minister in Washington and may notfind favour in Ankara.Forty-three German agents have been broughtto this country during the last year, butonly 15 were to operate in the U.K. The totalCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1925isnumber of afents sent to the U.K. is non 75.According to HANSEN, the latest arrival, theGermans are training others. We must ereforeexpect an increase which is probably due tothe enemy's anxiety about our invasion plans.We now have nightly raids by not more thanabout a dozen planes. Only one or two reachthe centre of London. These raids are nodoubt retaliation for our nigntly Mosquitoraids over Berlin.I learn from Montague that M.S.S are puttingout frequent reports about the dispositiseof our troops in this country. It seems/thawe should not be told about this.October 22ndMutt and Jeff did not receive their newtransmitter, on the grounds thataa plane ithan experienced crew was notravailable. Theyhave been promised delivery next month. Mean-while Mutt is to be manoeuvred into theIntelligence Corps. Mutt and Jeff have sentan indignant message about the unheraldedarrival of HANSEN whose capture has come totheir notice. They say: "Extremely important.Jack furious.He retorsthat parachute agentcaught night 30th Sept. near Frazerburgh.This is madness. You promised usdelivery.In stead of that you play silly tricks inour area. Why our rotten treatment. DO youby any chance think that new man m can give betteservice? On account of length of service wemust insist that we are considered first.Another trick like this and we are through".Catalogue Reference:KV/4/192314This drew the reply "Don't be abusive. It allhas its reason. Greetings and best wishes".Lat Sunday's "Sunday Chronicle" has raked upPlan Bunbury again. The Hamlet-Mullet-Puppetcase is not going too well and raises somedoubts. Hamlet has to go to Paris to explain.Joseph has left for Lisbon. Gelatine hasreceived E238. The Worm has got employmentwith PWE. Lipstick has gone to Madrid wherethe Germans appear to be extremely satis-fied with his preliminary interrogation.They have asked Berlin to send two expertson England to exploit Lipstick's informationto the full. I now seems that serious effortsare being made to pay Dragonfly and thatin fact some jewellery may shortly be arrivingIn view of the possibilities of this casebeing revived efforts are being made tomanoeuvre Dragonfly into a position which willenable him to travel about the country andreport on troop movements.I gave a lecture to the LRC this afternoon.AFTER referring to my first lecture, when Iwent over the pre-war ground, I explained thatwould try and tell them firstly That webelieve to be the enemy's sources of informa-tion in this country, and organisation, second.ly what the German I.S. thought of us, andlastly what we thought of the German I.S.As regards the enemy's sources of information,I said that they were (1) what Ne give him,2)what he gets throug neutral embassies,neutral journlists working to their embassies,Catalogue Reference:KV14/192and neutral missions what he gets from our345lack of signals security (4) what he gets fromP/Ws and captured agents (5) what he gets fromEire (6) what he gets from seamen and pilotsplying between this country and the Peninsula.(7) penetration of official or non-officialBritish agencies abroad (8) what some of themore dubious members of the Abwehr in thePeninsula or elsewhere invent. (9) what they gefrom our Press (10) photographic reconnais-sance.What the German .S.think of us: (a) heconsideres the FBI a far more formidableobstacle than the British S.S.. This is probab.-ly due to the policy of the FBI which isinclined to work on a smash and grab basisith huge headlines in the press. (b) heseems fairly satisfied with his performancehere,probably because it is our policy tokeep him as far as possible in the dark.(c) the enemy has sent over 15 agentsduring the last year and 75 altogether.Apart from the I3Sthat had been executedsince the beginning of the war he is generallyspeaking in ignorance of what has happenedto the remainder. He may speculate (1)that they have come here solely to get outof his clutches, (2) that having come here withgood intentions they found mattere diffi-cult, got cold feet and did nothing, (3) thatcircumstances had made it impa siblefor tmento operate or (4) that they have gone overto our side. (d) he must think that ourpowers of detecting an illicit transmitterfrom this country are strictly limited sinceas far as we can see he has cofidence in20 XX agents here who have been workingCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192316over a long period. (e) owing to lackk ofwireless discipline in the army, he cannothave a very high opinion of our militarysecurity.(f he has a considerable respectfor the LRC which he regards as a difficultbarrier to pass. (g) in some quarters theAbwehr is inclined to think that the BritisnI.S. is ubiquitous.What we think of the Abwehr: (a) +hey made abad start by not prep ring the ground efficient-ly before the war. (b) While their organisa-tion is sound and logical on paper, and inthis respect has many advantages over our ownit seems to fall down on matters of detail.(c) The quality of many of the agents is notgood, vide the recent ease of HANSEN. Thetraining varies according to the districtfrom which the agent comes but is on the wholenot of a particularly high standard. (d) Thecover stories are often weak. (e) Coveraddresses show a lack of system involvinggrave risks to agents. (f) There does notappear to be any really careful scrutiny of anagent's work. There are times when his reportsif looked at with a critical eye and comparedith reports from other agents should leadto the conclusion that the individual is inour pay. Only high-grade technical informa-tion would seem to be the subject of carefulscrutiny. (g) There are definite indicationsthat certain sectionssoff the Abwehr or agentsworking to them are fabric ting entirelyinaccurate information, which it should beimpossible for any responsible person toswallow. Nevertheless the information isCatalogue Reference.KV/4/192accepted. not only but also in Berlin.(h) It follows that certa in representativesof the Abwehr must be regarded as, conscious-ly or unconsciously dishonest. In thisconnection certain factors should be takeninto account: (1) if personal relationsare good there is a tendency among spy-mastersto regard their agents as infallible, or atany rate as honest reports. (2) Even if aspy-master comes reluctantly to the conclusionthat he has been having his leg pulled, itis difficult for him, particularly in theGerman Service, to admit to his superiorsthat a large expenditure of money has takenplace over a long period on reports whichhave been largely misleading. There areundoubtedly cases where Abwehr officials whohave come to his.conelusion have deliberate-ly continued to furnish false information ortried to sell out. (i) The enemy hasfailed to exploit to any degree the immenselyadvantageous position of the neutrality ofEire. (j) He has also failed to exploit acerta in percentage of disloya elements thatare known to exist in this country. (k) Hehas failed in his attempts at sabotage inthe British Isles although he has had somesuccesses in Gib. (1) It is probably true tosay that the Abwehr have failed to obtain anyreliabe information of strategic importance.They had no clear orconception of the natureof our operations in .Africa, they got noadvance information about they CasablancaConference, and they were muddled about ourattack on Sicily. Tactically however theyh ve had certain suecesses outside thiscountry particularly with regard to shipreporting in the Gib. area and also to someCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192318extent in N. Africa where they carried outtheir successful attack on Gafaa. (m) Abt. IIIF. work has been good. (n) There seems littlecoubt that the OKW share our views about theinefficiency of the Abwehr since certainimportant members of its personnel haverecently been removed from office, and con-siderable encroacnments on its preservesmade by the S.D. It is difficult thereforefor us to say what weight is attached toreports received from the Abwehr and how farstrategic and tactica moves are based onthem, There has been some nnge in themanner of their distribution and the onus ofassessing them has to some extent beendecentralised on to local commanders in thefield. In Berlin they pass to that sectionof the OKW known as Fremde Heere, where theyare presumably collated with informatiorfrom other sources.In conclusion I complimented the LRC on theexecllence of their work and said that itwould be dangerous, even if we thought thatthe Abwehr was not particularly efficient, torelax our vigilence in any way. We knew thatit was the enemy's intention to increase thenumber of agents he is sending here andpresumably to improve his methods. He antici-pated that we should invade the continent andhe therefore was anxious to obtain as muchinformation about our intentions as possible.After the lecture I spoke personally to theheads of sections about the interrogationCatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/1923iaof unaccredited agents. I explained to themthat cases had been brought to my notice fromtime to time by CSS which were in the natureof complaints. It was said that agents vereinterrogated about their worK for SIS andthat theres was a lack of security. In eachcase the matter had been gone into verycarefully as a result of wh ch it had beenfound that no fault lay with the LRC. Ihad explained that it was necessary tointerrogate an unaccredited agent both onhis movements and his contacts. If thiswere not done it was impossible to conduct asecurity examination. We as a service couldnot waive our rights unless SIS could assureus that an agent was acredited and known tothem to be of proved reliability.. Therewas however a psychological aspect to thiswhole question. Some of the examiners may intheir time have run agents themselves. If sothey would know it was extremely anxious workand that it was a natural inclination to safe-guard such an agent from any possible riskof leakage about is work. I thought thereforethat it was important that officers at theLRC should do their utmost to meet SIS'Srequirements in this respect even if they feltthat the precausitions were unnecessary orexaggerated. What was even more importantwas that the section heads should establishpersonal contact and obtain the confidence oftheir opposite numbers in the P.Sections ofSIS. I had made strong represent tions to CSSthat P.Officers should visit the LRC andsatisfy themselves that the business was con-ducted with the utmost discretion. I foundeveryone very responsibe.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/192320October 23rdFrost came to see me about the letter thathe had received from the D.G. He asked mewhether I had already seen it. said thit Ihad and that the D.G. had consulted me. AS FrFrost himself had told me that he had verylittle work to do and was looking for anotherjob I had agreed with the terms of the D.G.Sletter. Frost's attitude was quite friendlybut he did not altogether like the passage inthe D.G.'S letter where it was suggested thathis agreement with this office should terminateat the end of November. He rather took upthe attitude that poor old Frost had beenbrought into this office some hat against hiswill on the assumption that there was a jobto do. He quite saw that circumstances hadchanged but he felt that through no fault ofhis own he was now being thron to the Aray.He thought that it would be up to the officeto see that he obtained suitable employment,and not sont to some distant station as anRTO. I said that I was sure thit the D.Gin accordance with the terms of his letterwould be very willing to assist Frost in anyway to obtain other suitable employ ment. Frostsaid that he would write a reply to the D.G.Sletter somewhat on the lines of our conversa-tion. I suggested that he should see theD.G. personally in addition to writing himthe letter,Catalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/19231October 25th thThe D.G. called a meeting this morning todiscuss our recommendations on OVERLORD tothe ISSB, with particular reference to theestablishment of a 15 mile belt rom theWash to Penzance. Barry had prepared a good nnote on the subject in which we expressed theview that a visitors' ban to this area ou..dbe of considerable assistance to themilitary authorities in preventing entryto certain regulated areas within the belt.We also thought that if it came to our know-ledge that some inquisitive person was wishingto visit the coastal area it would be usefulto have an official reason for keeping himout. Lastly we felt that it was difficult tourge the military to pay special attention tosecurity matters during the period preceedingOVERLORD if we were at the S me time going toacguiesce in freedom of movement for civilians,enemy aliens etc.Jo Archer and Egerton-J ohnson came to see meabout a document which had been C ptured inN. Africa last June. It disclosed an accur-ate kno pledge of the performances and produc-tion figures of most of our aircraft. Inone case itstated that certain modifictionswere being made to the Stirling bomber. Thesemodifications had been discussed on a highlevel in MAP and of course also with Shortsand the Bristol Co. but the whole scheme hadbeen scrapped in March 1943. It seems f iirlyclear that this piece of information would notbe discovered either from P/Ws or from acaptured aircraft. The ssumption 1S thatCatalogueReference:KV/4/192 or from the companies322through some neutral air attache, possiblythe Swedish. I said that in my view weshould conduct a very searching enquiry andhave carte blanche for one of the B.5 officersto investigate MAP,Ai Ministry and thefactories concerned. It was arranged that Ishould see Air Marshal Sorley of MAP tomorrow.MacIver came to see me about Badeley and SeedsI have arranged with him that Hart should godown aind look at their work. It may be thatin the purge we shall be able to dispensewith Badeley's services. He is an honestplodder but not very reliable. Seeds thenmight perhaps be brought up here and placedunder Hart.I had a meeting with DNI,Coombes of the ISSB,Lennox and others at which we discussedsecurity measures for OVERLORD. The Admiraltyagreed to look into the question of coast-watchers, and see whether first of all thenumbers could be increased and secondlywhether any assitance could be obtained fromthe Observer Corps and the Home Guard. ASregards foreign fishing boats and crews Adamsaid that only 12 would remain at Brizham,as I gather that some of them are concerned inSI activities. Such steps as were possiblewould be taken to Narn fishing vessels about puputting into Eire ports and Eire coastingvessels would be kept strictly to their fourports on the west coast. Lastly a limitingarea would be made round the Bristol Channelfor fishing vessels and Coastal Command wouldbe asked to report any boats seen outsideCatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/192$23that area. On the matter of Irish labourand travel we eventually came to the conclu-Sion that it would be best to do nothingthat was in any sense abnormal and to takethe risk that any information which did leak-out would be more likely to cause confusionthan otherwise.I dined with Harker and Liam Archer. Thelatter seemed in very good orm He hascome over visiting hir Force training Centresetc.October 26thD attended a meeting at the JIC at which thefuture of that organisation was discussed.I said that as far as we were concerned weshould welcome the existence of some such bodywhere our problems could be aired. I madespecial reference ot the study that we hadmade before the war of the NSDAP and its foreigbranches. It was only with the greatestdifficulty that we could get anybody to takeany interest in this important matter. Hadthe JIC been there it might perhaps havebeen possible to get something done. As itwas, the issue was always sidetracked, eventhough our paper reached the Cabinet on atleast 2 occasions. When we suggested thatthe NSDAP ind the Fascio should be dissolved,as alien to our institutions here, someone inthe Cabinet said that this could not be doneunless we dissolved the Communist Party,obviously a completely false analogy. ItCatalogue ReferenCe:KV/4/192324was decided that the JIC would prepare a shortpaper without going into any detail, So thatthe matter might be on record when its st ituswas considered at some future date.The JIC then discussed a paper put up byDNI suggesting that a small committee shouldbe formed on a low level of workers from the3 Intelligence Services who were concernedwith German affairs. The idea was toobtain the most up to date collated informa-tion regarding the enemy's counter-movementsto OVERLORD in order that these might bebrought to the notice of COSSAC. It wasdecided to ask COSSAC for their views. Irather gather that this proposal had comefrom below. It was not welcomed by the DMIwho must I presume be a firm believer in theprocedure of the M.I.Directorate, by whicheverything in theory percolates through fromthe lowest to the highest. The trouble isthat it percolates very slowly and probablyon some occasions not at all. If it does,the highest, who do not see the lowest, maywell misinterpret its significance. If Iwere the DMI I should see Melland for quarterof an hour every day since from the M.I. pointview he is handling by far the most vitalmaterial in the W.O. In fact, the DMI hasonly seen Melland once and tha by accident.C. mho was present at the meeting, spoke abouta meeting of the Defence Committee which hehad attended. The subject was the rocket gun.There was a number of eminent professorspresent including Lord Charwell. The lattermaintained his view with considerable forceCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192325that the rocket-gun was either a hoax or acover for something else. He did not thinkthat it was scientifically possible to throw75 tons on the rocket principle. This was nothowever the view of other prominent professors.The meeting was inally swayed by Smuts, whosaid that whatever the facts he thought therewas sufficient evidence to regard the wholematter as extremely grave. He thought that eevery possible counter-action should be taken.I gather that the hir Force are going intoaction shortly on the various emplacements onthe continent, the existence of which isknown. C. was very emphatic that no furtherpublicity should be given to this matter and nindication that HMG were in any sense alarmedby what had appeared in the Swedish Press.Ifthe Germans thought that we had the wind upit would be increasingly difficult to sortout the facts from scare propaganda. TheJIC take the view th t if they had to makea bet they would come down on the side ofCharwell but they think that every possiblecounter-measure should be taken. Regularmeetings are to be held by the Sands Committeeand the PM is to be kept constantly informed.At the DGS meeting Brook Booth gave us anaccount of recent decisions about Itali nshere. There are apparently about 18,0 atlarge, only 9,000 of which are subject torestrictions. It is proposed that we shouldvet these 9,000 with a view to their beingemployed. The internees in the I.0.M. arealso to be vetted. They will be released tottke up employment but if in any Nay theyprove nsatisfactory they will be re-interned.Dual nationals are also to be vetted on theCatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/192326same basis. They cannot however be re-internedunless there is a real case against them.They can only be prosecuted for any offencethat they may commit as British subjectsunder the D.R.S. If Of course there was anover-whelming case against them on securitygrounds a fresh 18B order could be obtained.Gibbs came to see me about returning to a jobin the Petroleum Board. I said that much asregretted his departure, as I was quite surethat we should need his services later on, Icould not retain him when there was no suit-able job which would occupy his full time.I called on Air Marshal Sorley with Jo Archerand Egerton-Johnson. We discussed the leakagecase and he agreed that a thorough enquiryshould be made. He thought it possible thata good deal of the information could have beenbuilt up from a variety of sources, namelyP/W,observation of captured dircraft,etoOn the other hand the information as a wholewas extremely accurate and the preduetionfigures could not very well have leakedexcept through MAP or the firm. He recommendedthat we should first of all try and ascertiirwhether the German report indicated leakageof a document. This could be done by astudy of production figures for last June andalso for a period of 3 to 6 months before thatdate. The figures given might possibly bethe current figures or they might be figureswhich we anticipated we should reach on acertain date. We might then direct ourenquiries to specific points in the doeument.Catalogue ReferEnCe:KVI4/192327He would give us carte blanche to do this asfar as MAP were concerned. He thought thatin any case some sort of enquiry would beuseful as it might throw up potential sourcesof leakage. It would also be good for firmsto te them that the performances of theiraircraft and their production figures wereaccurately known to the enemy. I said thatin my view the most likely channel of leakagewas through neutral air attaches. We knewfor certain that they were extremely activeand that the information they supplied did ul-timately reach the Germans. There would seemno point in these people being allowed suchfreedom of action since an reciprocal groundswe did not stand to gain anything. from neutralcountries. He entirely agreed. the troubleis that many firms manufacturing aircraft arethinking of the post war period and areanxious to advertise their goods to prospec-tive foreign buyers. This is probably the waya good deal of the information goes out.Major Villiers of Key Points came to see me.He had discovered that various secret estab-lishments in use by ourselves, SIS and SOEhad no priority in thecase of fire, bombdisposals, hospital treatment ete. They hadbeen kept off his list on the grounds ofsecrecy. He proposed to have a speciallysecret list and to make arrangements withhis officer in the areas concerned to givefirst priority. The matter came to noticebecause a bomb dropped close to one of SOE'sestablishments. The they asked for hastyren oval owing to large quantities of explosivesin the vicinity they were told that as theyCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192328were not on the key points list they could notbe given any assistance for 2 or 3. day s.Maunsell,Charle Dick and I had a short talkabout the future of SIME. We all agreed thatit was very much dependent on the future ofthis office and the possible amalgamation ofSIS and ourselves. At the same time it wasthought desirable that Maunsell should putin some document recommendang the continuanceof SIME after the war. Its status locallywould depend to some extent on whether thearea remained a military one. It seemedlikely that it Nould, in which case SIME mightgo under the local JIC. Alternatively itmight come under the Minister, if there wasa Minister. In any case we thought that ifit reverted to a civilian status it should ifpossible be based on this office. If therewas no amgamation between ourselves and SISSIME and ISLD should if possible become ajoint MI5/6 concern.October 27thI gather that Frost is taking a line that heis fed up with MI5 and resigning ind that thewhole trouble is due to ealousy on my part.This is certainly an interesting point of viewand I am deeply intrigued to know what I amsupposed to be jealous of.At the Wednesd y meeting Hart'said that WilliamHEAP has arrived it Gib. with a somewha uneon-vincing story. He will be sent on to the LRC.BERTRAND is waiting in Lisbon and is expectedhere shortlyCatalogue Reference:KV/4/19232AWethered reported a rather bad c ise relatingto Free French hesist nce movements. AnSOE agent reported a number of arrests. Onenquiry it seemed that a list of the covernames of the agents had been sent out tothe he d of the org nisation in France, Nhowas subsequently arrested, interrogate andrele sed. It must be assumed therefore thathe divulged the re real n imes of the individualson the list. Why it was necessary to sendsuch a list out goodness only knows.Baxter mentionedthe C se of a man Called LEONwho had come through the LRC as an unaceredit-ted agent of SOE. While a Belgian report fromSIS was being carded it was discovered thata man of the same n me was listed as an Abwehragent. SIS had original reported that they hacno tr ce nd presumably they never passed acopy of the report to SOE. Meawhile theyhave lost the original report and the BelgianSurete from whom they got it, have lso losttheir copy. It no'N only remains for SOE tolose the agent who is undergoing a preliminarytraining.There is confirmation of the Mederic story TIcert in messages which are being handed outby a representative of the German Legationin Berne to a representative of OSS. it wasfrom this source that the GOERTZ telegramswhich ire undoubtedly authentic, were received.Other messages which apparently come fromStockholm are signed Hector and do de l withMAP subjects, although the information SO farreceived is totally in ccurate. It is of asomewhat highlevel kind referring to conversa-Catalogue Reference:KV/4/192330tions betvee Portal and Harris in Cripps'ante-room. I am inclined to think that thisline for what it is North has little or noconnection with the documents found in NorthAfrica giving performances ind productionfigures of our aircraftThe Cy her Security Committee has gone intothe security of cy phers used by the Armedforces of the French National Comm ttee andthe Allied Govts. in exile. In therr openingpara. they say: "The Committee feels boundto express its grave concern at the insecurityof these yphers and to bring this fact to thenotice of the JIC". There follows a roughsurvey of all cy phers in use here and in theMid East and .Africa, and it is clear thatthe situation is far from satisiactory. Itis suggested that the heads of the armedforces Of the free nations should be invitedto agree to the following rocedure ind toinstruct their commanders accordingly.:1.cyphers used for the purpose of sendingpersonal messges, the contents of which itmust be recognised are not the affair of anyof the other allied govts., must be re-cypheredAn One Time Table and a specimen of the latterbut not necessarily the page which will actuallybe used should be submitted to the appropriateBritish or .S.authority for their scrutinyfrom the security view point before such pagesare brought into use.2.Wherever possible all operational messagesshould be sent in British or US cy phers andbe routed through British or US channels.Catalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/1922313. Where communication through British or USchannels is not practicable, the armed forcesof the free nations will be supplied withproper combined cyphers by the British or USauthorities and will use these in accordancewith the instructions and with combinedcommunications procedure.4.the armed forces of the free nations willnot use any cypher, code, communication systemor signals procedure which in the opinionof the approving British or US authority isnot secure, and will obtain the concurrenceof these authorities before using any procedureother than the conbined systems to be supplied.5. They will bring to the notice of theBritish or US authorities any evidence whichmay come to their knowledge suggesting thecompromise of any cypher used by any of theunited nations.This meeting of the Cypher Security Committee wwas evidently a result of the meeting that wehad at Kinn ird House sometime ago, when afairly complacent view about cypher security ofallied govts. wis t ken by C. and G-P.The argument was that other "Y" materi L harnever thrown up any indication of leakage.ARTIST has put in an extremely interestingreport about recent changes within the Abwehr.Owing to demands by Gen. von Unruh that everyoneof the 1908 class or younger should be calledup and that 50% of the remaining Ab wehr per-sonnel should be replaced by wounded men fromthe front, Canaris reluctantly agreed to acut of 25% of eligible Abwehr personnel,Catalogue Reference:KV/4/192provided it was left to him to decide who could332be dispensed with.Eventually a list of only15% was made up and many of these did notin the end leave the service of the Abwehr.Instances have come to light of the expendi-ture Of large sums of money on 7 Jewish familito which Switzerland. were got out Ostensibly with Canaris' the payments connivance weremade to them as agents but of course they haveproduced no information, except a certainamount that was made. Piekenbrock, the for-mer head of Abt.] resgned, firstly becausehe did not like the Nazi regime and did notwish it perpetuated through the victory afGermany, and secondly because he did notfeel that as an officer he could take activesteps to bring about Germany's defeat. It isgenerally believed tn t he asked for atransfer to the eastern front on the assumptiorthat he would prob ably be killed. In spite ofhis ability he tolerated extreme inefficiencyin the Abwehr, and since the arrival of hissuccessor IANSEN, many subordinate officers inresponsible positions h ive been dismissed.ARTIST entioned that the director of EinzLuft reired to assess Tricycle's reports fromAmerica since in hisopinion it was impossiblfor anyone to transmit from that country.He took this view because his own W/T agentthere had proved to be a XX. Hansen is a staffofficer but much younger and more energeticthan Piekenbrock. He is not a Nazi but heis determined to prevent Germany's defeat atall costs even if this involved coming toterms with Russia. He was formerly in FremdeHeere and was in charge of E.Europe. Thereis nodoubt that he means to reform the Abwehrcompletely although he is having very graveCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192333difficulty in getting suitable personnel.Itis to be expected that traffic will be seru-tinised with greater Care and that certainXX agents now employed may be eliminted.ARTIST believes however that until Abt. I,besides vetting reports for their value fromthe point of view of the armed forces andasking for criticisms from the Fremde Heere,m akes a practice of pass ing them to Abt. IIIfor assessment as to the bona fides of theagents supplying them, the Abwehr will notwork really efficiently. He states thatAbt. III is not as a rule consulted whenagents are recruited. This is an interestingconclusion and had the practice which ARTISTnow suggests been adopted by the offensivesections of SIS and SOE many disasters mighthave been avoided. ARTIST recommends thatall material fed to the Germans should be in ashas great both detail advantages as possible. ind disadvantages This of course sincereports in detail can be more easily checked.On the other hand vague reports do not carrymeh weight and are regarded with suspicion.The maxim is "I f you lie, lie well and thor-oughly and see that you do not get foundout". ARTIST draws attention to the factthat the Abwehr tests its agents by askingthem to give the location of divisions in theU.K. They are believed to do this as they geta lot of information regarding dispositions ofour units through W/T intelligence and low-grade cypher breaks. to sum up, the newofficers appointed by Hansen to the Abwehr haveno experience of intelligence work nor anmost cases of life abroad. They are lacking inCatalogue technique Reference:KV/4/192 and in instances the knowledge334of foreign languages, but they are keenerand more active than their predecessors andwill probably sueceed in tightening up theorganisation.-Jack Barrow came to see me and I had a talkwith him and Barry about Dixon. It seems thatJock Whitefoord really wants somebody withI.B. staff experience to cope with the organ-isation of the various units. He wants a manof a certai in age and seniority who will beable to bludgeon his way through the heirarchyof the W.O. ind of the Army Staffs. Hewouldhowever wish to retain Dixon as his technicaladviser on all civil security matters. He hasnothing gainst Dixon but merely feels thathe wants this extra help. I suggested thatI should go nnd see Whitefoord in order todiscuss this matter with him. I felt thatperhaps he slnotofully aware of the diffi-culties of Dixon's position but in spite ofthis I think there may be something in whathe says. At any rate I would not try anddissuade him if he felt strongly about thematter. Barrow said th t the last meeting ofhis committee was unanimous on the inter-rela-tion of I.B.1,2 and 3. In other words my sinequa non for the separate existence of I.B.1and 3 was accepted. He said however thatDixon was seeing Viv. at the latter's request.I asked Barrow about Dick's suggested visitto Italy. He was all in favour of it andthought it would be an excellent thing for anIB officer from COSSAC to accompany him. Ishould rather doubt whether anything had beendone about this matter so far. I intend tomention it to Jock Whitefoord when i see himCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192225tommrrow and with Barrow's agreement Iam going to see the DMI.October 23thHarker, ,Charles,Jin ale,Dick Butler and Iheld a meeting to discuss the question ofErost. The leg il view is tht his contractis binding and that any r ingement abouthis departure should be an amicable one.It was decided that the best course would efor the D.G. to write a letter to Foot ofthe B.B.C suggesting that Harker and Frostshould discuss vith him Frost's re-absorptioninto that organisation. If Foot did not wishto have Frost at the first interview it wouldbe for him to say so.We We thought howeverthat it would be preferable for Frost to bethere since he would then have no opportunityof saying that we had let him down With theB.B.C. The D.G. should see Frost and hand hima copy of the letter that he had written tothe D.G. of theB.B.C.Butler tells me that Stephenson has insistedon Denham being accompanied by a represen-tative of his office if he goes to seeHaover. Denham replied that if he was to beaccompanied he would only go with Stephensonhimself. This Stephenson has refused to do.Stephenson has made it quite clear that thisis the principle on which he proposes to work.It seems cle r therefore that if Mills goesto Washington he will have to be accompaniedby a DSC representtive This matter hasbeen represented to Duff who does ot vish totake up the question of principle with C.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/192336until Mills meets with resistence.Dick,Jo,Anton and I discussed the MAPproblem. It was agreed that Jo J should extractfrom the German report those it ems for whichthere was no very reasonable explanation andthat these should subsequently be the subjectof enquiry by B.5 under his and our direction.One were not inclined to think that there wasany link between the Hector messages and theinformation in the Germ n report. On theevidence available it seemed that the Germanreport is almost certainly compiled and nottaken from a British document. This howeverneeds verific tion. A useful checking pointwill be the production figures and Ho willundertake this job. We all felt that whateverthe prospects Of getting to the bottom of thecase were, it would be valuable to conductsome sort of enquiry which would doubtlessbring to light a number of potential sourcesof leakage. Jo gave various instances of howthe information might have leaked out. MacKennaa director of Shorts, was formerly an RAFofficer and is employed in the RAF Experimentalestablishment. His job is to go round allJomber stations and to find outfrom Stirlingpilots what ther difficulties are. He wouldnatur lly discuss any modifications to theaeroplane which were in contemplation. Ifthese pilots were subsequently shot down theymight well have given the information awayunwittingly. A good deal could be done on theproduction figures by computation. If forexample the enemy knew that there were so manyStirling squadrons in action they would beable to say roughly that to keep theseCatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/192331aeroplanes in the air with the losses incurredvould necessitate a production of so manyaeroplanes per month. Blunt is examiningthe position as regards messages eent out vianeutral attaches. He will also get special-facilities both for certain service attachesand possibly also for test pilots. Jo does no:think shere is much in keeping visitors avayfrom factories. It was rather doubtful hethe]much inform tion passes in this way. Itis much more likely to pass over the dinnertable when an attacne has made contact with atest pilot, who must have the most up to dateinformation about the machine. We know ofcourse that Rupert Belleville of Vickersis in the closest touch with Sartorius, theSpanish hir Attache and that the latter is inpossession of the production figures for Speke.I sav Jock Whitefoord at the club. I told nimthat I had heard from Harry Allan that ne wasnot ltogether happy about Dixon. He saidtnatfrankly he was not. Neither ne nor Col.Black, of the American Forces, seemed to haveany real confidence in him. He thouen neought to be getting on with the planning ora big scale but in certain memoranda thathe had put up he did not feel that Dixon wasquite the calibre to do this. He thought in away that he ought to have somebody with Staffexperience. He had nothing personal againstDixon. I said stright away that I understoodhis point of view and that if he had no con-fidence in Dixon, obviously Dixon must bewithdrawn. On the other hand I did feel thatDixon had been in somewhat of a difficultysince it was not easy to plan until certainCatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/192338basic matters had been settled. It had not yebeen decided what the relations of I.B1,2 and3 were to be. This matter was in the handsof the BarroN Committee. Equally the wholeorganisation of AMGOT was in the melting pot.Whitefoord agreed, but still felt that even ifdecisions had been made Dixon was not quitethe man to handle the job. We agreed to meetagainsat lunch on Sunday to discuss theproblem further.I dined afterwards with art Thurston who seemsvery satisfied with the co-operation he isgetting here, but is evidently dissatisfiedith the lac of co-oper tion he is experiencirwith SIS. He hardly ever went to hyder st.himself. Cimperman still went down ind sawthe ISOS but even in th t field there werecertai matters which had apparently beenwithheld. told Thurston that I had seenDick Ellis before ne went back, th I hadknown him for a long time, liked him, andregarded him as straight I did not know whatthe Bureau had against him. I rather doubtwhether Thurston knew either.ohn Booth called at the flat and stayeo tillabout 1. .30 a.m. talking about the Africancampaign. He had been ill vith pneumonia Forabout 2 months but had now recovered. He wasemployed in .Afriea in a special unit for theinterpretation of photographs.. This branchof the service has now becone immensely impor-tant and nobody dreams ims oi going into battlewithout it. The americans have no such unit.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/19201John's account of the nmericins is most depres-sing although he thinks that possibly theymay have gained experience and improvedduring the Italian campaign. The difficultyin Africa was to stop them from running.The Grenadier uuards took Longstop Hill 3 timeseach time the Americans took over fron themnwhile they advanced on the next objective, andeach time the Americ ns were driven out oitheir positions and the Guards had to re-o-occupy them. At Gafsa, where they had about4 divisions they took over from that waslittle more than a battalion of Frenchinen.These Frenchmen had been hoiding the Germansback with considerable success, but immediate-ly the Americ ns were attacked they decamnped.More or less the same thing happened atKirouan. Here the Guards vere ordered to takeone hill on t e north side of the ravine andthe Americans on the south side, in order thatthe armoured units could go through betweenthe tro hills. The purpose of this operationwas to cut off Rommel's retreating forces Whichwere bein subjected to frontal attack by the3th army. The Guards reached their objectiveon time but the Americans who had more thandouble the number O troops, did not move.A British General went round to see what washappening and received the reply that "myfellows are doing fine". when it was pointedout that they had apparently not started, theAmerican general said that things were verytough. Asked whether he had any casualties,he replied no. In the end the Guards had togo through the American Division and capturethe other hill. by that time it was too late fforthe aroured divisions to cut off hommel.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/192340In spite of these incidents the Americansappear to be entirely without shame. John'sG. 2 metea coloured driver going full outalong the road to Bone. He stopped him andasked him wha he was doing. The niggerreplied "I'se retreatin'. I'se not stopping'till I sees the sea".I asked John the reason for the Germancollapse in fron t of tunis and Bizerta.Hesaid that they had apparently ascertainedwhere our armour was concentrated and intendedto go through. They brought up about 160 oftheir88 mm gun which is used both for A.A.and nti-tank purposes, and concentrated themin the area. These were discovered by photo-graph reconnaissance. A huge concentrationof some 600 British guns was brought up todeal with them They were completely annihil-ated at the beginning of the attack and thearmour went through,some 4 divisions fanningout in the rear of the enemny. The form nowwith artillery is to put them well out infront of the infantry before the attack beginsThey are only covered by patrols. In additionto producing a creeping barrage they also do6ery effective counter-battery work. TheGerman's most effectiveeapon is his anti-tankgun and his 6-barrelled mortar which seems towork on the Stokes principle.The Freach fought magnificently in spite oftheir lack of equipment, in spite of their oldtelephones and wires as compred with theamericans cabinet wireless sets with tele-printers.etc. The French always knew wheretheir front line vas but the merit ns were ofteCatalogue Reference:KVI4/1923ul20 miles out. One of the great faults in theAmerican army is that they do not appear tohave any leaders. They are so obsessed bywhat they believe to be demmcratic principlesthat the right man never seems to get to the-top. John is now a strong supporter of theold school tie. It is not inirequent to find3 NCOs ind a squad of 6 men, with no onereally taking command. Much of the -mericanequipment is extremely good, particularlythe Sherman tank. John does not think muchof the Germa Tiger tank which though veryformidable cannot owing to its veignt operitvery satisfactorily in difficult country.He thinks the Churchill has done very wellin spite of criticism. Mopping up after thebattle for Tunis and Bizerta did not take verylong. Parties of German prisoners weregiven directions as to the: route they were totake to o.Bone, which was the collecting centreand proceeded there almost unattended. Theywere most of them orderly and decent fellow,in contrast with the Italians who were dirtyand insolent. The Italians are apparentlycapable of brutality and nave also been guiltyof appalling negligence in the handlingof P/Ws. Some of our P/'Ns were kept in adesert camp nearly 6 months and arrived inItaly in an appalling state.There was considerable rivalry between theFirst and Light Armies and aa good deal ofcomment on the self-advertisement of Monty.Everyone has a grea respeet for Alexander whoseems to have the power of bringing order outof chaos in a very short time.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/192buyOctober 29thI had a talk with Dick this morning aboutDixon and also a long talk with Gwyer abouthis recent experiences which seem to show upmany deficiencies in the. I.B.organisation.In quite sure that the first thing to do isto arrange that all the information bearingon the Second Front should be prepared inthe right form by a Commiitee consisting ofourselves,. SIS, Melland and 2 officers in 21starmy Group who appear to be collecting data.In the light of this informaticn plus theexperience derived from_operations in Italy;should be possible to say how the I.B. forcesshould be disposed. To make a decision aboutthe organisation in vacuo would seem to--beentirely wrong. There does not for the moment.appear to be any decision as to how a reservearmy pool of 100 men and 20 officers is tobe used. Some people think it shouldremaina ppol, others think that these forces. shoulde allocated down to divisions. I cannotsee-myself no Dixon alone can decide thesematters and I agree with Whitefoord that heneeds an adviser with staff experience andknowledge. of ordinary I.B.duties. He shouldnowever have at his elbow an expert who willadvise him as to how to dispose his forces.What is abeolutely wrong is that we know verylittle about the Army and the Army know verylittle about ut.Brooman-White has returned but I have notCataloguevRefereroe.kH4llg2it his experiences.Into IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED242ACT IN 3(4) DEPARTMENT.UNDE OF 1958 THE PUBLIC RECOROS 2sod SECTICFrost attended a meeting of the Junior e atwhich signals Security by the Allied Govts.was discussed. Apparently Arnold-Foster andCavendish-Bentinck were very. much opposed tothe granting of One-Time Pads to the Allies sincthey felt that this. .would cut us ff.fromvaluable intelligence. They suggested there-fore that the matter should be referred bag tothe G.O & C.S. Nobody seems to have askedthe following cuestions: (a) what communica-tions of the allied forces have been moni-tored during the last 6 months, (b) havethey been correct, (c) what informition dothey contain? It seems to me ne-that.only that only withthis data is is possible to decide whethersecurity should take precedence over intelli-gence or vice versa.Milmo came to see me about 2,000 French airmenwho are coming to this country from N. Africafor training, having been-previously vettedlocally. He feels very strongly., and I agree,that all the names should be passed over our recrecords and that those who came to N. Africaafter the German German-occupation-s -occupati ion should be examiresat the LRC. The reasons are that on the(aalagy of the cases of FEYGUIN andsome of these individuals may have been senthere to fly aircraft back to the enemy lines.BERTRAND who is coming here may give us impor-tant information about this. It has alreadytranspired through ISOS that BERTRAND hasbeen asked to findout what has happened toJUDE and another man who was mentioned by JUDEin his interrogation. This man is in factSCataloguerReterence:kV/4/Ag2has a brother withhim. It would 1 think be criminal not to344examine these cases very carefully sincean airman might well le ive this country afterbriefing day for OVERLORD.Walter Bell came to see me about America.He had had a long talk with Viv. who seemedto be extremely irritated with the BBI.Thurston apparently made contact with MEWwhom he asked for information about agenciesin S. America. iv.regards this as theTrojan Horse. I said that I thought it wouldbe much better to have these matters out withThurston. Bell is going to try and tacklehim. Probably thurston is acting on theorders of TAMM.October 30thTAR came to t 11 me about discussions withthe Controller and COSSAC as to the futureof deception on the Second Front. He thinksthat it ought to be done on the same linesas those employed by Dudley Clarke in theMid East. Firstly there is Bevan, who ontrolglobal deception. Under him are controls forthe eastern and western Mediterranea workingto Dudley Clarke in Cairo. There is oweverat the moment no Luropean controller. It isfelt that one should be appointed and that neshould be in COSSAC. His role Nould be towork out strategic deception, Under him willbe.an officer t 2lst Army Group who willwork out tactic l deception. This officerwill be responsible for working out tacticalplans ind deception and for goving the planCatalogue the necessary Reference:KV/4/192 the ground by means349of dummy units and also by means of wirelessdeception. Under him will be an officer fromB.l who will be known as the controller ofchannels. It vill be his responsibility towrite out the messages for agents on the basisof his superior officer's plans and to placethese messages through whatever agency isconsidered to be most suitable, wnether itbe in the field or in this country. This ishow things are working in the Med. at themoment. Dudley Clarke is the controller ofstrategic deception. Under him in Italyis Trangeways who is responsible for tacticaldeception, works out a plan and moves theunits on the ground, in addition to arrangingfor wireless deception. He has another officerunder him who concocts the messages to bepassed through agents. He goes first to theS.I(b unit who may or may not be able tohelp. He also may use channels in Algiersor even in London.Cussen came to see me about the CUENCA case.CUENCA has appealed to the Privy council. Allthe documents in the case were obtained byhis solicitor and sent to the SpanishEmbassy here for transmission to whateversolicitor or counsel would be acting forCUENCA in an appeal. i'he documents same bybag, one copy being sent to us and the otherto the Spanish Embassy. This was most un-fortunate since the documents contained agood deal about Medlam's agents. So far aswe know the Spanish Embassy did not getparticularly excited about them and we navenow succeeded in obtaining them throughIgnatius. We are holding them here until theyCatalogue Reference:KVI4/192346are handed over to the firm of solicitors.The best procedure would have been for Medlamto despatch the documents on behalf of thesolicitors in Gib. to us for transmission to tthe solicitors in London. this would haveavoided the necessity for the documents pass-ing through the hands of the Spanisa Embassy.Peter Ramsbotham called in. He is gettingon with his training which will not be comple-ted probably for about 2 or 3 months. Hethen hopes we may be able to place him inan I.B.unit. He is at present learning toride a motor-bicycle.OctoberTin-Eye rang up about HOPPE, the ISOS charac-ter at 020. They had been unable to get any-thing out of him up to the present. He hadhowever forwarded his pants to this officein order that certain gelatinous substancesfound in the waistband or turn-up could beexamined at the laboratory. Noakes got holdof Hedger who after submitting the substance tovarious tests said that he did not thinkit could be used either as n ink or a re-agentI luncned with Whitefoord and Col.Black,theAmerican, his G.1. 1. They confirm fonmer viewsabout Dixon and it seems fairly clear thatwe have no option but to withdraw him. It isI think rather bad luck as many of his diffi-culties have been due to lack of foresight bythe Army, who shouldlong ago have made up theirminds what an I.B.Staff should look like. Itwas agreed that if I could obtain the D.G.SCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192347approval Dick should be attached to the IBStaff Officer who would be provided by theArmy. He should have an assistant who fterthe planning stage was over would take overand proceed overseas if necessary. It wasthought that Dick should do a fortnigntwith the Staff Officer ind then go ith hisunder-study to view the position on the groundin Italy.We talked about deception. Whitefoord's viewis that tactical deception within the bridgeheais not likely to be necessary since havingestablished a bridgehead we should obviousiybe pushing out all along the line. The onlyform of deception which is likely to arisein the early stages could probably be moreeasily lealt ith from aere, e.g. an indic tionthat we were going to land at several places.As I underst nd the position from Witefoord,our estimate is that the forces th t are knownto be at our disposal can deal with the presentestimate of German forces on the continent.Insuch an eventuality it is thought that theoperation would move extremely quickly. If itcan't, it is not worth doing at ll. If thytherefore the German divisions on the continentare suddenly increased, it is quite possiblethat the operation won't take place, and thatan alternative will beadopted. This is ofcourse just the kind of thing that any oneplanning an I.B.staff should know. I havearranged for Dick and myself to dine withhitefoord and Black on Friday evening. In themeantime we should I think get out something inthe nature of a plan which we can b ase on theCatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/192348information acquired by Gwyer during his monthattachment to I.B. at G. Q. Home Forces and2lst Army Group.Ned Reid sent me down a file Levers OpticalBros. He brought the case to the notice ofthe Inland Revenue owing to certain curiousbanking transactions. On enquiry they foundthat they had been deirauded of some 142,000.payments had been made for fictitious pur-chases of goods, and the cheques so drawn werecashed, and the cash went into the personalaccounts of the directors. This, as it isa public company, was a fraud not only on theRevenue but also on the shareholders. Thecompany had in its files fictitious invoiceswhich went into considerable detail and hadbeen stamped in differen ways indicating thatthe goods had been received, examined, checkedetc. whereas in fact there were no goods atall. This involved a idespread conspiracywithin the company and also apparently meantthat they had at least one accomplice outsidewho provided them ith a printed and stampedreceipt. The question of prosecution isunder considerit tion. In the case of MORGANwhich Ned is also investigating, the Revenuehas also been defrauded of 0, 300,000 MORGANhas already offered to pay up L400, ,000. Hisoffer has been refused and a demand for thefull amount is being made.Stopford has wired to say that he is on hisway back from the Azores. Victor has leftfor Gib. Maunsell has returned to Londonafter waiting about on the aerodrome for 5 daysCatalogue ReferenCe:KV/4/192249A serious case of attempted sabotige on theLMS line near Sheffield on 13tn October hascome to notice. Concrete blocks were placedon the line in one case and bogey wheelswedged at a crossing. in another. It is thoughthat thiswas an atempt to derail the ScotchExpress. The LMS Railway Police stronglysuspect a railway fireman on the line bu sofar insufficient evidence has been ob.tainedto take definite action.The German sabotage service in Spain hasapproached a member o1 the Italian orginisatiorto obtain details of the Gib. reshwatersupply either ith a vie to contaminationor destruction.The Germans are increasing their activitiesagainst British shipping in Spanish ports.Madrid has recently requested Berlin to sendmore SOE equipment for their underwater attackson our shipping. Berlin have also been askedto try and get hold of 6 members of the-Italian Naval Sabota e organisation. Theyare to bring Italian sabotage equipment withthem. Potash is being loaded on toalliedships in Spanish ports,particularly Huelvaand Barcelona. ISOS indicates th t a sabotageattempt is shortly to be made against oneofthe ships loading potash by inserting amongthe cargo a bomb camouflaged as a sack ofpotash. We propose to try and put skewersthrough each sack of potash before it isloaded.The German agent FELIX in the Union of S.Africahas received instructions to carry out acts of-Catalogue Reference:KVI4/19230sabotage and has been given various formulaefor incendiary and explosive bombs. Everyrecipe received is familiar to us, havingbeen previously given to Germnan saboteurs suchas Mutt and Jeff, Zigzag, Robles, Dash,Burger and others. Felix is asking for infor-mation about the contamination of high-speedsteel by chemcial methods. Impregnation ofbales of wool with delayed action incendiarymaterial, and the insertion of high explosiveinto cans of fruit intended for ships.He also wants to know about the conteminationof locomotive boiler water and how this canbe achieved. Felix's enquiries do not ring truin the sense that they display a certainamateurish ambitiousness which suggest thatso far he has done nothing and is not likelyto do much in the future.November lstUren, the SOE communist who gave informationto SPRINGHALL, has been tried and court-martialled and received sentence of 7 years:He divulged to complete lay-out of SOE'sorganisation.I had a lk with Brook Booth, Bick,Stamp andGroup-Capt.Buss about the Trench pilotsbeing sent to this country from N.Afric Itwas agreed tht in the light of our know-ledge which showed that/no less than 9 esesassignments had been given to agents to flyaircraft back to German-occupie territory,it was of the utmost importance to have aproportion o1 these prospective French pilotsCatafogue Reference:KVI4p192rrivil. We e proposed151to pass all the names overr the CentralISOS Index,B.IReg. B. and LRC records and to sendthose who had left the continent after thetotal occupation of France by the Germans tothe LRC. Lastly we proposed to get photographof all these prospective pilots and sho themto FEYGUINE and others Who might be able topick out a spy. I felt that this wa a matterof special importance in view of the possibilittha one of these pilots might fly over tothe enemy bet een briefing dy and D.day andas an added prec ution I recommended to G/CBuss that all allied pilots should be groundedbet een those d tes if this could possiblybe arranged. He agreed with me that this vasa matter which should more properly be putthrough the ISSB.I also discussed with Brook Booth the easeof certain Polish pilots Who have alrea dycome to this country. He is going to re-examinthe position.November 2ndBrig.Val rang me up today about the Letterhe had received from Whitefoord relatingto Dixon. He Wanted to nohether we shouldbe prepared to take Dixon back. Otherwisethey nould have to get in adverse report on nilhim from hitefoord ind then post nim to someother unit as he wiis on army strength. I saidthat we ere taking Dixon back and that Nenould also supply a G.2 to understudy Dickthite.We have now been able to piece together theCatalogue Reference:KVI4/192-352story of Franz MAYER, the German sabotageagent arrested in Persia, but there is muchstill to come in. At the outbreak of wir MaY E]a .man of 29, occupied a secretaria post inone of the commercial organisations of theReichsgruppe Industrie. In December 1939 hewas attache to the German commercial Missionin Moscow. He returned to Potsdam in eb.19 1940to join a signa unit as platoon commander,but follo ing orders from the Military Adju-tant in Berlin he was transferred in a fewweeks to the S.D. Here he met Ramon GAMOTTAand together they volunteered for service inthe Mid East, although neither of them hadin fict any specialised knowledge of the area.They vere, so MAY ER claims, romantics imbuedwith the desire to emulate in this war theexploits of LQwrence in the last. After manydelays and disputes with von Ettel, theGerman Minister in Teheran who objected tothe journey, MAYER and GAMOTTA at last reachedPersia in October 1940. They were singularlyill-equipped, being without specialist trainingin intelligence a d without any directives sto what they were expected to do. They wereobstructed in every way by the Germ n Minister,Tho refused to allow them communication withBerlin. They S cceeded however in makingcontacts among Persins whose goodw ill waslater to st stand t hem in good stead, lor inAugust 1941 when the country was accupied byourselves nd the Russians, they had to gointo hiding On the outskirts of Teheran.MAYER remained politically in active untilMarch 1942 when he sought out the JapaneseCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192353Minister who was friendly but unco-operative.When ho wever the Minister left inraprilinghe left MAYER 5 W/T sets ind some much-neededcash. MAY ER in turn gave the Minister aletter to the German Minister in Tokio With asituation rgort and a suggestion that theKameradschaftsdienst programme should be usedas a channel af communicatio with him, ndenclosing a code to be operated if the sugges-tion was accepted. MAYER asked that hisletter should be acknowledged over thisgreetings programme to which he listenedregularly, and this according to MAYER wassubsequently done. MAYER caims that hisscheme to use these greetings broadcast vasoriginal. MAYER'S main problem has beento bring about some measure of agreement amonghis Persian friends, who included the influen-tial Deputy i Shiraz, Habbibulah Naubakht,and Gen. Zahidi, ,G.0.C. for the Isfahan rea.He wished to use these people for the forma-tion of an effective 5th column. In Nov. 1942MAYER was betrayed by one of his closestassociates and narrowly excaped capture bythe British:when on a visit to Isf'ahan. Hispapers were seized and disclosed names of agreat number of individuals in almost everyclass of Persiu society as members of an ex-tensive 5th column network. It was largelyon this list th some 150 arrests were recent-ly made in Persia. In Dec.1942 MAYER receiveda KD greetings broadcast which revealed thata special courier was on his may to Teheran.Nothing ever came of this and MAYER was forcedto send his Persian merchant on a second tripto Ankarastressing again his urgent need for awireless operator, and sug esting 3 alterna-Catalogue ReferenCe:KV/4/19235utive landing grounds. He also evolved aplain language code for use in broadcastsfrom Berlin. In Mareh 1943 MAY ER heard bythese means that his operator could beexpected at the end of March. This Franz mis-sion as it was called duly landed on the 30thMarch and made its way by camel and motor-truck to Teneran where contact was made withMAYER. The party consisted of 6 Germans4 of whom were trained /T operators. Fourof the party were S.D.men including its leaderErnst BLUME. the mission came prepared tosabotage the Trans-Iranian railway, althoughBlume was the only one who h ad any sabotagetraining. This was however the last thingthat MAYER wanted. He considered his creationof a 5th column in Persia the best way ofassisting the war effort and that acts ofsabotage could only serve to undermine hispolitical plans, which were, as he describedthem, to obtain certain indireet controlin Persian politics to enable him to thwartBritish policy in the short run and to assista German dvince through the Caucasus in thelong run. They: party was therefore divertedas the end of June to South Persia, wherein the Bakhtieri country they were able toset up a W/T ost and supply information ontroop movements, aid to nussia convoys, andthe position of oil wells. This party wasreinforced by Berlin on the night 01 the lst/2nd August with arms and equipment. Mean-while MAYER in Tehera established communica-tion by wireless with Berlin early in May 1943and continued oper ting until his arrest inAugust which was due to Persian informers.Meanwhile the S.D. in Berlir were planning anCatalogue Reference:KVI4/192355expedition to southern Persia which landed inthe region of Shiraz in the middle of July.These people ere not under MAYER'S controlalthough he succeeded in establishing contactwith them. The party is still at large, inaddition to a later S.D. party of 4 Germinswho are believed to have landed some 50 milessouth of Teheran. Both parties included atrained saboteur. There would appear there-fore to be at present at large in Persia9 identified German agents. The Securityauthorities in Persia believe that theremay be some 10 more in addition whose presencethey suspect but has not yet been confirmed.The MAYER case shows the SD working alongparallel but at the same time competing lineswith the Abwehr, and because the former,unlike the latter, is not primarily concernedwith the immmdiate operational plans of theOKW the SD aided by their apparent greaterefficiency and methods would appear todayto be successfully displacing the Abwehr inPersia as it may yet well do in the Mid Eastarea generally.Lennox talked to us about future operationsand the possibility of an attack on southernFrance in connection with OVERLORD. Untilmatters develop in Italy it is not possibleto say how far attack of this sort would befeasible or desirable.At the D.G.S meeting we discussed the P.M. Smemo which asks all departments to reviewtheir position as they imagine it will beduring the transition period from war to peace.Catalogue The document Reference:KVI4/192 Reference.k is voolly ind there seems356little for us to say bey ond the fact thatwe shall be doing precisely what we are doingnow, though the incidence may be more onsubversive and political movements than onespionage. We snall have to adjust ourselves.as the situation demands.Perfect rang up about an exercise calledMurray. Lothian who visited a meeting of CCswas told that they had been addressed by the.C.Inverness on the subject of this exer-cise which involved suggestions to f ammersnot to sow crops in certain areas etc. andthe evacuation of certain civilians. Perfectknew nothing about this exercise or whetherin was in fact an exercise of an operation.I spoke to Lennox about this but he was like-wise in ignorance. He has now found out thatMurray is merely an exercise. Perfect shouldof course have been informed by opens.The D.G. spoke to me about ick going toCOSSAC. He now thinks that we ought to letDick go right in and write him off for therest of the war. I told him from my point ofview this would be impossible and moreover thatdid not think it was what COSSAC desired.In discussing the matter with Barry,Charlesand Dick, I have come to the conclusion thatthe best course would be to get John Mairback from N.Africa to fill the post of G. 2Civil Security in COSSAC, under the StaffOfficer G.1 who will be nominated by COSSACthemselves. Dick could go to N.Africa,pickup Mair and go on to Italy,bringing mair backwith him.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/192357I lunched with the Belgians, Pierlot,DelfossLapage and Gen.Ganzhof. I asked Lapage andGanzhof what precisely they were doing inconnection with the Second Front. They ratherturned the tables on me by saying "What doyou want us to do, because so far nobodyhas told us anything". I explained that weas a dep rtment re ally had very little sayin these matters. We were however supplyi irrofficers to the I.B.staff ind it might bethat we could use our influence in the rightdirection. Speaking quite personally I didnot see how the British athorities thoughtthey could possibly operate except in fullcollaboration with the Belgians who wouldnormally know f r more about the: area and thepeople in itiwhoivere reliable or unreliablethan anyone else. Ganzhof then said that hewas quite confident about certain members ofhis Resistance organisation who were distri-buted throughout the various provinces. Tomeet these people he was trying to build upthe nucleus of a small administration whowould be briefed with dossiers compiled hereand be able, in conjunction with reliablelocal residents of the Resistence mvement,to give the authorities the best advice. Hewas however meeting with a certain amountof difficulty in extracting suitable personnelfrom the Belgian Army. He had recently beenable to get powers to withdraw anyone overthe age of 42. There were ho'vever otherswhom he wanted and he did not think thatmatters were progressing fast enough. He askedme to spea to his Prime Minister, which Laccordingly did. Pierlot apprecited the pointCatalogue Reference:KVI4/192358I saw Duff in the afternoon and left with himthe MT5 report. I told him that we had triedto write it up in a slightly different form asI understood that he had re-hashed the pre-vious report. He gave he copies of his draft.He said th t generally spe king the P.M.couldnot consume more than a very limited amount.T said that we should be very pleased to tryand write up tne material in a more conciseform but that I fully realised that.he,knowing the P.M. S wishes, would undoubtedlybe able to do it far better than Ne could.If therefore he preferred this method perhapsit would be better for us to give him thefacts and leave the rest to him. He seemedquite satisfied.I then spoke to him about the SOE case ofKNIGHT. I expl iined to him tn t since 1had last seen nim Archie Boyle had called fora speci 1 report on certain aspects of thecase from Max Knight, which we had given him.It seemed therefore that he was very cons-cious of SOE'S defects and was determined toget them put right. This being so I thoughtthat it would probably be better if he saidothing to Lord Selbourne. Selbourne wouldnot know nything about the case, would sendfor Boyle or Senter who would then feel thatwe had sneaked on them. This would mean thatin the future they would not consult us. Hethoroughly understood the dilemma and we agreedthat as long as something was being done itwould be better to leave matters as tney were.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/192351The estimated strngth o1 the Luftwaffe inRussia is 1,600 front line as against 5,000Russiar planes. The Germans ire believed tohave 23-25 divisions in .Italy. The MoscowConference decided to press Turkey into thewar.A British subject n med JOB has arrived hereand was carefully interrog ted by the Asst.SCO at Poole in the light of informationgiven by us that soneone was expected to comehere with jewellery for Dragonfly. JOBfirst attracted attention owing to his ratherweak story ind the fact that he was the sonof a naturalised German. He said that he hadbeen interned in V rious camps ind let outon parole and had finally got away throughSpain. When sea'rched he was found to havein his possession certair jewellery identicalwith that described as being destined forDragonfly. JOB was let through but hasbeen picked up by B.6 and housed with hisbrother. So far he has made no attempt tocontact Dragonfly. We ire going to let him tunand see what he does. B.6 in following himoverheard him say to his brother that in virof his German origin he was likely to befollowed in this country.November 3rdLennox came to see me about a suggestion thatlarge numbers of Italians should be employedin the manufactur ofconcrete pylons at South-mpton,Portsmouth and other coastal areas. TThese will be required for OVERLORD. LabourCatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/192360is short and Italians are said to be speciallgood at this type of work. COSSAC want tohave our opinion from the security angle.I said that if large numbers of Italians wereto be let loose within the 15 mile belt itwould rather destroy the atmosphere ofsuggested security measures for OVERLORD..C. S would not like it and troops mightobject. There was l O just possibilitythat one of them might try and escape byboat. The fact that italians were nowco-belligerants did not to my mind affectthe situation one way or another. If they WEbored with life in this country tbhgy mighttry and get away: If they fell into the handof the enemy they would tell everything theyknew. I thought therefore that it would bebetter not to employ them on the south coastand in any case to have them under militaryguard.Burt is seeing Sir .Cripps and suggestingto. him that ne should give evidence in theOYSE case. This would give considerableleight to the prosecution.JOArcher came to talk about the MAP case inwhich e:-Chief of the nir Staff seems to betaking a personal interest. He thinks thathe ought to Dut in a preliminary reportrecommending that certain security measuresshould be adopted immediately particularlythose relating to the visits of neutralattaches to factories and service aerodromes:Catatogue RefevencerkV/19e the DGs letter aboutFrost. saying that if we will let themhaveISACOPYORIGINA DOCUMEN FETANED361N.DEPARTMENT UNDER SCTiON3 (4 OF IE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 19582000a confidential report about him the villarrange for his re-absorption.At the Wednesday meeting we discussed the caseof HELMUTH. He was arrested at T'rinidad andtaken to Bermuda by. air and is coming thenceby cruiser. He is due to arrive in about aweek's time. The case is not a very easy onesince HELMUTH is technically an Argentinediplomat on his way to Barcelon to takeupa position as Argentine consul. In factwe know him to be destined for Berlin where heis to discuss with Himmler the question ofgetting rms into Argentine. If he has noincriminating documents on him and sticks tohis statement that heis going to Bercelona, itwill not be very easy to decide how he is tobe disposed of. Vesey mentioned the case ofSIBIRIL. who has been responsible for arrangingthe escape of some 100 Frenchmen by means Oismall boats. SIBIRIL himself got intodiificulties and his organisation has beenbroken up. We are arranging or him to senda broadcast meSs ige which will convey to hiscollaborators that e has arrived safely inthis country.I later discussed tae- IELMUTH case with ick,ierbert and Stamp. e decided that the besttechnique would be to senddown to theport to meet him when he might ascertain some-thing more about HELMUTH'S character andwhether he had talked at all during the voyage voy age.This would give us an indication as to thebest method of breaking him. We all agreedthat ultimately he. ould have to go to 020CatalogueReferenceikW4m92c be detained. here fcr362the dur ition of the war. I felt thit it wasimportant that ve should state the case withall its difficulties to the F.O. and makequite sure that if we sent him to 020they would not press us for confessions,visits by Argentine diplomats etc. This isbeing done.I have read the JIC paper on the prob bilitiespf a German collause, based on the experiencesof 1918. There is no doubt that the parallelis a very emrkable one. Emphasis islaid on the fact that in 1918 we vere takenunawares because our calculations vere basedalmost entirely upon Germany' milita rypower, where as in fct the collapse vas dueto other causes. It is felt that if it werenot that the political situation in Germanytoday was very different from thi in 1918the JIC vould unhesitatingly predict thatGermany ould sue for an armistice before theend of the year. today however tae Nazi regirhas had 10 ye ars in which to destroy alltraces of democratic ideas and institutionsnd has during that period been training thenation to endure. great suffering. Police ndParty control over all phases of the lifeof the country is very much more effectivethan anything that existed in 1918 and hasso far been strong enough to m ke impossibleanything in the way of organised position.Moreover Germany today is faced with thedemand of unconditionalxx suurender to theUnited Nations, including Russia, instead ofPresident ilson's comparatively mild 14 pts.Catalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/192363Finally, the fear of retribution, particularlyamong the le iders, is this time far reater.These viens of the JIC are dted 9th Septemberbut/hey sawno reason to lter them on the2lst October. In the intervening period they.consider that there has been a steady deterio-ration in Germany's political,n military andeconomic situation as a. whole.I ve had long discussions about the G. 2appointment for COSSAC. Speir is ratheragainst disturbing Mair. le thinks thatrurnival-Jones would be rather at sea ii hewere sent to N.Africa to tike Mair's place.We do not vish to move Kenneth to COSSACas we feel th t his novledge of the Frenchwould be more V aluable at 21st Army Group.Possibilities for the G. appointment ireFurnival-Jones, Haylor, if he could be broughtback from Mid East, or MeDermot. The latteris perhaps the best choice of all.We have had informatior from .Africa obtainedthrough MASSA who was arrested a short timeago, that the Ossewa Brandweg arrested SITTIGsome 5 months ago owing to a quarrel thathe was having with PAASCHE. SITTIG isbeing detined somewnere by the O.B. Hiswhereabouts are known to Coetzee, the Asst.hieChief of Police who has long been suspect fromthe British point of view, and is according toMASSA a valuable link with the O.B.organisatiorthis information is being brought to thenotice of Smuts. Meanwhile PAASCIE's trans-mitter is still operating.Catalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/192THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENTAHAINE[DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSNovember 4th ACT 1958 .DeourB.5 are strting teir investigations onthe MAP case. nd 3. report is being Submittedto Jo Archer on our preiiminry findings.Bonnefusse rang me uD to say that GeneralCochet, who is nead of ill the Intelligenceorganisations in N. Africa. Wis anxious toee the D.G.thurston Called this moming. i exgliined tohim our proposils about divueing to theIrneao and Belgians information relating tosecret ink. He NaIS in genera agreement butishes Grogl to cle. r te matter with the.Censorship representative i.t the Pouden-tial. He would then communicate Nita theBureau and met their consent.Foley C illed withof siS about theCase oftho he wishes to run asa KX. in Iceland. de presumed that ifvas not working the Germins wold assumethat he had been iptured nd divuiged thefact that he had a parcel to Deliver tonother avent (believed to be COB ED). theGermans would tien expect that COE EB wouldbe arrested ina controlied. L said tilit Ltougnt his assumption was unsound in thelight c our experiences.1 adnever been given COBISE'S tidress nd wouldonly hive been given it then he C.ine up onthe ir. The genera vie of the Germans wasthat e as 3n intelligence organisation ereineificient, ind ie were tourt inciinedCatalogue Reference:KVI4/192THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958. 0ocotto over-estimate their mnterrigence: reverthis was their iffiir. Tn thinks tat itshould ilso be the sftair of the XX omitteewhere t vill be aired tis iternoon. Mean-while we have agreed to rele seprovided he is kept at one of TAS specialnouses were could be looked ifter by an FSPofficer until he leaves for Iceid. Holeywants him to see 31 bit of London in orderto support his cover story when he returnsto Iceland.I had a talk ith Kenneth, who takes anextremely poor view oi the I.B.officers.ilesays the fact is tit none oi them reallyknow anything about the job, ind the ualityis extremely poor. Very fen have the necessinlanguii qualifications. In lact lis on G. 5cannot spe k Fre ch. There is nO'N rather apanic about the possibility of RANKIN, Whichis a straight run through to Berlin. Insuch an eventuality Ii ill have gracticaiiynothing to lo and till probbly the clirge cfIB since IA at any rate have the Lanuisequalifict.iin ind is of a higher Calibre.IB in the Army is evidentiy regarded asa second-eriie occupition with little prospectot ceomotion. onseuently it iete clutteredith duds. Kenneth is quite sure tit ourlateet propes ls re sound iny tinks thatwe should give the army LS much S ve possiblycan. His opposite number in IB2,Ma,or Ricer,are rs to be 9 good fello, but doyer-Milleris obviously quite useless. His sole previosexperience nas peen G.2 in a vomm vommuind HeCatalogue Refeience.t\t92ation Both Kennethind Rider think tait IB2 n should be366amalgamated. The fact is that there is nopoint in having dividing lines betveen 1,2 and3.2 will be obtaining information throughinterrogat tion by FSP and will also have toreceive guidance from 1 and 3. The ordinarymilitary security duties vill be considerablyreduced in the field:if units have not earnedthe lessons of security during the lastthree yers in this country they are notlikely to learn them when they go oerseas.Brook Booth came to tell me that ne had madeall the necessary arrangements with Chaneyof the Air Ministry for the interrogit tion ofthe French pilots when they arrive. Itappears nowever that a number of ir-pornetroops some of whom have not had a securityexamination and about 90 of vnom reachedN.Africa after the total oceuption of France,are coming on the s me ship. Theyare to besent to Scotl nd for training. We poth agreedthat while their n mes should be put overthe records, we could only conduut a securityexamination in speciil cases. There vs agreat difference between iir-borne troopsand pilots. From the point of viev of secur-ity, the latter were fur more dangerous, where-as the former would not constitute a verygrave menace.I s N the D.G. about the possibility of puttingMeDermot into COSSAC with Lick. He seemedquite receptive to this idea, although Iexpect there vill be considerable oppositionfrom Lennox.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/192361Novenber 5thI saw Stopford who has returned from theAzores. Appirently the landing was conductedin an atmosphere of considerable coniusion.Things were left behind that vere Wanted,important sbores which were to hive beenlanded first vere landed last, etc.etc.thePortuguese ho ever gave valuable assis-tance both in lorries and personnel.Stopford himself proceeded almost immediatto see the Consul it Terceira. He obtainedthe names of hlf a dozen reliable Portugueseresidents. He then Went on to see the militarygovernor who was extremely co-operitive andalso the local chief of police. He does notthink that much can be expected From the latte]because he would obviously be well in withall the population and getting his rake-offthis and that SO that it Nould not be in hisinterests to do. anything very drastic. Theonly method in Stopford's vie is is to buildup a small nucleus of informants, which hehas done. These people have been handed overto Benady. Of course Beneday has no ideahow to run them. He thinks they shouldcome up and report to him it Headquarters oncea week. He has however been told that thiswon't do.On board the ship vere a wireless operator ndtwo cypher Clerks. They vereysupposed to beable to communicate with London and also ithMathews but Mathens who Went on in adv ince toPonta del Gada, apparently had the rongcyphers. He could camunicate with London butCatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/19236%but not with the Force Commander, who of courshad no idea what he was doing. ThePortugueseauthorities rounded up the vireless set inPonta ind Mathews proceeded to Horta ithone van supplied by RSS ind a snifter.Awireless transmitter h d been located in ablock of flats about 100 yds sq. but thepresence of the van became known at once andwas in fact reported to the Germ ns by theagent after which no further comunicationtook place. The block of flits Nas searchedbut without result. Matheus is still sittingat Horta hoping that the agent ill come upon theair I am inclined to think howeverthat ne will have to Wait some time. It wouldclearly have been better to have taken 5 snif-ters instead of a van. There might havebeen a ch nce of carryin out the perationwithout the facts becoming know to the wholetown, who turned out in crowds to see thehunt. There is a small security problemat Horta in that reports of movements of ourships from there would clearly be of valueto the enemy. Stopford did not go to Pontadel Gada s it seemed thi police work in theother islands was purely a loc l affair andhot controlled by the Internationa Police.TrThe Air Officer Comnanding as extremelyhelpfulland obviously glad to have someone whocould advise him on security matters. Stop-ford took charge O1 the wireless station andalso of the Purple Primer. I gather thatonce the wireless transmitter' nad been locatedin Horta Mathews intends to return, leavingthe various consuls to represent SIS interests.If it was worth Stopford's while going at all,and I feel on the whole that it was, he cer-Catalogue Reference:KVI4/192tainly should have been taken in on all theplans particularly those which concern SIS.Rupert Speir and Barry came to talk to ineabout Scott-Harston, and we went afterwards tothe D.G. Felix ovgill wants him for hisSI(b) unit for Norway. I pointed out to theD.G. that as no final decision had been madeabout OVERLORD, SIS Nere clearly taking theprecaution of acquiring suitable officersfor the alternative. Me might also find ourselves in a similar position. Scott-Harstonwas one of the officers Who had taken thecourse with this object in view. howeversince nobody seemed to rate hi S abilitiesvery highly and since he was at the momentvirtually unemployed and had been so for agood many months, the D.G. might feel thathe should be released. The D.G. said thatsince his n me was on the list oi officerssubmitted to the DMI e could only gree tohis going subject to the DMIS approval,and asked peir to tike up this point withDDMI(O).A telegram has been received from Mills tosay that he has been allo ed to visit theFBI unattended. Honour vas satisfied by atelephone call being put through to the FBIby the Security Co-Ordination officer inWashingtor announcing Mills' arrival.Dick ind I dined with Whitefoord and Black.There was a good deal of irrelevant andhistoric talk about the origins O1 COSSACduring which Black said that his arrival inCOSSAC as quite fortuitious. Having beenCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192370sacked by en.Devers, he was gyrati g in theair and landed on the only mattress.Whatwas clear was that whitefoord on his ownadmission knew very little about IB mattersand that Black knew precisely nothing. Weeventually got dow to some sort OI brasstacks. It was agreed tha Dick should notgo into COSSAC offici lly until the appoint-ment of the new GSOl had been made, and thatMeDermot would be very acceptable,as his understudy. Meanwhile it seemed that Dick couldhelp to put the Anerican in the picture indcould also m ke some progress with theTheatre Intelligence Section nich is to beset-up in CUSSAC to collate and distributeall information which relates to the reato be invaded. I pointed out that there vsan even more important aspect of this problem,namely to get the information into suen aform that it can be of real value to theFSP sections who have got to carry out theaction. For this purpose it will be necessaryto co-opt C.I.S. from Army Group which pro-duced the Martian reports, SIS, ourselves,Melland and RSS. Both Dick nd I thought thatGwyer is the most suitable person to carryout this work.This will give an opportun-ity for reviewing the Furphe Primer and thequestion of its unsuitability for use in thefield. I think Whitefoord and Black ventaway with a feeling that a problem which neitheof them really understood as, nowto beproperly tackled.I saw C. this evening when L asked him aboutMSS messages relative to.the the disposition ofour troops in this country. He said thatCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192971there had been one or to t o such message, Whichhe had in ict shown to the Controller no hadbeen much conerned. explained to nim whatTAR was doing in building up records whichwould show hon thiscountry looked throughGerman eyes.. If one of his agents happenedt nreport that the 9th Armoured Division h hidbeen sent to Norwich, such a report might beblue-pencilled by the approving authorities thewould not know th t this fact was ilre dyknown to the Germans. TAR'S agent might inthis may becone compromised. C. thoroughlyunderstood the point which had not previousoocurred to him, and undertook to let us havedetails of any such messages in the future,which he would send personal to me.He told me that MSS recently had been extremelyilluminating, D rticularly on the ir side.There were clearly grave shortages of allserts of materi 1. People vere being todthat they could not h ve this or that, thatold pl nes were to be ut into commissionag in, that Italir plines were to be used,etc.30 ME'S had even been sent from the northof Denmark to noumania, presumably to delith a possible attack on the Ploesti oilells. There was clearly a shortage of petrol;On the other h nd MSS h d confirmed the useof the rocket. C. himself is convinced thatthe rocket will be used sometime during thisinter. Probably during a foggy day shen itsflashes will not be able to bedetected.Opinions still seemed to V ry is to the effi-cacy of the veapon. the prob bility is thcerti types will be used it short range andothers at long ringe. I underst nd that Ne reCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192