The National Archives(c) crown copyrightCatalogue Reference:k :KV/4/186Image Reference:445$7E dined with Swinton and Harkec. Harker, had pre-viously been to see Horace Vilson and had arrangedfor Jimmy Rae of the Treasury to look into theorganisation here. We had a very amicable conver-sation on general topies, but vihen we reached 11 rmT thought it was time that wre began getting dovmto the sub ject on which the meeting had obviouslybeen called. I therefore opened the ball. I toldSwinton that E did not see uite how Crocker wesgoing to fit into the organisation. I said that wehad discussed the possibility before the warbut had decided that on the whole he could be ofinore use outside. his had been tried out and a.certain munber of eases had been fared out, buthe had not been able to find a solution for them.1I felt that there was very definite vork for himto do here but from my convessation ith him Tdid not feel that it was of a kind he envisaged.He seemed to think that this investigation branchwould deal writh a very large nuber of cases,which would be handed.ove lock stock and barrel.said that cases arose out of an intelligenceackground and that while certain aspects of themneeded police investigation the case must remain inthe control of the intelligence officer. Svintonseemed to think that this was sound, although hewas rather reluctant to admit it at first. Hethen said "You have bom arded me. Iow I an goingto bombard you". He said that he thought thatthe eases for internaent which we submitted tothe Home Secretary were badly drafted. I askedhim to quote instances. He cou]d only think ofone or two. Nor could he make it very clear tome exactly what was wrong. I said that our proce-dure in B.Branch wa.s to out case up to the LegalSection whichewe thoug ht wes a likely one forinterment. S.L. then made out a form and gavetheir opinion as to whether the pase was weak orstrong. Sometimes we turned down such cases. Weoften had difficulty in ascertaining what was aCatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/186GSSweak case in the eyes of H.O. and vhat was a strongone. There were cases when we had what we deemedto be a really strong case and the H.0. turned itdown. In others waere the case was much weakeran interrment order was made. Swinton thought thatthese eases should all be prepared by solicitorsand put up to barristers who would if necessarydefend them.He said he was very lad to have had such franktalk, but he did nothing towards solving ourim ediate difficulty, namely, what exactly isCrocker to do. Rather vaguely he ought thathe should Be in charge of the solicitors preparingthe cases and that he should carry out what hedescribed as the "pursuit stage" of a case.Opinions are likely to vary on the exact momentwhen the pursiit stage has been reached. Swrintonwas horrified at Crocker's having asked for a listof the staff and their records. He said thathe vas never told to do anything af the kind,merely to engage some extra solicitors who wouldwork under himself. E gained the impression thatSwinton felt he had put his Coot in it prettybadly, but that he vas trying to get away with itby calling down both sides. Harker told him thathe thought the position of denuty Director wasrather out of balance. He said that perhaps itmight be, but that people like that attached agood deal of importance to t eir position. Theanswer of course is that we have efficient peoplehere just as important in their walks of life, whohave taken up quite a humble position in thisoffice and who at any rate have made it theirbusiness to find out the true nature of the work.The fact is that it is mpossible to tell how aman is going to turn out here, whether he be asolicitor,lavye or anything elsey There is notraining which is of any very certain value. Theonly thing to do is to start in at the bottom rung.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/186K59August 9thT lunched with Somerset Mau hem, who is writing 24articles for the American Press, one of them on the 5thColumn. D.M.I. had asked me to go and see him. Hesaid his task was rather difficult one because altho'he wanted to arouse Americans oepioan to a sense of thedanger with which they were faced, he did not vish thento get the impression that this country regarded theposition as hopeless andvas not worth supporting.I.gave him an outline of the foreign organisationof the S.D:A.P., explaining that I thought that asfar as this country was concerned, aBd in fac't Anericaand mary other countries, it was the basis of the 5thColumn activity. T then went on to give him an estimateof what I thought was the position at the moment.I said in fact that I did not anticipate anything veryfrightful in the way of 5th colun activity. He saidthat what 1 had told him was most interesting but notactually very helpful in so far as his report wasconcerned. He had apparently just written one articlefor some Amnerican periodical on the French collapse.He said that when something sos complete and unexpectedhappened one had to go back to fundanentals. He thoughtthat the root cause was that the rench had grown toattach more importance to money than to more spiritialthings.August lothThe W.Section is beginning to get under may. Thearrangements have nov been made for an officer From theArmy,lavy and Air Force to join the o ganisation andsupply all po sible infornation relating to oper tions.ovements of a]] enemy aircraft over this country havebeen plotted and in one instance it vas found that theyall seemed to turn at a point in Somerset near theBristol Channel. A few days later a map was taken offa Gervan aeroplane brou ht down in this country whichhad E X on it at this very spot. The pilot is beingterrogated and the whole area is being combed out esCatalogue Reference:KVI4/186D.B.Taking into consideration the disguises that youhabitually put on when out of the office I think that thefollowing extract from a recent book by Somerset Maugham mi getbe of interest to you:"I examined a number of secret reports dealing withthe Fifth Column and I was fortunate enough to meetsome of the men whose Job it is to watch its activitiesin Britain and to take the necessary steps to counterthem.I cannot tell their names; I can only saythat in appearance they do not at all resemble thesecret agents of fiotion. If you met them you wauldnever dream that they had anything to do with theoccupation they follow. Another was a plump manwith grey hair and a grey moon face, in rather shabbygrey clothes. He had an ingratiating way with him,a pleasant laugh and a soft voice. I do not lowwhat you would have taken him for if you had foundhim standing in a doorway where you had soughtrefuge from a sudden shower - a motor salesman, perhaps,or a retired tea planter.B.1.0.30.3.42.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/efar as possible. It may be that there is something inthe nature of a beacon station at this spot.Dickson has done a very good reppre on the funds of theB.U.F. which have been investises in a nuber ofPast Companies. A great deal of trotible had been takenby the Party to cover up the origin as far as possible.So far investigations disclose that there is a balericeof some cl1y637.OAusust 11thThe War Cabinet were informed on August lst that LordLytton would aecept the chairmaanship of the AdvisoryCouricil on Aliens. An attempt has been made to get.1.5. to send a representative but this has beenheavily turned dowm by Svinton, on the grounds that itwould be most improper for any meiber of this serviceto express views at such a meeting.On August lst the P.I. stated to the War Gabbine't thatour position was HOW considerab mote secure than ithad been Some months earlier. At that time we had veryfew trained an e uipped troops in the country. Hethought that it would now be possible to take a somewatless rigid attitude in regard to interrment of aliens.The Home Seeretary agreed but thought it would beundesirable that there should be too violent a reactionProm the policy previously endorsed.Peter Smithers, the Naval representative on the W.Branch tells me that our convoys are being attackedin the narow channel off the north-east coast ofUlster. 16 ships have been torpedoed there since theis6 Angust. The Gemmans have not been slow to realisethat since we have laid a mine field from the CornishCoast to the E.Coast of Eire all our shipping, whichis now. concentrated on the wes't coast, musit pass outthrough this channel. They have conse quently had a Lotof Submarines lurking. It was here that the troop shipTel Aicabir was torpedoed. I gather that we have NowCatalogue Reference:KV/4/186transfe red a number of our destroyers from the FastCoast and aleo patrol poats. This should improvematters but leaves the East Coast exposed. Smithersis going over to Ister to see whether any measuresare possible to prevent Leakage of information fromNorthern Ireland, since all ships passing through thnarrows there must be clearly visible from the shore.August 12thCharles and T lunched with Vivian. VV. proposed ththat he should have a very frank tall with Swinton,and should tell him in very plain language that hisaction in pitchforking William Charles into this officewas fundamentally wrong. He woul.d say that he vas iteready to serve on a committee but that it must beproperly constituted, and he would probably say manythings that might conceiyably make Swinton his enemy.Archer tells me that our air strength is 20,700. Thisincludes all types of aireraf in all parts of the globe.We had pparently estimated several years ago thatour vastage in pilots would amount to some 3,000 a.month. At the outbreak of this was we had 9,000surplus pilots and since intensive training has beengoing on ever since I gather that ve are fairly wellplaced.Cecil has got an interesting report From an Irishinforant of a reliable type who had been in touchwith a member of the German Legation in Dbolin. TheGerman, after being supplied with a certain amount ofdrink, began to talk in an interesting way. He seidthat the effect of our bombing of Hamburg had been verygreat, end that a eonsiderable ber of people hadbeen killed besides the material damage. The Germanscould not give this out on the radio as they had alwayssaid that their air defences were impregnable. Therewas a feeling in Gerany that the Air orce had not comeup to expectations. Pilots were not receiving adequa.teCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1862training ovring to shortage of petrol. Serious riotshad occured in the mining districts of Norway. Minershad attacked Fries taking food out of the country andthe Germans had had to use tans against thein. InHolland there was a passive hostility which was causinganxiety. The French harvest had been -mel damaged inthe fighting zones and what remained was not beingbrought in. Food shortage was serious in Germany butappalling in the conguered countries. Gemans werelooking forward to the coming winter with great arziety.The formation of the local security forces in Irelandhas been going ahead with excellent results. Host ofthese forees are being led and organised by the localgentry, most of them ex-o ficers or retired eivilservants loyal to this country. The greatest keennessis being shovm and allowing for the very short time andlacle of equipnent, results are extremely ood. Astage had been reached here Irish nationals from thelocal ecurity forces had volunteered to provide arisand armnunition From the cache which they had made. Ourinformant said that when an Irishman vent to theselen lengths ths you mig ight be sure he was really interested.The e Tfect of this had been to lessen the inmtuence ofthe L.R.A. and a great many people who were neithee onone side nor the other had now found a new interestwhich had arewm ther on to the side of an orderedGovernment. It is obviously very important that nothingshould be said about this;if it once got aboutthat the local volunteers were in the hands of theAnglo-Irish there would very soon be a reaction.Charles and I and Harker disc ssed the possibilityof having a re-organisation committee wi.th Creedy inthe cheir. The only dher members would be V.V. andHo rroeks. This T think would be far more satisfactorythan the present suggestion of Crock Horrocks andmyself. Personally I should be absolytely satisfiedto Leave the whole matter in the hands of V.V.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/186563Aucust 13thAb the board meeting torley Toby raised the questionof Birkett' attitude towards members of the B.TE.F.In spite of the fact that he had a.greed to keep ininternaent proven members of the B.I.1. since theirorganisation had now been proscribed, he had beenletting them out Wherever he thought they had anattractive personality. Evidence did not seem tocount for very much. In one case the man denied thathe was a member of the B.T.T. in spite of thofact that his black shirt was found in adraver and that he was wearing a Fascist belt. Iforget what exxcuse was offered about the shirt,but as regards the belt he said that he wore it forhis lumbago. This was readily accepted by thecomittee. The matter is being taken up with theH.O.The problem of the lists of suspects whon the soldieswant to arres't in the event of an invasion has beensolved by our going through these lists very careful:and by the granting of powers to the RegionalCommissioners to pass bye-laws in such an emergencywhich will cover the situation.An interesting case has come to light. We haverecords dating back some years shotring that oneStanislas SEYMOTTICEYK, who has used a variety ofother aliases, vas either a member of theOGPU or the Lth Department. This man sueceededin getting over here with a nuber of refugee atthe time of the French debacle. He was accompaniedby a woman called Alta LECOUTRE. Ve now find thatthey are ensconsed in the offices of De Caulle, thewoman being secretary to LABARTHE, who is supposedto be in charge of technical equipment. LABARTHEhas a very sticky record as one of the people whowere deeply involved in the Spanish anns raclcet onbehalf of Moscow. This looks like developing intoan interesting case, We have sent a wire to Mr.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/186$64Thomas in Canad da as he is almost certain to knowthese people.August 14thThere has been bremendous exeibement today ovringto the discovery of 80 parach tes dropped throughthe prev ous night in various parts of the country.Meetings are being held by G.H. Air Ministry,the Centre, etc. In actual fact these parachutesare a very crude hoax by the Gormans. They vereobviously intended to cause alarm and despondeneyand the N.B.F has been collaborating in fiesh-creeping broadcasts. Two points have almost eom-pletely given the show avay. One of the parachuteswas discovered in a comfield and there were notracics leading from it. In another case docuentswere dropped giving alleged instructions to agents.These doetments were partly covered withmud, andbore a secret stamp. Unfortunately the staap had beerput on over the mud. IT is of course possible thatthe Gerans might put over a hoax of this lcind inorder that on some future occasion they might do thesame thin and drop a couple of agents.Charles wen't and saw Svinton this eve ing, andseems to have had a devastatingly frank talk. Hetold Swinton that his recent acti n in pitchforkigC. into this organsatior assa Deputy-Director onhalf-baked infomnation had completelyessed up thewhole lepartrent, and that everybody was regardingC. as Swinton's spy, particularly as he still retainshis appoi tment on the Exxecutive. Charles explainedto him that he had put mne in an extreiuely avlwvardposition and that he would b be well advised to sendfor me and hear wh t I had to say. Swintonadmitted that he had acted too hastily. Charlesreplied that although there mightybe no means ofgetting over the present situatior there might be away of getting round it. He thought shat Swinton'sCatalogue Reference:KV/4/186565political training might help him to find a forala,since it was uite dvious that there WSS no job inh.I.5. which would varrent C. being given the rankof Deputy Director. In Mr. Chamberlain's frightfulwords after his return from erchtesgarten, "It vasa Crank talk end e friendly talk".August 15thI went to lunch at Latchmere Ho se. Stepherscertairly has done a first class piece of work,and he is evidently enjoying the job. Theestablishment is in fact now more or less full upand ve have the necessary interrogators.180 aircraft vere brought down today. We had araring at 7 p.m. when Croydon vas bombed. Noneof the Germans engaged in this attack got back home.August 16thYe had two air raid warnings today, one in themorning and one in the evenings.KANO has written to KASE of the Japanese Ebassyforwarding a copy of a long meno on Japanese policyvis a vis China etc. which is to be given to SemphillThe latter is to put it over with members of theLabour Party and the Goverment and also withcertain people in the House of Lords. SinceSemphill is employed at the Armiralty this seems tobe going rather far, particularly in the light of theprevious informat ion which shows that he is in receigof 62-300 a year for services officially and unoffi-cially rendered to the Japanese Haval and Militaryauthorities.We had a meeting at 3 this afternoon about Tribunals,with Svinton in the chair. We had to considerGermans and Austrians to be released under 19categories. It was agreed that we had adequate stafCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1865beto deal with this matter. Itallans would alsobe eligible under these categories, but ie Bhouadnot deal wi'th any who had been the subjeot or thegeneral interrment order for those between the agesof 1 -70. this left us with the 750 duals andsotne 2,000 pure Itallans who are memtbere of theFascio. It was agreed that everything possibleshoula be done to get the view acoepted that mein-bership of the ascio constituted surticient groundsfor keeping a man interned. With this obiect inOview Ourry is to prepare 8 memo for disoussionby the Home Defence Executive. TThis shoud strengththe position. Thore may be difficuty with the 7.O.who are inclined to think that membership of thoFascio is quite meanin less. It will also be neces-sary for the Ary to make up its mina whether itwants members of he asoio in the A. P.O.Theo Turer wote out certain recomendations madeby the Asqui.th Counittee, which was get up tosuggest further ca tegories of enemy allons who mightbe released. One of their recoruendations was thatall energy aliens in Cat.B should be given thebenefit of exe ption onder the 19 categories whichhad been applied to Cat. Since we lmnou that thereis no real di.stinctior between the ategories B. anC.6. it is in A way rather dieficut for 18 to oblect,It constitutes an adnis ion however tha't thoort inat tribusals were a 0o utely valvetens, inclassifying enemy aliens. The sort suggestion of11 was that the eneiny alions in Cat.0 who bad beensent to Canada or Anstralia shotad be given thesome opportunity or exeption under the 19 eategoristhose who had remained here and further that the ewho so deaired should be shipped back to thiscountry. No further deportations to the Dominiorsare to take place.Curry has unearthed an interesting case. A mancalledwho takes extensive photo raohe inCatalogue Reference:KVI4/186567Bond Street, has been reported by 1.35. as beinga doubtful customer. His record shows that he vasforerly a Czarist Intelligence Officer, that hemanaged to obtain his release in 1921, and went toBerlin. He came here after the Nazi revolution,and is running a very successful business. Onlooking up his H.O. papers Curry has found that he CEcame here on the recommendation of Valter BLOCHof BLOCH & AlDERSON and the Mercedes Co.Svrinton saw V.V. V.V. hes I cather offeredto help in any way that we may consider to bemost useful.-August 17thLakin has discovered that the Censorship areemploying A.E. NEV/TON, the crook solicitor whofeatured in the "Mr.A" ease.Auzust 18th110 aircraft have been brought dow today, out of600 aircraft which came over. The figures for theweel come to an average of 82 per day. Our ownbomber losses amount to 31. his figure isconsidered very low consiering the grourd coveredand the damage caused. We are working almostentirely at ni ht, and apparently with just asmuch if not more effect.August 19thAttended Bow Street where I gave evidence in theWOLKOR-Tler KELE ease. T merely hed to state thattwo of the letters found in the possession of TylerFETT addressed to the Ainerican Embassy were writtenby myself. One referred to the BEYLDEIS case andthe other to certain secret vireless operations.T said that both these letters would be aueful tothe enemy. McLure, was prosecuting. E was notCatalogue EReference:KVI4/18e565Roger has scen Legsett and Cifrine coda.v on thequestion of passes for T.U.C. leaders who wish to-Visit Government; Establishments: Rogerandbeggettook the view tha's Government blishnents shouldnot include Government Departments. If it doesthere vill. certainly be the strongest oppositionfrom all the Services. Citrine seemed to be rathe:pioued about these oasseS as he had showm his tothe porter at the Minis rv of Labour who had treatit. with contemt. He said that if it aidnot not gethim through next; time he would go suraightback-io back tothe T.T.A. and wait there Cor Bevan to come doymand apologise.Aurust 20thf- E have just seen the Night Duty messagess one. ofwhich ran as follows:LratecD.S.D.9. Aamiral'ty.rang UO to say that the PortlanSignal Office have caotured a carrier oigeonwitha piece of green paper waoed round one leg; onwhich. is witten the follovi.ng message:"Beach Hotel. The bamnaid's arawers are pimnk.Sutton on Sea from Rogues Roost Louth" 228There was no other means of identificationton thebird:The question of Citrine and T.U.C. passes has rathcome to a head. A thousand of these passes havealready been issued and 13 have been withheld atour request as they were for communists. Citrinewants to know whether if there is a row the Govt:will stand firm and refuse the issue? of these passto the 13: Otherwise the FT.U.C. will be made tolook more reactionary than the Govt. If -CitrineCatalogu ataloguanpefeenee.kvparratee he proposes to let the13 have their passes. It seems that the wholeTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDsL'\IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958question of the government attitude towards thecommunists is going to be raised on this smallmatter of T.U.C. passes to enter factories etc.Bescsitha returned from Lisbon with an up to datewireless set in a suitcase and E950. He metRANTZOW in Lisbon and his whole visit seems tohave been a thorough success. He gleaned a certainamount of information regarding local Germanactivities particularly those of DOBLER, who iothe head German agent there.I had lunch with Lord Swinton and went over withhim all the ground that V.V. and Charles hadcovered. I told him how his action had completelyupset the office and how an extremely difficultsituation had been created through William Charlesbeing pitchforked into this office with the rank.ofDeputy Director and a seatron the Executive.S. was careful to explain that He was not on thecommittee but only a member of his staff. Thisof course comes to the same thing, and as I toldputs/ him i/William Charles in a priveleged positionvis a vis Harker. This at any rate was the impre-ssion created at the office who regarded WilliamCharles as a spy put in here to see what tare alldoing in order that he can report to S. himself.I told S. that in my view William Charles h admade a very superficial criticism of the work Orthis office. about which he knew practicallynothing, and that he had got an entirely wrongidea as to what euare doing. He seemed to thinkthat this office was rather like a large detectiveoffice with fast cars, which in fact it was not.It was really an intelligence and research depart-ment throwing up occasional cases requiringinvestigation either by our own watchers or by thepolice. I was in some difficulty to know exactlywhat Chief Inspector Burt and his merry men weregoing to do. There were a certain number of casesCatalequf hferensaKhahtsgi Rferense But not a great many.578S. thought that W. organisation would give themplenty to do. I said that if W. threw up one goodcase in 6 months T should think they were doingvery well.T he interview was extremely friendly, andI think 1 told him everything I had in mymind without much reservation. He wasobviously quite aware that he had made amistake but he showed very little sign ofany intention of putting it right. Thematter has been more or less left to us tosort out. At the moment I do not see my wayclear, but quite definitely the presentstate of affairs cannot continue very long.The registry is still from the point of viewof results in a chaotic condition, andpeople are beginning to wonder whether it wiwill ever get right. The staff are at a verlow ebb. They feel rather like individualsmaking a bolt or a cog in a Ford factory,the only difference being that there are nocars coming out at the other end. They findthis particularly devastating as in the pastthey have been accustomed to making RollsRoyces.Morris, who is chairman of one of the Tribunals dealing with members of the B.U.F. hashad a talk with Toby Pilcher. It is quiteevident that he is not acting on thedirectives laid down and agreed to byBirkett, namely that as the Party had beenproseribed, active membership up to thetime of arrest should constitute sufficientgrounds for permanent detention. In 36cases detention is being continued. In 35we have agreed to release, and in a further31 the committee have recommended releasein spite of that fact that all those concern-Catalogue ed e'ReferenCe:KV4tise movement until the time511of their arrest. If something is not doneto prevent the H.0. releasing these peoplethe Govt. will find themselves in a verynasty hole, quite apart from the risks ofallowing a number of potential 5th column-ists to remain at large. We have just comeacross a group in Leeds consisting of mem-bers of the B.U.F. who are endeavouring toestablish communication with Germany.August 21stMassey, the Canadian High Commissioner,has told Lennox that he left the programmeof his tour round the 12th Corps on hisdressing-table at the Dorchester and thatit hac vanished. After giving endlessdetails about the loss, he later rang up tosay that he had found in in a place in whichhe had put it himself for safety and hadforgotten. Meanwhile the W.0. were wonderinwhether they should cancel the whole tour.A German named H.K. BRUINE who came over herein the guise of a refugee from Belgium andHolland, is a self-confessed German agent.He had been in possession of a wireless setwith which he had been communicating weatherreports and other information to theGermans. He had also been instructed togive them early intimation of the advanceof British troops into Belgium. This Igather he had done. He was working forRANTZOW. The question now arises whetherthis is a shooting case. There is no doubtwhat ever that BRUIN was a German agent andvery little doubt that he was operatingagainst us. He was certainly yoperatingagainst our allies.SEYMONICZYK has been followed, and had aCataegtereferehee:kr4i8sir Lido with a man571who was subsequently identified as NOLTE,a Dutchman. NOLTE has a considerableintelligence background. He is said to havebeen working for the French and has quiterecently offered his services to us. Inthe meantime things are obviously leakingthrough Ge. de Gaulle's office. Very secretoperations in contemplation involving thelanding of de Gaulle' forces at Dakkarwere only supposed to be known to De Gaulleand his Chief of Staff. Now they seem tobe known to almost everybody on the FrenchMission including LABARHHE. We shallhave to tell the D.M.I. that until thatorganisation is cleaned up they should notbe given any confidential information at allRothschild had an amusing interview withthe Beaver on the subject of LOEWY. Hedescribed the general scehe when he arrived.There were about a dozen people in B's roomall talking in groups. B. went out forabout an hour and left them all sittingthere. When he came back he was calledupon to go to Downing St. Rothschild wentwith him and started his business in thecar on the way. He waited 12 hours outside10 Downing St. in the car, and had a furthertalk with B. on his return. After thishe got 10 minutes private conversation.The dialogue went something like this:B. Well, Rothschild, you have come to see meabout the Loewy people, about those8 people.Iam surprised that somebody with your name,your liberal views, your position and repu-tation, should go in for this witch-hunting.Those poor Jews have been hunted out ofGermany, and now when they come here theyare hunted back into concentration camps.You should not be involved in this persecu-Catalogue Reference:V4a186not be in M.I.5 witch-513hunting. You should be leading your peopleout of the concentration camps.R. The members of the Loewy firm that Icame to see you about are not Jews. Theyare what is known as Aryan.B. They are Jews.R. They are not.B. They are Jews.R. They are not.B. I am not going to start an argument. NOWare you anything to do with that man Capt.or Group Capt.Archer?R. He is a colleague of mine.B. You know I fired him. I fired him becau-se he said a terrible thing to me, somethingthat would do this country a great deal ofharm with its traditions of harbouring poli-tical refugees. He said that if those poorJews were left out that the public would hangthem on every lamp post. Anybody who saysthat to me gets fired at once. You oughtnot bo be associated with those witchhunters.R. Do you think then that M.I.5's investi-gations into Nazi agents in industry are ofno value?B. No value at all. Even if these Loewypeople are agents, they can do no harm.R. Couldn't they sabotage plant?Catalogue Reference:KV/4/18674B. No. I watch them very carefully.R. Couldnit they convey information to theenemy about the geographical position ofyour extrusion presses, and about theMinistry of Aircraft Production's aircraftcapacity and production?B. I don't carerif they do know where thepresses are. It is not easy to bomb a presseven if your so-called agents were signallinto them. As regards our capacity, I hopethe Germans do know. I said what it was onthe transatlantic telephone at 9 o'clock thievening.R. So really you are quite happy abouthaving these people about. You rememberwhat happened in France and Holland.B. I was in France at the very last momentbefore the Govt. fell, and I cann tell youit was nothing to do with so-called 5thColumn activities. The French were a deca-dent and beaten race. That poor Jew Mandelwas the only one who had any spirit in him.I watched him trying to carry the wholecountry. You know I have not always beenpro-Semitic, but when a people get persecu-ted I go on to their side. I am the onlyliberal member of the Cabinet, and I amsticking up for them everywhere. You oughtto stick up for them too, instead of persecu-ting them. It is disgraceful.R. Well, if you are quite happy about havingdangerous people in your employ, I will saynothing more about it.B. (a little apprehensively), Well, what isyour case against them? I must have logic.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/186615and I must have my presses. If you take themen away I can't have my presses.R. Your own industrial adviser Sir CharlesCraven says it will make no difference ifthese people are taken away.B. How the bloody hell does he know? Whatis your case against them.R. In two cases we consider that thepeople are German agents, ar at any ratestrong Nazi sympathisers, and our source ofinformation has been some Czech intelligenceofficers who have known these people for aconsiderable time. It is no good your sayinthat Loewy has confidence in them. Loewyis quite unreliable. He told me that EugeneHILT, an Englishman who had been in hisemploy for some time, was perfectly reliablewhen the witch hunters knew perfectly wellthat he was actively conspiring with theGerman Embassy and the German Chamber ofCommerce to break Loewy. The thing I haveagainst the others is that they were membersof the German Labour Front.B. The German Labour Front is a Trade Union.R. It isnit. It is an espionage organ-isation.B. Everybody in Germany after 1934 had tobelong to the German Trade Union. Thereforeit means nothing.R. But these people became members of theGerman Labour Front not in Germany in orderto work, but in a free country.B. That poor Jew Loewy wants to go to CanadaCatalogue Referehce:R)94/186 me every day to letG76him take all his people over there.R. Well, I take it you are not going toagree to having these people removed.B. You produce your case. You have notproduced anything yet; and I will considerit. I do not want Nazi agents in the Minis-try of Aircraft Production.R. Thank you very much for letting me comeand see you.B. Good-night. You should not be in thatorganisation with the witch-hunters. Itought to be abolished. I do not think thereis any danger from Nazi spies in this count-ry. I do not think it matters if they areat large. 11I have got Bingham to start a press section.He will get it on its feet and try to finda suitable person to run it.Rothschild has seen E.H.Jones of theMachine Tool Co mpany which was taken overthe other day by the Ministry of Supply.Jones had got an injunction which had necess-itated the re-drafting of 55(4) of the D.R.Jones admitted that 75% of his business hadbeen done with Germany, and that his firm hadrepresented 10 German machine tool firms.He himself had been a member of the Anglo-German Chamber of Commerce and had knownMarkau. He volunteered the information thaton one occasion he had been summoned to Berlibecause one of his employees,y Jew, had madedisparaging remarks about Hitler. When hearrived he was told by the German MachineTool Association that he would have to getrid of this employee. He got out of it byCatalogue Reference:KV/4/186511saying that even if he had got rid of himhe could not stop him saying things aboutHitler. The case is interesting as showingthe degree of German interference which hasnot previously come to light. Jones saidthat he wes still getting machine toolsfrom Switzerland which probably means thatthey are coming from a German controlledfirm if not actually from Germany. Theyreach this country via French unoccupiedterritory, Spain and Portugal.I lunched with General Kell. He was verydisturbed about the whole situation in theoffice, particularly by the publicity givento the appointment of Chief Inspector Burt.He thought the whole thing was disastrous.What worried him still more was the factthat this office was being run from theoutside and was rapidly becoming political.He thought it would have very serious reper-cussions after the war, if not before. Heis quite ready to take up the cudgels onour behalf if we thought it could be of anyuse. I said that at the moment I thoughtit would be better to see how things developWe were committed to taking on Crockeralthough at the moment I could not see whathe was going to do which was consistentwith his rank.August 22ndI lunched with V.V. and Cowgill. I toldthem that I had arranged with Wood,Dickand Sinclair to prepare a chart showingexactly where alien populations were situa-ted and what steps had been taken to pene-trade. We were dealing with 4 categories,service personnel, seamen, fishermen andrefugees. It was agreed that Woods personelCatalogueReferencekld4llsexten be made use of579and that we could probably appoint someonein each community who would serve our dualpurpose. He would keep us informed of whatwas going on and he would point out toS.I.S. likely agents. It has been suggestedthat a small committee should be set up atthe Centre consisting of Leggett,Wall andRoger, in order to discuss various communistproblems. There seems no harm in this, butWall is rather inclined to gop too far.He wants us to put people into the factoriesThis is obviously going to lead to trouble.He also wants us to collaborate with theT.U.C. This I th nk 1S also dangerousboth for ourselves and the T.U.C.Leonard Ingrams told me today that he hadvery eefinite evidence that the police inGermany are committing suicide at the rateof about one a day. He asked whether any-thing of the kind was happening over here andwhether I could give any special reason.I could ant think of anything except that apoliceman's lot is not a happy one.I dined with David Boyle. He has now moreor less completed his organisation in theprovinces. Incidentally he has I thinksolved the mystery of the message about thebarmaid's drawers The pigeon was probablyone of his as he has communication nothonlyby wireless but by pigeon to a loft at Willesden. All his pigeons have a green band.August 23rdA new wireless station has been started call-ed the Christian Peace Movement Station.It begins its broadcast with a hymn.There was an air raid last night. It is theCatalogue first time Reference: Reference:kV/47186 I nce:X:v/49186 have the guns.579August 24thRaids at 8.30 and 2.30.Frost is very much on the war path abouthis organisation. He has had a row withCrocker after which he went to see Swinton.He made it clear that his organisation ispart of B.Branch and that he will put out toCrocker any enquiries that he wishes donebut he must be the judge as to what particular lines, how, and when they shouldbe carried out. Swinton apparently agreeswith Frost.A scare has been raised about the Dutch AirLines.K.L.M. were operating between this coun-try and Lisbon and a service is also to berun between Berlin and Lisbon. This meansthat the K.L.M. pilots from this countrywill be meeting their compatriots from BerlinA service of this kind of course mightoperate both ways, but on the whole I thinkit is rather risky from our point of view.August 25thAn Italian engineer named RISSONE, bornLondon 1915 is exempt from internment un-der the 19 categories because he haslived here for more than 20 years. Hemade a declaration of alienage in December1939 and left the U.K. for Italy in Feb.1940on holiday. He returned on June 4th toseek employment. We are recommending thathe should be interned.According to a code message the Germans arevery anxious to find out the strength of ourforces in N.Ireland.Catalogue Referene KV/4/186r580 5August 26thI lunched today with John Booth. He gaveme an interesting account of his experiencesin Belgium. He said that on the whole therewere not many really bad moments. The firstdive bombing attack shook him slightly,buthe very soon got used to it and SO did hismen. He really disliked being shelled morethan being bombed. He thinks the men behav-ed absolutely marvellously and that now theyhave returned here they are absolutelyitching to get at the Germans. They arevolunteering right and left for the variousexpeditions or raiding parties which are onthe tapis at the moment.Roger Hollis has been all through the docu-ments of the Executive Committee of theC.P.G.B. which were in Eric GODFREY'Spossession, and made a comparison betweenMoscow's short thesis on the war situationand utterances made by Moscow as related byJ.Lovestone to the Dies Committee. Moscow'sinstructions are that the imperialist warmust be gradually converted into civil war,that no steps should be taken to oppose aGerman landing in this country since a shortperiod under a Nazi regime would be thequickest way of bringing about a Communistrevolution. J.Lovestone said that Moscowwas working on similar lines in the past inGermany since they held the view th t it wasmuch easier to bring about a revolution aftera Fascist regime than after a Social-Democra-tic one.August 27thyI met Duthie in the passage. He asked me howthings were going. I told him none too well,Catalogue that Referehce.K4lson what Crocker's581position here was and resenting his inter-ference.On the 25th August Rustu Aras told theEgyptians that he had heard from Ankara thatif Greece were attacked, Turkey in conjune-tion with t.Britain would assist her. KingFarouk had been so informed by the TurkishPresident.SNOW is in daily communication with theGermans, and arrangements are being made toland an agent by parachute. A suitable spotis being found, the location of which willbe communicated to the Germans. The greatdifficulty is to get the man down alive andto prevent the L.D.V. from getting at him.The German proposal is that a house shouldbe taken in an out of the way spot where thiman and other agents could be accommodated.A cynical American youth, writing from NewYork, ays:"America is the only countrywhich has passed From barbarism to decadencewithout the intervening stage of civilisa-tion".August 28thHad lunch with Duthie. From our conver-sation on the previous day he had evidentlygathe ed that all was not well a d he wasevidently anxious to effect any adjustmentsthat were possible. I started the conversation by saying th t I was going to be blis-teringly frank. I told him how we had dis-cussed before the war the po sbility ofmaking use of Crocker's servies, how we hadcome to the conclusion that there was no jobbig enough for him inside the office, butthat he might be useful outside, how I hadCatalogue Reference:KVI4/186582later suggested that he should come intothe organisation and make recommendations,although I had warned him that many thingswhich would seem logical to him would notin practice be possible, and lastly howhe had come on to the Executive, criticisedthis O fice on half-baked information andwithout consulting those who were really inauthority, and then got himself pitch-forkedin as a Deputy Director. I explained thathe had not helped matters by his rather tact-less behatour and that it was a difficult ifnot impossible task to see how he could befitted into the scheme of the office. Iexplained that the e were many quite eminentpeople here who we e content to do minorjobs, but he was obvi usly a type who wasSO filled with a sense of his own importancethat he would never be content to work herein a minor capacity. Duthie said that Swinto1had realised this and the only thing for usto do was to swallow the indigestible morselor bring it up. He himself rather doubtedwhether things would work with Crocker in theoffice. He told me that Swinton had nowwritten to Harker instructing him to holda meeting which would consist of himself,Crocker, Horrocks, Frost and myself and thatCrocker's functions were to be regidlydefined. I told Duthie that I was quiteprepared for him to remain and do whateverwork that could be thrown up to C.I.Burt butthat I did not propose to mess the branchabout in order to find him a job. Duthietold me that he was sup osed to be lookingafter Latchmere. I said that this was thefirst I had heard of it.I attended Lord Snell's committee thismorning. It had been set up to go into thequestion of the Arandora Star. There onlyCatalogue Reference:KVI4/186543appeared to be one other member of thecommittee, whose name I did not catch.Iwas asked to state the part played by M.I.5in the preparation of the lists. I explainethat we had compiled a list based mainlyon membership of the Fascio before the warbut that there were half a dozen to a dozenother people who were suspected of espionageThese people had been interned immediatelyon the outbreak of war and were put intoCat.A. We had recommended the generalpolicy of clearing the ground in thiscountry of enemy aliens because we thoughtthat as this country was in a state of seigethey might create dangerous focal pointsand would be a source of embarrassmentboth to the military and police. There wasfurther the question of vetting them. We ha(however agreed in the case of the Italians tlthat large proportions of them should besent back to Italy innorder that they mightbecome focal points of discontent there.We had made a reservation in the case of theyoung Italian Fascists since they might havebeen sent back here as parachutists or asattacking forces with specialised knowledge.This policy had been abandoned owing todifficulties connected with shipping.The fact that our Cat.A. enemy aliens hadbeen placed on board the Arandora Star Wawpart of the general scheme of evacuationof all enemy aliens and it was natural thatthe cat.A people should have been taken firstLord Snellother wanted to know somethingabout the membership of the Fascist Party.He thought that although some of them mightbe prepared to commit some overt act hethought that a certain numberyof them mightquence have been be harmless. forced to join Was and there might any difference in conse-he asked between membership of the FascistCatatogue REference.Kv4pse REferece the British Club inpy a British subject. Isaidyesindeed584there was a very fundamental difference. Inone case we were dealing with a totalitarianstate fighting a total war and in the otherwe were dealing with a single individualwith no organisation behind him. I thentried to explain the organisation of theFascist Party abroad. He seemed quiteinterested and thanked me profusely forhaving given evidence before the committee.I am convinced however that he understoodvery little of what I said or of its impli-cations. He lives in an entirely differentworld.I hed endless discussions about our proposedmeeting on reorganisation. Jane thoughtthat we ought to say that Crocker has blottehis copy-book to such an extent that theoffice cannot hold him. Pilcher and Harkerthought this would be bad tactics, andthat we must hold a meeting to see how farhis services could be made use of. Probablythis is the right course although I cannotsee myself how it is going to work.August 30thWe had a meeting today with V.V.,Crocker,Hor-rocks D.S.S. and myself. The purpose was todiscuss the organisation and Crocker'sposition in the office. V.V. explained thatthe position created by Crocker's presencehere as a Deputy Director with a seat on theCentre was really an impossible one. It hadbeen laid down that he was to be in chargeof investigation. This he could only dosubjeet to direction from B.Branch, sinceall the cases arose out of aybackground ofresearch and intelligence and had thereforeto be controlled by the various -sections ofCatalogue Referencetkvi4/i8e that anybody with555the rank of Deputy Director should beinvestigating and giving orders to officersserving in another branch. This only ledto lack of confidence in the head of theoffice and in the branch leaders. If on theother hand Crocker was subordinate to B.both as regards investigating certain organ-isational problems and enquiries made throughBurt and his fellow police officers, thesituation would be entirely different.It was pointed out #has- to Crockerthat he had in his actions upset quitea number of people in this office already.He regretted this but felt that if he hadactually offended somebody he should havebeen told about it. He retired at the con-clusion of the meeting and left us to delib-erate and put forward what we felt mightusefully be his functions. He said that hewas quite ready to resign if he was in anyway an embarrassment to D.S.S. or myself.We both said that we felt he had certainvery useful qualifications which would beof great benefit to the office. The onlydifficulty was to work out how this couldbest be applied. "e discussed the positionafter the meeting and were all agreed thathad Crocker come in under better auspicesand been more tactful in handling thevarious people in the branch, he couldhave been very useful. Some doubt! wasexpressed as to whether he could achievevery much in the present circumstances,but in the end we decided to suggest thathe should work under me both as regardsorganisation and investigation.I met Butler after the meeting. He toldme that Crocker was unlikely to stay anddid not feel that he had had a fair deal.Butler entirely agreed with our point ofCatalogue Beferensepky14/186 regrets that through5%6ganeral mismanagement we had lost theservices of somebody of very useful quali-fications. V.V. really carried the wholemeeting and expressed his views kindlybut forcibly. It was arranged that weshould show our recommendations to Crockerand submit them to Lord Swinton on Monday.Roger had a meeting with Wall about Com-munists. Wall is extremely anxious toprecipitate some sort of action but bothLeggett and Roger think this would be mostill-advised in present circumstances. Theydo think however that when action is takenunder the D.R.S some steps should be takento make the position clear to the man'sfellow-workers. At present there is only avery one-sided propage nda in the DailyWorker which tends to make out that the manhas been victimised for his communist views.There have been some melodramatic develop-ments in the case of the B.U.F. at Leeds.There is now a definite conspiracy to obtainmilitary information through a young girl whis friendly with an officer and to pass thiinformation to the Germans. There is alsoa scheme to obtain arms and explosives.August 31stCecil returned from N.Ireland. The wholeposition from the security angle has beentightened up and satisfactory arrangementsmade with the military and police.A new regulation has been published permit-ting the shotting of peregrine falcons, asthey apparently prey on homing pigeons cominin from the continent.Calalegue RefereintekVf4/186 days leave.547September 6thReturned mieday to find that in my absence4 Dutchmen had landed in a boat from Dun-geness on the 3rd Sept. Their names wereVan Den KIEBOMM, MEIER, PONS and WALBERG.They had been instructed to report onBritish defensive measures on the coastnear Dungeness and on army reserve forma-tions in depth from Dungeness to Ashfordand thence to London. They said thatthere was a concentration of mounted troopsequipped with mules at Le Touguet. Thisinformation was confirmed to some extentby S.I.S. sources They had been toldthat an invasion would take place before themiddle of September. In the meantime theywere to report anything they could withthe small transmitting sets in theirpossession. They were to work in pairs.Each pair had E60 in English money andfood for 7 days. They were given no con-tacts in this country. In fact they weresingularly badly directed and to anybodywith any knowledge of conditions in thiscountry it should have been apparent thatnone ofthese people could hope to succeed.All of them had been misled about conditionsin this country, probably as an inducemeto them to come over.Sir Percy Lorraine's committee for dealingwith Italians who wish to appear is showingsigns of being as useless as the BirkettCommittee. Sir Percy had seen Lord Swintonand D.S.S. and had been handed a copy of avery concise memo on the Italian Fascistorganisation. Conditions of ymembership ofthis organisation were very clearly definedand to any ordinary person would seem to besufficiently serious to warrant the contin-Catalogue ued internment Reference: member of the Party.589A particularly bad case has just beenbrought to light where the committee haveeconmended the release of Sergio ESPOSTI.This man on his own admission acted astreasurer to the Party and was a member ofit. He did not think tha he had actuallytaken the oath but he knew about it and itsterms. He pleaded that membes in Scotlanddid not generally take the oath. AS regardshis member- treasurership he said that hehad been called in to reorganise the finan-ces of the Casa d'Italia, but that apartfrom that he had taken no part in politics.is-wife was about to have a baby and thecommittee recommended his release.I found on return that Crocker-resignedI gatar that he was not prepared to acceptthe position which we had to find for him bbut that he had had a rOW with Swinton asthe result of which he had retired not onlyfrom.. this office but from the Centre as wellPersonally I am very sorry in a great many.ways. that this has happened, as I am surethat he could have done veryuseful workhere. The real mistake .is that he waspitch-forked into this office on half-bakedinformation as to the situation. ForthisI am afraid he was to some .extent to blame.Curry and Dick dined with me and we had along discussion about the organisation ofB.Branch. We made a little headway-bu novery much. We were all impressed by theextreme difficulty in finding a satisfactorsolution. There are unfortunately too too-mar manypeople who either won't or can't co-operateThey therefore have to be subjected tospecial treatment. It is extremely difficuto fit them into any sort of heirachy.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/186THIS ISA COPL549ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSSeupstemberl th 58.2c00A parachutist descended during the nightfrom a height of 15,000 ft. He had beenstunned by his wireless set and was foundlying in a ditch at Denton,Northants at17.30 hours yesterday. He was dressed asa-civilian and was intpossession of aGerman automatic and a wireless set whcould transmit and receive. It was ofsimilar pattern to that now in possessionof Snow. The man's name isSommeR,He- is a Swede: of German origin. He had bee:dropped by a Heinkel plane and had embarkedat Brussels. He had intended to land atBirmingham and thought that on landing hewas somewhere near Stratford-on-Avon. Ittranspired that he had been in England aslate as December 1939 when he ad-stayedwith friends at Boughton. He was in poss-ession of his National Registration Certi-ficate. He had been trained at Hamburg.Hinchley Cooke took down a st tement from hihim at Cannon - Row and he was then sent onto Latchmere.Rothschild spoke to me about the sabotagesection. He felt that the present stafwas inadequate and it was essential, to 6tsomeone with a knowledge of marine engineer-ing. He also wanted the service of oneof_Burtis men for-investigation purposes:He did not think that as Sir Francis Griffithad mumps and asliable to sickness duringthe winter months that he would be of muchvalue to thesection. Noroiaetr he a veryhigh opinion of Edwards! work. I have spokerto Curry about this. He agrees.about-Grif.fith but thinks that Edwards has done usefulwork although he may not be of a very energe-CataloigueReferencevkVsils6r eel however that590Rothschild is the moving spirit of theorganisation and that there would only befriction as long as Griffithis and Edwardsremained in B.18.. Since RIS services areof the greatest value I am very anxiousthat he should organise the section in hisown way. I am quite sure he would make uafirst-rate job of it.Quite a number of reports have been coming>in from S.I.S. regarding the imminence ofinvasion. S.I.S. are in touch with twopeople in Portugal who have been approachedby the Germuns and it has been suggestedthat they should be allowed to come hereand that we should test them out.September 8thCarrigan has been on a very-secret visit toDev. He wus asked to find out what Dev!sterms would be for the abandonment of hisneutrality. I gather that Dev. is quiteintrigued and is thinking things over.This move isinspired from the highestquarter here.The Germans have been flying in here on adirectional wireless beam. I It is claimedthat we have succeeded in bending this beamwith the result that the Germans instead ofdropping their bombs on important industrialtowns in the Midlands, have dropped 500in the open fields.I have got out the directies about theinterrogation of prisoners, particularlythose who land in small boats or by air.If they have wireless apparatus they are toCatafogtereferenee:Rvr4asbirs nstance by W.THISISACOP COPYORIGINAL DOCOMENT RETAINEDbIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4 OF THE PUBLIC REGOBDSOtherwise they will first be interrogatedby someone delegated by Dick. The handlingof the case in SO far as the D.P.P. isconcerned will be done by Cookie. Ourobject will be to get the prisoner to Latcl-mere House at the earliest possible momentand to give facilities to the military toextract from them anything in the natureof urgent operational intelligence.Wood tells me that he is endeavouring t.obtain the release of the Belgian womanwho has been at Holloway for some monthsowing to an unfortunate mistake. Shearrived here in May, when the general rushof refugees began, and described herselfas a journaliere". The immigration authorities, thinking this meant journalisticame to the conclusion that her generalappearance did not quite justify thedescriptionof her occupation. They there-fore ordered her internment. The policeauthorities at Holloway, not being quiteclear as to the reason for her internment,rang up the Belgian Embassy to enquireabout the lady and her profession ofI1 journaliere". On being told that the wordmeant "daily worker", they banged down ttelephone and decided that she shouldremain in internment for an indefiniteperiod.According to Group 1 the Germans areworriedabout the 4 men in a boat and alsoSJMMERand his friend TATEwhoseidentity has now been disclosed, on condi-tion-that TAE life will be sparedif and when he arrives in this country.This is interesting confirmation that these6 spies, who have been thrown into thisCatafogue RefePertce:kv/4y86efficient RYferertce manner, areTHIS IS A COPYIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION5923 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.2000apparently part of a serious German organ-isation. SUMMER is not apparently interested in his own life but merely that of hisfriend. He himself is quite prepared to beshot as a spy. He is apparently a studentof philosophy. Owing to his German parent-age and his admiration of the German regimehe joined the German Army. He was howeverreluctant to become a spy, but having takenthe job was prepared to see it through anddetermined not to give away his friends.Frost and Knight seem to have sueceeded inpersuading him that theGermans had given hia very raw deal and had sent him over hereill-equipped and under somewhat false preteces. He came round eventually to this viewand agreed to work his wireless set, whichhe had up to then refused to do.I saw Kenneth Strong from M.I. thiseveningHe had just had an interview with the prisoers. What puzzled him was tha the Germans,should have given their agents details oftheir plan of attack. The details they hadgiven more or less agreed with what we hadreceived from other sources and from aerialreconnaissance etc. of the dispositions ofenemy forces. This made itdifficult to be-lieve that the spies had been sent over hereto mislead us. Strong has a-great regardfor German efificiency and cannot bring him-self to believe that they could have been Sostupid, as to send these men over here with-out having schooled the properly and worked Cout plans by which they could be really effetive.September 9thWe had a heavy raid last night and a raid atCatalogheReference:KV\4/186 sending SJNNER downto Bucks Where he is going to get intoTHIS IS A COPY:ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTCsas3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDEACT 1958206.0communication with the other side.Had a talk today with Egerton-Johnston.He said that he did not feel that he wasfulfilling any very useful purpose inBurt's section. He thought it was muchbetter that the sections should prepareany cases on which they wanted Burt to actand that it was useless for him to be akind of 5th wheel in the coach. He fouit difficult to summarise the file and gw.einstructions to the police without knowingall about the work. In any case he thoughtthat the police would know more about thematter than he did as they at least hadpolice experience whereas he had neitherpolice nor intelligence experience.We are getting Ciakue fixed up in Man-chester where is to be ready to receiveanother agent with a wireless set. We havealso got a place waiting in Wales for 3 moreagents who are due to arrive.A man called Gordon EVANS. reported at theRecruiting Station at t.Scotland Yard thathe had arrived here-in- a rubber boat from anaeroplane which had taken 3 hours to come froCalais, to Dover. He had then gone up tLondon hanging from underneath a train.His story was that the Germans were going toattack at midnight on Tuesday. He was SOincoherent that the doctor was called. Hecould not find anything wrong but by hypnot-ism he ascertained that theman had been inan accident and had been in hospital for sometime. It also transpired that a bomb hadfallen fairly close to him since he came outof hospital. The facts about the hospitalwere checked and found to be correct. Obvious-CatalogelemReferencete1e86504September l0thThere have been more day and night raids.A meeting has been held with the M.I.bodiscuss policy in regard to communicationssent to the enemy through our various agentsAre we to encourage them to invade or are weto try and stall proceedings? D.M.I. wasrather in favour of encouraging them to comeover but on referring the matter to theChiefs of Staff it was decided to let themhave the truth about the strength of ourdefences. The question of getting thenecessary information to transmit was alsodiscussed. This was to be done through M.I.9 except in the case of theAir Ministrywhere Archie Boyle will continue to let ushave information for Snow. Cowgill is notvery satisfied with the plan to obtaininformation through M.I.9. His whole exper-ience is that we ought to go very high.The heads of the intelligence are too impor-tant to give us the chicken-feed and notimportant enough to give us the reallyvital stuff. Whenever you asked somethingof the kind you are always told to referthe matter to someone else, when the esultis generally unsatisfactory and the delayconsiderable. Personally I think Cowgill isquite right but I am afraid i we are com-mitted to the M.I.9 scheme until it breaksdown, which it undoubtedly/will.Rothschild has recovered his Home Farm atTring,which he gaves to the office for theuse of those who wanta night' sleep. Thisis getting more and more necessary.It has been suggested that Harker shouldCatalogue SReferencetRVf4fs86him informed on the5asquestions affecting the general policy ofthe office. I told him that I felt therewere dangers about an organisation of thiskin being placed between himself and me, andbetween himself and Curry and Dick. It wouldmean that he would be asking entirely inex-perienced people to extract informationeither from myself, Dick or Curry and thatwhen we gave the reply it would probably bemisunderstood and he would receive a agarbled verson which would only bemisleading.September l1thI discussed with Jasper the question of aPress Section. He seemed doubtful aboutits value. Personally I cannot understandhow an organisation like this can beexpected to do without an efficient PressSection. What we really want is someone withan intimate knowledge of the work of theoffice here who can go through the pressintelligently and cover all its wider aspectsAt the moment we do not study the Irish pressnor do we take in any reviews or periodicals.The work needs a highly qualified and intell-igent officer who will make it his businessto keep in constant touch with the requirments of all sections.Archer has written to us that he has unearth-ed the wireless set we told him about. Sometime ago he had been interested in a Germannamed PREETZ who had left thecountry. PREETZhad subsequently returned under the name ofMITCHELL and was associating with a man call-ed DONOGHUE. This is the Donoghue who we werlooking for as the result of a group 1 mess-age. Both PREETZ and DONOGHUE have now beenarrested and a wireless set has been foundCatalogue Reference:KVI4/186506in their possession. We have asked for thefullest possible details.Cecil has put forward a scheme by which an IIrish Mission should be attached to ourforces if we are called in to assist theEire Govt. in the event of an invasion.He feels that it is extremely important thatthe military should not attempt to dealwith any 5th columnists in Eire exceptthrough the Eire mission. If it is necess-ary to arrest anybody he should immediatelybe handed over to the mission for necessaryaction. This is I think an extremely impor-tant and urgent matter. A memo has been pre-pared for D?M.I. on the subject. There isalso a suggestion that suitable liaisonofficers with the British forces should beappointed for the purpose of maintainingco tact with theEire missions.The Sabotage Section here is to be reconsti-tuted. Rothschild is taking it over, andis bringing in a marine engineer and one oth-er. Edwards is going to help W. and Griffitlmay not return.Maurice Burton, describing himself as amember of a political inteligence dept. ofthe F.0. (this is really the organisationworking under Jebb and Dalton OfM.E.W.)called today to say that he was dealing withBelgium and would be glad of any informationabout that country that we could give him.He was interested in spreading straight andsubversive propaganda and sabotage. Hisexecutive dept. would be M.I.. There wereother sections in his organisation dealingwith other countries, such as Holland,Czechoslovakia, Poland etc. He said thatCatalogue probably Reference:KVI4/186 these about would the countries also be asking with5u7which they were concerned. I toldhim that iit was not our primary function to obtaininformation from abroad, but that we didfrom time to time get something of the bye-product. This information would probablycome from our port officers. If we gotanything of interest we would let him haveit. I have since arranged with Adam thathe should pass his information throughB.26 The officers of B.26 have now beenpooled between ourselves and S.I.S. S.I.4.will be using them to discover useful agentsin the various alien communities while weshall be using them to ehlp us to ascertainthe political reliability of the variousgroups of soldiers, seamen,fishermen andrefugees.We have received a group 1 message that atroop-carrying convoy has safely reachedOstend and that further orders will beissued when the convoy leaves for the attackon England.September 12thA woman called Mrs. O1GRADY has been residingin the I.0.W. She was walking along thebeach with her dog in thedefence area andwas challenged by the military. She offeredto bribe them as they she didnot wish toget into trouble with the police. The matterwas reported and a summons issued under D.R.She did not turn up on the appointed day anda warrant was issued for her arrest. Mean-while there have been a certain amount ofmalicious cutting of telephone wires concern-ing which the police were making enquiries.Mrs. O'GRADY was eventually traced and foundto be residing eh a boarding house under thename of ARLAND. Among ber property wereCataloguedBeferenge:kyi4/186 the I.O.W. showingall the various gun emplacements and defenceTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION5983 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.200oworks. She aamitted that the drawings werehers but refused to disclose the identity ofthe person for whom she was workingSUMMERhaS succeeded in getting through tothe Germans and has receied a reply. Heexplains that he had been experiencingconsiderable difficulties.The Asquith Committee have proposed thatall enemy aliens interned whose servicesare required for industry and who mightusefully be drafted into the rearmamentindustry shouldhave their particulars taken.They would have to be interviewed by aMinistry of Labour representative who woulddecide whether their alleged qualificationswere bona fide. Then provided M.I.5 hadnothing against them they should take theirplace in the queue at thelabour exchange.This is somewhat staggering seeing theamount of work that has been put in here tokeep our armament industry clean of enemyaliens. I have said that we should replywith a flat and uncompromising "Nof. Thewhole question of internment of undesirablehashow reached a stage which is quite with-out precedent. In addition to The wonderfusuggestion of the Asquith Cttee. referred tabove, we have Sir Francis Lindley's commitwhich is engaged on the release of so-callefriendly aliens. (As regards resident Dutchmwe cannot even recommend their internmentwithout previous reference to the Queen'spolice). There is Sir Percy Lorraine!committee which refuses to accept the factof active membership of the Italian Fascioas grounds for internment. There is Birketcommittee, and two others, dealing withmembers of the B.U.F., who have recommendedthe release of 21 Party members 'who admittebefore tae committee that they were allCataloguee RefereneekV14/186 ty work at the timeof their arrest. And lastly there is Sir5aaCecil Hurstis committee e.ngaged in releasi gprominent anti-Nazis or anti--Fascists.Apparently anybody who has written againstconsidered the Nazi Party eligible or Fascist for releuse. regime is Since to bethese people merge right into the Left Wingwhere things are just as likely to be goingon. It is rather difficult to accept thefact that if a man has written against eithe]of these regimes he is necessarily all rightThere are moreover plenty of people who havewritten against the Nazi regime but who3thoroughly German at heart e.g. HermannRAUSCHNIGG.H.O. have decided that enemy aliens whoobtained a quota visa for America are to bereleased to.pack up their things and willremain at large until their boat sails.This does not seem to be a very brightsuggestion when an invasion is thought to beimminent. I gather that some 150 to 200 areinvolved.A.A. guns were firing hard last night inLondon for the first time. There were nosearch lights. Two energy planes were broughdown during the nigh and 89 yesterday.September 13thThere was a daylight raid on Buck House.Two bombs were dropped and the chapel des-troyed.D.M.I. has written to us suggesting that asall this parachutists country is now etc. in should the zone be of sent the to armies oneof the P/W Camps to be dealt with by themilitary. We would be given facilities tointerrogate afterwards. This does not reallymake sense as we have already offered to giveCatafoglierelerence.kvamsities ties at Latchmere.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSaoACT 1958.2000I have asked V.V. to arrange that we shouldreceive in future copies of Group 10 mess-ages which come from U.S.A. These are veryimportant if we are to have a completepicture of the Rantzow organisation.ThePoles,Czechs and Hungarians all appear tobe transmitting by wireless without anysupervision. I am not SO worried about theCzechs but I think the Poles should certairly be supervised. I have asked R.S.S. totake down the Hungarian messages and ifthey cannot be decyphered I propose to askfor the removal of the Military Attache, whis transmitting the special cypher unknownto his minister. He is moreover notoriouslpro-German.September 14thA warning has been sent to C.C.s aboutKUHIRT and Peter SCHBODER who may havelanded here. We are still on the lookoutfor SUMmeRfriend, TATE@ LEONHARWe know his wave-length, which has not comeup and there is also a rendez-vous betweenhim and SUMEROn the 20th.V.V. says that he is moving a section ofhis show backto some place in the vicinityof t.Albans. His forward oifice will bereduced to a mini um and will eat, sleep anwork underground.From their best sources S.I.S. learn thatorders were issued last night for a 24-hourblitzkrieg on London. The order was sub-sequently postponed apparently owing toadverse weather conditions.Had a long talk with D.S.S. about the staff.He does not think it right to issue anyCatalogueReferencetkMi4ites cdvice and assis-THIS IS A COPY(0)INDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.2600tance should be given To those wishing foraccommodatior in the country. He feelsthat this might lead to panic and subse-quent criticism. Personally I do not agree.I think it is very definitely up to us tolook after the staff regardless of whatanybody thinks.Gen.Staff G.H.Q. are fussing about enemyagents who land here from the air or byboat. They do not think that they aregetting early access to information ofmilitary importance. We have arranged tohave them present at Latchmere and givenfacilities to interrogate anyone ofinterest.September15tLast night SOMMeksent a message tellinghis employers that he was in the vicinityof Oxford but had met with considerabledifficulties. This morning Snow receiveda request from the other side to go to theassistance of a Swedish friend who was inthe fields near Oxford. He has agreed todo this and has suggested High Wycombe State-ion as the rendez-vous.D.IV.I. rang up in the evening. He wasworried about these wireless messageswhich he did not understand. He told methey referred to a meeting which was to takeplace at 11 o'clock on Monday. I showedhim that the meeting would be covered. Heseemed satisfied. In actual fact we aresending down B.6. (a). to see that Summerdoes not escape and (b) to ascertain whetherthe Germans send anybody to observe whattakes place.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/186THSIS.A.COPY THISIS COPYIN DEPABTMEN UNDER SECTION023(4 THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.20a0I dined at the Hyde Park Hotel, where thewaiter announced that we had brought down165 planes up to 8 p.m. The night wasfairly noisy. One bomb gave us a mildshock. Cecil spent the nii ght at Hackneyand toured the East End with Arthur VillieThe damage has been considerable. He-wasvery impressed by the Anderson shelters.One was right on the edge of a huge crater30 yds wide and 40-50 ft.deep. An oldlady had been sleeping in the shelter andgot off with a broken leg.September l6thI have arranged thatwe shall in future fora small committee to deal with Snow anddouole-crossagents. It will consist. ofFrost, Dick, Curry, T.A.R,Cowgillandmyself. of S.I.S. has put in anexcellent report of his examination of theprisoners. He seems to have come to pre-cisely the same conclusions as Dick but headds a certain amount on the lay-out of thwireless stations etc. It has been decideto amalgamate the two reports.The latest figures show that 185 Germanplanes were brought down yesterday. TheAir Ministry believe that 72 others werealmost certainly destroyed and a further35 severely damaged. We had air raids allday and work has been much dislocated.Three French cruisers and three destroyershave apparently passed through the Straitsof Gibraltar unmolested. I# seems that theare on their way to Dakar, and I understancthat De Gaulle and his party are now on theway back to this country. The whole situa-Catalogue RefeFEre.K4/186 and it looks verymuch as if there has been a muddle somewherTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONw,p?3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.ne200There have been various developmrents in theMercedes case. Both Alfred and Walter BLOCHseem interesting, particularly the latter.They look more and more like 4th Dept. agentsOne G.W. AUSTIN has entered the case. Heis principal scientific officer at theRoyal Naval Torpedo Factory and it is sug-gested that he has Russian sympathies. Herecently stated to Bloch &c Anderson that acertain Russian, manager of Langley Alloand thus connected with High Duty Alloyswould be of interest to them both on businessand personal grounds. Further an Anglo-Russian family of PICKERSGILL, who arehighly suspect, have come into the picture.There is yet another strange incident, whenU. 35 called on HARLIP at an unexpected hour.A mysterious stranger came in, much to theembarrassment Of HARLIP and his -wife. U.35had a very definite impression that this manwas a German agent.Mrs. OIGRADY is now at Holloway.The meeting between BIscUiT and SUMHER tookplace. There was no one else there. TheGermans have expressed their warm thanks toSnow for his services.I had a meeting with Dick andTheyare both quite convinced on the evidence thatthe Germans did not attempt to build up anyservice in this country until after theoccupation of Holland and Belgium and thatthis accounts for te very uninspired and slip.shod performance which si going on now.The J.I.C. continue to report concentrationsof barges in the Channel Ports. They see noCatalogue reason Reference to ted evious at any view moment. that an6o4Two of our battleships were moved downfrom Scapa to Rosyth a few days ago.Bombs fell during the night in Bond Streetand Berkeley Sa. One of them hit the ent-rance to the Air Ministry and M.E.W.I had a long talk with Burt about hisposition here. I told him that there werea number of points which I wanted to clearup. He asked me how it was that he gothere as he was surprised to find that Iwas not clear about his position. Inex-plained to him that it was entirely at thesuggestion ofCrocker, who I thought hadmade rather a big miscalculation about theworkings of this department. Burt agreedthat the whole nature of our work waspeculiar and differed in many respects fromordinary police work. He quite realisedther may be many things which his peoplecould not do and that police enquiries mustbe controlled by intelligenceofficers.We both agreed that there were many waysin which he could give us most valuableassistance, provided this could be donewithout upsetting S.B. and the provincialpolice. He thought that he could short-cir-cuit quite a lot of work by having directaccess to C.I.D. and their records. He hadalready established a position by which hecould bring C.I.D. files here. He couldnot however do thisin the case of S.B.Norman Kendal apparently is quite satis-fied with this procedure but does not wantthe files to leave Burt's position. I thenraised the question of his warrant. Itseemed to me that he should not exercisehis warrant within the Met. area withoutfirst consulting Scotland Yard. As anextreme case, I pointed out that unwittinglyCataloghegReference:kVi4i1shi to arrest one of-Canning! agents. He quite saw the forceof this argument. He also felt that if anyespionage case reached the stage of policeaction, that S.B. should be called in asheretofore. I am going to discuss thequestion of Burt's powers with Kendal.September 17thA detective from the I.0.W. came up to seme about the case of OIGRADY. She hadapparently done 3 years. detention in Bors-tal institution for forging 10/- notes.She also has convictionsagainst her as aprostitute. Her maps and drawings are quitegood and the details of gun emplacementsete. are correct. She still refuses tosay whether she was acting for anybody inparticular. She evidently dislikes thiscountry. I am a little inclined to thinkthat she may be the type of person who hasto be in the limelight. Cookie is dealingwith the case as it will have to go to theD.P.P.I had a meeting with W. today about thetravelling censorship. It has b en agreedthat ehl information obtained should goto us with a copy to the Regional Officewho should not take action unless he isout of touch.Con has gone to Sheerness in order to findout whether there is any local buzz aboutthe raid which is to take place on the 24th.We are carrying out a test today to seewhether it is practicable to set the seaalight as a defence measure.y Two tankersare taking part in the experiment. If it issuccessful it is intended to make use ofit in an attempted invasion. I believeCatatogue ReferenceckVtAt1e6tho known as Greekfire and we had a suggestion early in the6otwar that possibly the Germans might attemptto make use of it. This came from STEINwho heard of it through some quite goodGerman source.September 18thHad a meeting today with Herbert and ourCensorship. He is very anxious to getproper direction. It has been suggested ththat we should put an officer with head-quarters of the Censorahip here and atLiverpool and that whenever the travellingcircus was imposed for our benefit, weshould send someone to help in the direc-tion of affairs. Herbert emphasises thata large number of his officers had a greatdeal of information under their hats whichthey were only too likely to disclose inconversation. If therefore there was acloser contact we stood to benefit.Had a meeting with Dick and Curry aboutoffice organisation. We are going to meetevery day from now until we have got thisproblem solved. It is fraught with everypossible difficulty.I hear that there is considerable confusionin the Irish Home Guard due to the fact thatthe orders are given in Gaelic. As nobodyunderstands the language, they. never knowwhether they are being told to pile armsor open fire.The following cutting from the EveningStandard rather amused me: "When a Dornierbomber was shot down neur a .E.town yester-day, 4 men bailed out and were taken to apolice station. 3 of the men were quiet anddecent but the pilot, a short stocky man,was very truculent and spat in the policeatalogueRefereneekvi4las6id not recover consciou-ness until late in the efternoon."Cecil has got a reply from Archer aboutPREETZ. We have got a description of hiswireless set, and photograph and furtherdetails are to follow.September 19thIt has been suggested that Harry shouldbecome chairman of the Inter-Services Secur-ity Board vice Ferguson, who has gone backto the police. There is apparently a feelinthat all matters affecting army securityshould be under one head. I am not quitesure what this means. It seems however thatthe military have rather got the feelingthat their various functions are being takenaway from them by the Security Service -It is however I think a good thing to haveHarry as Chairman as he will smooth outany difficulties. He will spend half histime at the W.O. and half here.September 20thIt appears that the Cabinet have issuedinstructions that all depts. are to consiCrcutting down their staffs in London to aminimum and sending as many people as poss-ible to battle headquarters. I have said thI did not see how we could possibly splitup the organisation. On the other hand theOffice of Works say that they do not thinkthey can give us the necessary transport tomove at short notice in an emergency andthat we may therefore do well yto cle r outwhile the going's good. It is certainlydisturbing to have our records here as theyare extremely vulnerable and if destroyed,Catalogue the Reference:kVI4y186offic would be very60%seriously impaired. We cannot possibly dowithout them, and this really applies toall sections, neither is it possible tosplit the records. It follows therefore tperhaps with the exception of B.5b, B.6,B.27 and the wireless personnel of W., thewhole of the office should be with therecords.Andre Maurois! wife, writing from New Yorkto a Miss Varley of Ross on Wye, talks ofher husband' book and his story aboutReynaud which is apparently authentic.Helen de Portes, Reynaud' mistress, washis undoing. She destroyed his sense ofduty. His so-called accident was perhapsa double suidide. It occurred shortlyafter a discovery in Spain of suitcasesfilled with 50 million franc's, which hadbeen carried across the corder by two mino]attaches de cabinet of Reynaud. Arrested,the two men declared that the money belongeto Reynaud and mostly to Mme.de Portes, whewas killed in the accident. To Bullett, t}American Ambassador, who visited Reynaud inthe Montpelier Hospital, Reynaud said:"]have lost my country, my honour and my loveI have been looking at the Cockfostersconversations. The morale of the Germanprisoners seems to be high. They seem veryignorant about their losses and aboutconditions over here. They were expectingan invasion to take place about the 15thand seemed surprised that nothing hadhappened.An M.Intelligence Report states thatGerman troop carriers could pull 3 gliderswith 8 men each. They would have a landirspeed of about 45 m.p.h. and a range ofabout 35 miles. It is believed that theCataloguaRefetengeikvie86glid liders in France.IriD I A UOFYORIGINAL DOCUMEM RETAINED1o9IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.e00SUMMER friend TAIE - has beencaptured near Cambridge. He had a Danishpassport and answers to the description wehave. He said that he was a refugee andthat he had landed some time ago. He firstsaid he came on a yacht with brown sailsand then on a ship propelled by motor.A gypsy has told the police that he had afriend with him at 8 o'clock yesterdayevening. Every effortis being made totrace this individual and also a wielessset if one exists.Egyptian S.M. indicates that the Italiansare making certain tentative Jeace movesin an effort to eliminate Egypt. RustuAras says that Turkey is assisting Syriaand that the Italians are not making amyheadgay-with that country.September. 21stDick and Frost have been interrogatingSMMerall day but withoutresult. Hesticks rigidly to his story although ithas many discrepancies.F.0. are suggesting that consuls should begiven permits to go into protected areasI have araised very strong objection tothe consuls of Japan, Hungary and Russia, ancposibly those of other countries. It isobviously quite useless to have protectedareas if Jap consuls, who are known to bespies, can go into them and send back anyinformatior they like.Four Frenchmen who arrived as refugeeshave been sent to Cannon Row for interro-gation.Catafogue Reference:KV/4/186TIIS IS A COPYORIGINALIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOTRN3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS610ACT 1958.Stephens rang me up late in the evening tosay that TATe the new arrival, hadbroken down and was prepared to go out ancassist in the discovery of his wireless SESeptember 22ndThe wireless set, which was a two-wone, and also his code, parachute etc.were found. He explained that he hadbeen dropped from a height of 3.500 ft.he had been caught up in some telegraphwires and for a brief moment was in asearchlight beam. He eventually succeedein extricating himself from the telegraphwires but damaged his foot on landing.He could not add agreat deal to -whatSJMMERhaS already told us, but what hehas to say is interesting confirmation.I discussed with Frost the question ofrunning TATE We came to the conclu-sion that it was essential that he shouldtry and establish connection, since if thGermans thought he had beencaught SOMMEand Snow might be compromised. TaTEhad an address on him of LOPEZ in Lisbon.We are considering writing to say thatthe set had been damaged. It was recoll-ected however thi the LOPEZ address hadbeen to some extent compromised by thecapture of the other prisoners SO wedroppedthis idea.I have just been told that the officerfrom M. M.I.9 who was present at the interrogation of TE yesterday took it uponCataloguerefereacelkihanfse the prisoner withoutTHIS IS A COPYDOCUMENT RETAINEDOilNDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 OF THE RUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.saying nything about it to Stephens, Dickor Frost. The interrogation broke offat lunhtime, when Scotland left the room.Frost, wondering where hewas, followed himand eventually discovered him in theprisoners cell. He was hitting TAC inthe jaw and I think got one back for him-self. .Frost stopped this incident wit)out making a scene, and later told me whathad happened. It was quite clear to methat we cannot have this sort of thinggoing on in our establishment. Apart fromthe moral aspect of the whole thing, I amquite convinced that these Gestapo methodsdo not pay in the long run. We are takingthe matter up with the D.M.I. and proposeto say that we do not intend to have thatparticular M. I. officer on the premisesany more. I am told that Scotland turnedup this morning with a syringe contai ingsome drug or other, which it was thoughtwould induce the prisoner to speak.Stephens told Scotland that he could notsee TTE who was not in a fit state tobe interrogated. Actually there was nthing seriously wrong with TATE.Had a long discussion with Charles abouttrying to get suitable accommodation for thstaff outside London. He decided to seeSwinton about it and get his permissionfor certain expenditure for transport etc.Vichy are reported to be showing signsof coming over. In Syria a third of theCatatogue Referencetkv4/186o-Fre France.612Stephens has given an amusing account ofOsbert Peake's visit to Latchmere. He.s sawtwo of the German spies. The conversationwith KIEBOM was pleasant and ended on thenote that he (Peake) hoped that KIEBOM"would not be here long". Conversationwith Meier was perhaps equally unfortunatepitched in that he on asked to these this shores spy who by had the been Germans.S., whether he had arranged with hisrelations to send him clean laundry eachweek. Peake was closeted with Dr.Deardenfor some time and told him that he intendedto rely on him as a private source ofinformation.A short time ago Ned Reid told me that anemployee of his named MARTIN had beenasked to go over to Dublin to. see De V.Martin has known De V. for a good manyyears. He has now returned and states thathe was asked to straighten out currencymatters which had got into a frightful messThere had been a good deal of correspon-dence with the Treasury and it was quiteobvious that there was nobody in Dublinwho really understood what he was doing.De V. apparently told Martin that theinevitable consequences of a German vic-tory were too horrible to contemplate.This remark is I think somewhat surprisingand very significant.Catalggye CatplnguAReterenfekVAl1863il ilots on the lstApril 1940 was estimated at 16,000. TheirTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED(1?IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.2000losses since that date are said to beabout 6-7,00 and their capacity to trainsomewhere in the neighbourhood of 8-9000per annum. In August and Septemberthey must have been lesing pilots at therate of about 3,000 a month.September 23rdOWe had a meeting here with V.V. , CowgillFrost, Dick, T.A.R. T. R. and myself, when wediscussed all the aspects of the casesof the various German agents through whomwe were communicating with the enemy.As SUHHEK had seamen's papers we decidedto get them put in order. Later on wecould arrange for him to fall in withanother seaman whom we might perhaps runto Lisbon. It was agreed that we shouldwatch the money situation very carefullysince it was obvious that we could notdo all that we weredoing for nothing.As regards TATe it wis decided thathe must be worked if possible, but thatmuch would depend on his frame of mil.afterthe treatment he had received fro:the M.I.9 officer. I suggested that wemight possibly use him or one of theother agents as a very obvious double-cross, transmitting sometimes true andsometime false information. If they cometo the conclusion that we ywere using thisset for our own purposes we should per-haps enhance the value of the other sets,which they were inclined to trust. WeCatatogue guekrererenteatv/4ng6 that it nece sary to getTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(43 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.2000TATE into communicatiom as soon aspossible. V.V. was very interesting aboutinformation he was receiving from hisbest sources. It was clear that theinvasion has been meeting with consider-able difficulty. The German Naval expertsconsidered the craft entirely inadequate.The troops and naval ratings.y were tiredof waiting and did not view with anyenthusiasm the prospect of crossing thechannel in a barge at 8 knots. The AirForce are apparently quite ready to havea cut at it but they are feeling theirlosses rather acutely. Hitler has beentold by his High Command that he mustmake up his mind one way or the other, asit is impossible to.keep the troops upto the mark indefinitely.September 24thAt a conference with D.S.S. , Charles andHorrocks today, the latter was very hurtabout the memo put forward on the registryby .Branch. He feels that .Branchofficers and secretaries are in leaguewith the old guard in the registry andare not cooperating as they should. Thelatest suggestion that Jane should gointo the registry for 10 days has worriedhim still further. He took particularexcetion to the opening para. of theB. Branch memo which seemed to condemn thewhole system on what he thought wasinsufficient evidence. He thought thathealssheupeferaryce:kV/41s6kec to attend themeeting at which this memo was drafted.-115I explained to him that the meeting waswhat we call the "lower deck meeting."It took place periodically in order thatofficers of one section should becomeacquainted with the work of other sectionsThe question of the registry had beenraised at one of these meetings, sinceall B. officers felt very deeply aboutthe present dislocation. It was afterall they who had to take all the kicke frfrom the outside because they were not ina position to answer questions. I myselfhad recently been told by somebody in theF.O. that it was no longer any use writ-ing to M.I.5 because one never got ananswer. Most people in B. .branch were verykeen about their work and it was verydisappointing for them to see the wholeorganisation blackened in the eyes ofoutside departments. I did not thinktherefore that it was unnatural thattheir feelings shculd be very seriouslydisturbed by the present position.There was no suggestion as to where theblame lay. I could see that Horrockswas taking the kicks from the insidebut he must realise that all the officerswere taking theirs from the outside andthis was in a sense more painful.Horrocks evidently thought that thecriticism was not justified and it wasto some extent ill-informed. He did notthink that a full account had been takenof the arrears of carding etc. and theirdifficulties connected with dilution ofstaff, air raids etc. He evidentlyCatalogue Reference:KV/4/186616agreed somewhat reluctantly that Janeshould spend 10 days in the registry.I explained to him that it would be inall our interests since at the momentthere was nobody in B.Branch whoreallyunderstood the system. If she becamethoroughly acquainted with it she wouldbe able to convince the sections, if shewas convinced herself. Jane is in factgoing in with an absolutely open mindand will say exactly what she thinkswhen she comes out. Horrocks seemedto have some general complaints thatthere was no discipline or organisationin B.Branch. When I explained to himthat Curry,Dic and I had been giving anhour a day to the problem for some timeand it was an extremely comRtex one, hehad a grievance that he had been askedto attend our meetings, since he had beenappointed as director of organisation.I apologised for this and told him thatwe should be delighted for him to bepresent, although much of our discussionswere on very intimate points connectedwith the work and personalities of theofficers in the branch. We could instildiscipline up to a point, but it hadtobe remembered that everybody here hadgiven their services voluntarily andforsmall remuneration, that not only thetemporary but the so-called permanentstaff were on a month's notice and hadbeen for years, and that therefore theorganisation could not be expected to runquite like a military unit. It wasCatalogue ue Reference:kV/4/186necessary into consideration the67various peculiarities of certain officerswith a view to getting the best out ofthem. This meant that one could notalways build one's organisation quitelogically.As regards hiscomplaint about nothaving beenconsulted about the organisa-tion, I drew his attention to the factthat the question of forming a sec-retariat here had all been decided uponwithout anyreference to me whatever. Thiswas obviously a matter of grave concernto the head of B.Branch who saw somethingin the nature of a body being placedbetween himself and the Director. WhenI had heardabout it I had spoken to Horrooand Harker and told them that I thoughtsuch a secretariat should be built upunder C.S. who already fulfilled certainfunctions of the kind which I gather wererequired. To this Horrocks had repliedthat he did not really know what C.S. wasdoing. This seemed to me to be a funda-mental error. How was it possible for amen to organise branches of an officeif he did not know what the sectionswere doing? I personally would welcomehis sitting in all the sections of B.Branch in order that he might become fullyacquainted with our work. In the sameway I thought it desirable that somebodyfrom .Branch should become thoroughlyacquainted with what was going on in thereeistry: this The note meeting and closed I lgathe gather more that orCatalogue Reference:KV/4/186THIS IS A COPYIN ORIGINAL DEPARTMENT DOCUMENT UNDER RETAINED SECTION3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS6ISACT 1958tooHorrocks was quite satisfied and bore meno malice.I have just heard that the Cambridge Policare 7ATE up in arms about our having sent downin a car under guard to dig up hiswireless set etc. without telling themor the Regional Officer. This was ofOcourse quite inexcusable but one of thosethings which happen in the enthusiasm ofthe moment. Charles has very kindly offe-ed to go down in person tomorrow. Inthe mean time Jasper has made a fulsomeapology on the telephone. The worst ofit was that the police,L.D .D.V., etc. havebeen scouring the country for this wire-less set during the last 48 hours. Theyeventually came on some people who repor-ted that some mysterious diggers had comedown in a car and removed what appearedto be a wireless set. On making furtherenquiries they discovered that thesepeople were officers of M. I.5.Derek Tangye has been brought back from aregion. He is to collect informationfrom all sections and bring att a weeklybulletin which will include informationfrom R.0.1 's and will be sent out to allthe regions and other people concerned.Jane is very keen about this as she thinkour R.O S are rather highyand dry. Al-though the plan is a good one, I ratherfeel that the first two numbers will bevery interesting and that the subsequentCatalogue Hefererfcetkor4/i8il off unless we getsome sansational stuff. I am alsoproposing that Derek Tangye should run thePress Section since he will eventuallybecome well acquainted with the work ofeach section. He will therefore knowtheir requirements and what to look outfor. Organisationally I am placing himunder Curry who will be in a position tovet the information that he gets from thesections before itis published.The battle of Dakar is goingon. Itlooks like being a fiasco as the localFrench forces are not inclined to cometo terms. This is I think a real disas-ter and will have a great effect uponother powers, particularly the Orientalpowers. The Egyptian Minister is veryworried about the effect on the Moslemworld. I am told that the plan wasconceived by the P.M., Desmond Morton andSpears without being properly thrashedout and co-ordinated by the Services.Further the whole project was known aboutlong before the expedition started.This is not surprising in view of theundesirable people who surround the DeGaulle Mission. The whole story hadleaked to Vichy who sent three destroyersand three cruisers from Toulon. Forsome reason or other these were allowedto slip through the Straits.I dined with Anthony Blunt and GuyBurgess at the Reform Club. Just as Iwas going away at about 11.30 a Molotovbreadbasket descended. Three incendiaryCatalbgueReferencieurvi4nside Pall Mall and all620sorts of people were rushing about in dres-sing gowns with bags of sand. When Igot into the Mall the whole of St.JamesPark was lit up as if by Roman candles.I saw at least a dozen there and severalin the Mall itself.September 25thWhen I arrived at the office this morningI found that part of the registry had beenburnt by incendiary bombs and that all thecard index had been destroyed. Mercifullywe had had it photographed. Some thousandfiles had also been destroyed.I discussed with Jaspar and Charles thequestion of a move. My own feeling isthat the registry should go back but thatthe officers of B.Branch should remain herI should haye thought that the whole of.Branch and possibly part of A. and D.could go back as well.I attended a meeting at G.P.O. where it wadecided to let sorting be done as a com-bined operation with the censorship atthe Prudential Building. This means thatour list of H.O.W.S will be mixed up withthe general sorting list. They will nottherefore be identifiable. The censorshipstaff employed on this work are speciallyselected. In actual fact no change isinvolved beyond the carrying out of theoperation at the Prudential instead of theG.P.O. There will be a good deal ofCatalogue ogufReterence:Rth4/18e in and labour.I lunched afterwards with Brookie atFrascatis, which had been somewhat dama-ged by the events of the night before. Infact the whole of the far end of OxfordSt. and part of Tottenham Court Road hasbeen rather seriously damaged. Therewere piles and piles of broken glasson both sides of the street, but workmenwere already replacing some of it andmost people were carrying on in one wator another. Brookie'gas in particularlygood form.We discussed propaganda filmsand he said that the acid test was boxoffice value. He could only say that thosehe had seen had nobox office value what-ever. One from the Post Office was SOgrossly indecent that he had been obligedto send for an official and have itdestroyed.He thought that if it had beenput on the screen the police would prob-ably have intervened. This whole situa-tion is hardly to be wondered at, seeingthat they have people like Sydney Bern-stein in charge of the film section ofthe M. of I. He is a strong supporterof the Communist Party. Joseph Reevesof the Woolwich Arsenal Co-operative,another communist, is also there. Itis really rather a waste of time, our vet-ting people from the communist angle ifthese individuals continue to be employed.If they were doing a really useful jobof work it might be worth while stretch-ing a point, but since all the work com-ing from that department in connectionwith films is SO obviously useless, Ishould have thought that a change wouldCatalogeerReferenceski4/18bilm like "M ein Kampf6z2are doing no good at all from the boxoffice point of view, since quite obvious-ly they are not the kind of thing thepublic wants to see. There has been aspate of them on account of the removalof the ban on Charlie Chaplin's film"The Dictator".Swinton has been consulted about themove of the registry and he thinksthat we should remain here.September 26thSome more Molotov breadbaskets, and theRegistry has now removed to Blenheim.Haldane Porter's s.on has joined. He isworking for Caulfeild. Abbott of thePost Office has also come in. He is toform a nucleus of what is known as theSecretariat.Theo Turner spoke to me about the sugges-ted visa system for British subjects.The F.0. say we cannot put visas onBritish passports as this undermines thevalidity of the passport. They suggestsome arrangement by which passports areshown to the British consul and marked"Seen". If this system is to be of anyuse there must be some secret mark onthe passport which will be an indicationto wrong the with the that holder. there Personally is something doCatalogue Reference:KVI4/186not see a great deal of use in this systemIf the visas were referred, we shouldthen have a chance of passing the namesover ourrecords and of checking up on thenumber of the passport. Under the sug-gested sy stem the man will arrive and willhave to be admitted unless there are verystrong grounds for thinking that he isnot really entitled to the papers heholds.The Dakar project has been abandoned. Iam afraid the consequences may be ratherdisastrous.September27thAttended a meeting at Kinnaird Houseregarding the arrest of members of foreignallied governments or mssions. Broadlyspeaking it was decided that we shouldobtain the agreement of the S. S.S. represen-tatives of the countries concerned and thathe responsible minister should then beapproached SO that he could be given theopportunity of withdrawing diplomaticprivilege before the arrest was made.The Security Services felt that any otherkind of previous notification would onlylead to the destruction of any comnpromis-ing documents.I lunched with Stewart Menzies. He toldme that the invasion roject had beenworked out in every detail' includingpractice in climbing up cliffs. It hadCatalbgee Refevenoeskyi4/astponed for some reason6zyunknown. The Navy and Army had both hadmisgivings and the matter had been referredto Keitel. Meanwhile people in Berlin ardelsewhere in Germany were getting impatienand were unable to understand the delay.Something has obviously gone wrong.S.I.S. have successfully dropped Dutchmenby parachute on the continent who aregiving them useful information. One ratheralarmist report was sent over yesterdaythat the Germans were getting steam up.Menzies said that the meeting betweenCiano and Ribbentrop had been unsuccessful.The Germans are trying to press the Ital-ians into action. The latter seem reluc-tant to commit themselves too deeply.Dakar has been a disaster as we were eX-pecting someone from the Petain Govt. andarrangements were on foot to get Martinqueand its ships and aeroplanes handed overto ourselves. Itis feared that Dakar.maprejudice these negotiations.S.I.S. have learned from a very good sourcethat the Russians have been makingapproaches to the Czechs and have beenurging them to commit acts of sabotage.This is a very interesting development.It has now been decided that most of B.is to go to Belnheim. We are keeping uponly our police sections and B. .24. I donot know how it is going to work. Ultimate-ly the staff here are to go forward tosome house in the centre of London. W.inCatalogue Reference:KVI4/1867'the meantime are going to Barnet onaccount of R.S.S. who have lines fromthere to their various stations.September 28thAnother eventful day. The Germans sentover fighters instead of bombers. Theresult was/ to 8 in their favour.Presumably they came in superior numbe.but the change of tactics is ratherinteresting. It probably means thatbhey are trying to wear down our fighterforce.September 29thThe move was started and everything seemsrather chaotic. It has been decided thatCookie is to run the London region.September 30thThree people arrived in a rubber boat inthe early hours of this morning on theeast coast of Scotland somewhere nearBanff. A man and a woman, the lattercalling herself Vera ERIKSON and the for-mer Francois De DEEKER. They appeared atGordonstown station looking somewhatbedraggled as they had been obliged towade ashore. They aroused the suspicionof the station-master, who sent for thelocal inspector. On opening one of theirboxes a two-way wireless set was found.Catalogaehefeyence.Rarrsoste ind are on their626way to London. Another man has been seenin the company of these two. He is said tto have taken a ticket for Edinburgh.The local police have been informed andsteps are being taken to have the trainsearched. There is a suggestion thatthere may be a 4th, but this is based onthe fact that the boat, which incidentallyhad aluminium oars and may therefore havebeen carried by a seaplane, was big enoughto hold four people.October lst.The other man has been caught at EdinburghWith characteristic stupidity he had lefthis suitcase, wet and covered with sea-weed and sand, at the cloakroom. Thelocal porter who had a good nose thoughtthere was something fishy and sent forthe police. The man was arrested. Hisname is WALTI and he has a Swiss passport.He has been sent to London. Vera E. andDe DEEKER have been questioned. Vera'sstory is that she was going to Londonin order to hand over the wireless setto a man called WILKINSON, who was talland thin with fair hair, who would callon her at the Dorchester Hotel within thenext five days. She began by saying thatshe knew nothing about DE DEEKER but even-tually admitted that both he and WILKINSONhad come wer with her in the same boat.They had started in a ship called the"Northern Star" but failed to get throughthe blockade and had gone back to Staven-Catalogue Reference:KV/4/186gar whence they had taken a seaplane.I attended a meeting in the D.M.I.' roomto discuss the establishmentof a newcommittee to be known as the W. Committeefor the dissemination of false informationThe three directors of intelligence,Steward, myself and a representative ofM.I.9 were present, also Cavendish Bent 1c.of the F.O. D.M.I. is very anxiousto centralise the dissemination of rumoursand false information and to take stockof the channels through which such infor-mation could be distributed. I said thatas far as we were concerned it was essen-tial that we should get quick answere toany questionnaires or enquiries that wereceived from the other side. We wantedfirst of all to know the truth and second-ly how much of it could be put over.Having obtained this information we wouldthen send down our agent to see how muchof it he could pick up of his own accord.It had to be borne in mind that we weremainly purveyors of true information, butthat by putting over a half-truth we migbe able to assist a line put out by someother dept. At the moment it seems thatE.H.,M.E.W., S.I.S. S. and N.I.D. are allcirculating false rumours. Some of themhave come back to our agents for onfirma-tion. We are thus in the position ofhaving to contradict information put outby another dept. It was suggested at themeeting thatI.S.S.B. wh was alreadydisseminating false information to coverCatalogue Reference:KV/4/186628various operations, we should, rather thanset up some new committee, build up some-thing round I.S.S.B. D.M.I. suggestedthat all rumours and false informationshould be pooled in I.S.S.B. and that weshould submit our questionnaires to thesecretary who would provide the answers.L expressed doubt about the speed withwhich such an enquiry could be made andD.M.I. said that in cases of emergency wecould always go direct to D.S of I. Inthe mean time the W. Committee would meetabout once a fortnight in order to assiston the main rumour policy.Theo is attending a meeting of the AliensAdvisory Committee which is consideringthe recommendations of the Ascot Committee.We are to take a firm stand on the releaseof enemy aliens for employment in industry.October 2ndThe interrogation is still going on butDe DEEKER and WALTI refuse to say nythingand Vera is obviously lying.A friend of Rothschilds, Alan Hotchkin,turned up at Tring tonight. He is I believone of the most eminent scientists thatCambridge has turned out for a great manyyears. He is only about 28 and is atpresent working on the R.D.F. He wasextremely interesting on the developmentsgoing on to which he attaches great impor-tance. Much of the conversation was ra-Catalogae Refererice:kv/4tse gathered that ourpredictors on A. A.A. A. guns have completelysolved the question of range ind that a gogood deal has been done towards thesolution of the difficulty of obtainingan accurate line of fire. As soon as thisdifficulty has been overcome it will bepossible to deal very successfully withaeroplanes by night. The application ofthis invention by medium and short waveis the subject of experiments throug)fitting the apparatus in Blenheim Bombers.They have brought down 10 or 15 machinesby night, and by December the designshould have been perfected and fitted toa number of machines. The application ofshort-wave to this problem is beingdeveloped but will not be ready untilabout February. It is I believe possiblefor the Germans to. jam this apparatus butSO far they do not seem to have done SOin spite of the fact that they must havegot some of our predictors in France.There has also been a rumour that one ofour planes fitted with the apparatus camedown by accident in France about a fort-night or 3 weeks ago. Hotchkin explajrto me how the R.D.F. stations round thecoast were able to give about half anhours warning before any raid took place.There is apparently a screen on which theplanes appear in the form of little spikesas they are flying in to assemble beforethe raid takes place. When they are allassembled a rather thick black pyramidis descernible which represents the con-centration. As soon as these concentra-CatalogueReference.riv4msorighter Command iswarned.