The Nationa Archives(c) crown copyrightCatalogue Reference:kV/4/188Image Reference:44A.ACWORTH101,106,130,139 145,156.ADAIR, Robert112Agents on Ships57,126,171, 194Air Mail74,39>Air Ops.172,199ALCAZAR de Velasco 35,40Allied Governments 189Allied Seamen121American-Eire Lisison 128,208America Visit68,75,92,96, 145, 150, 155,160, 175.Attaches, Restrictions 69B.Bahnpolizei945,Baird &c Co.77BALFOUR,J.15BEDFORD, Duke of179Catalogue-Reference:KV/4/188B.J S16TwunT11o, 110.000, crop, 57,8517,BOYD-CARPENTER, D 210B. B.R. R. S position935,945B. U. F. Pamphlet60BULL, Commander59BuRqte$3C.CALVO144,154,158CAMPO, Del930CeRol92CARRICK140, 164 169,176CANNINCQ39,Censorship932, 962, 990, 14,29,33,103, 14, 29, 35,104,119,137. 104, 119, 137.Central EuropeeanSection102de COURCY18CORNELIUS117CORRIGAN, D136Czech Section76C. P. G.B.975Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188DDomestic Agency954,76"Dorothy"27, 103,196The Dot7,13,15,16,17,19,112,119Duration Camp154OYMOCK, Rev.54,61E.EGER, F.W. F. W. @ JENSEN 72,75Egypt (XX)86,96Eire Liaisons927,122,171Eire Wireless928,957,977, 928,957,977,105,128, 105, 128, 28,153 153,210ELVESTAD38,71Exchange of Internees 127EY SEMONT935,988,51.F.FLEGERMANN114FRASCHINI974French Liaison949Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188Gde GAULLE39GERLACH34,87German Broadcasts193Germans in Iran118GILINSKY197GLOVER, R.37GOERTZ, Dr15,66,122, 166, 212GONHOUILOU5GORRISON933Greek Govt. &c Army 106GREEN, Ben132,169,209GUNN2G.W. G. W.154,158H.HAMILTON, G.987,157,166HARRIMAN, Miss111HARRISON, L.117,122,210HARZBURG979Catalogue eference:KV/4/188"Hernie"993,21,24,43HICKSON132,169,209HIRSCH197HORSFALL-ERTZ963HUTTON, P53II. D. A.101, 106,130,139,156 106, 130,Illicit Wireless940,941"Inside Information" 146Internees in Iran83,118Internment Policy151Invasion, aliens in- 929Invasion, plans re-104Ireland,N. visit to-212Irish Brigade9ISOS937,946,947,969,978,980,30,43,44,52,74,03,90123,137,151,161ISOSOCLES999,12,14.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188JJACOBS, J.18JACKson, Gunner149,177,199Japanese Officials996,9,57,72,1 110, 163J. I.C.69JONGHE, Comtesse967,97(JORDAN, Max996JOUBERT, Air Marshal977K.KNUPFER, G.207,2 211KOLLINSKI933KRAFT, Mrs.963,966KURTZ132,169,209KUZNETZOV27LLagos953,982,989LAPAGE, Major997LAPORTE, Major965Leakages963,969,983,990, 991, 68,Catalogue Reference:KV/4/ 98.Lecture to RSLOS,My201KENIHAN,T909, 909,992,993,995 992, 993, 995, 1000,27,172,178Liberty RestorationLeague145LLOYD, Llewellyn999LONSDALE, John149LONSDALE, Stella168,173,183LONY AY106LOWTHER77MMAASS927,929,932,976,904,19,26,35, 154MAHON, Carol78,82MANIFOLD946,948,953MAN MOHAN SINGH213Middle East Section121Middle East communicati with - 133Minefields963,969,983,990MLADOROSS207,21Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188MUHLSTEIN @ Mills51MUNOZ74,32,90,106,1 123,125 123, 125198,213NNAKIMURA48National RegistrationCard Plan962O055101,114,122, 114, 122, 136.O'CONNOR, P75,99, 107, 123,140,164.OCRANA, M941OLLION91Ops. Section946,965P.Parachute Corps29PATRAZI932PETIT ,General949Plan Guy Fawkes165,170,171Plan Stench90Plan Trellis50Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188POGO82,90,123PLIGGE, Capt.151Polish Plot(Hess)934,964,967,970,903POULLAIN5Poste Restante letters 100Prisoners of War979,79,90, 102, 2,103,104Prosecutions88Protected Area Passes 171Pyrene Company147RRadiolocation102,110Radiotelephone124.Regional Tours942, 972,3.Releases937Reorganisatior926,942,960, 991,998, 991, 998, 16RICHTER156,16RICE, E. D.977R.P.S. P.997, 7,6,14,23,44,57,58 6, 14, 23, 44, 57 7,58,61,81,96,103,105,137,144.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188RSLOSConference eye950, 950,979a,937, 979a, 26, 28,93R. S. S. Commi t ee926,937,946,14, 22,ROTteCttiD9teRUTLAND, F.J. F. J.89,108,117,141,153166,173,102SSAETRANG38,58,75SANT, A.G.929S.B S. B Liaison with -939SCROGHEIM64Secret Inks41, 124, 129,130, 129, 138, 131Section V.930,938,950,979,979a12,17,19,22,20,65,0 12,17 19, 22, 20, 65,03 65,144, 144,159,176,100,1 159, 176, 100, 138SELIT-RENNY931SEMMELBAUE927,929,932,976,19,26,35,154SEMPILL75Shipping Committee959S.0.1.88S.0.2.955,951,985,989,992996,247,81,85,80,107Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188Spitzbergen36,50,61STANLEY, Ol.123, 123,125,134,1 125, 156, 139,141,145.STAPLETON, I.173,179,139, i9l,196 ill, 196STEFI ANSEN38,53,75STE ART, S.926,932,935,941,943, iiSTRACHAN76STRESSER, R.994SUKKEINIKTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDT.3 IN (4) DEPARTMENT OF THE PUBLIC UNDER RECORDS SECTIONACT 1958"Tacoma Star"49 Spenlae hooTelephone to Swit-zerleind103TIMMERMAN37TRECHARD, talk with940TRICCLL927,981,171, 47Turkish Mission05U.U.S. U. S. H. security91,993,996,997,10 91,993 996, 96,997,100( 997, 1000Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1V.VELASCO, A de995V. H. F.926,923WW. Board46,125,140,141,143W. .A.F. A.152,158WALLEM20,24WEGENER27,103,196West Indies25,32,37WET, 0 de66THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINWIJK, G. Van975 IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEOT!3 ACI (4 OF THE PUBLI RECORWIJK, Knut45raprteceWhite Russians207,211WHITNEY .D.191Worthy Down75,99,107,123, 140, 164169,177,195.W/T Signals11oXXX Committee50,62,133,145Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188XX (Egypt)23,133,143XX (Seamen)57,126Z.Z. O.R. 0. R.52THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL. IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONOCUMENT RETAINED3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS o00ACT 1958. sfCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188THIS IS A copayORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDJune2ndPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONOF THE PUBLIC RECORDS1958Five youths have been arrested in Notting-ham. They have been King VHF for monthsand have been communicating with some ofour army units. There is of course no1 roper organisation for detecting VHF orfor policing army traffic.le had a long conference about Sam STEART,and the procedure to be adooted.I lunched with Mrs. Maude, who is anxiousto get across on the Clipper as soon aspossible. She was worried about John'sthreat of resignation. I told her thatreading ceyveen the lines and knowingJohn, it was merely his habitual discontentwith the dilatory methods of the CentralOffice. Hie thought that only by threaten-ing his resignation would anything bedone. I told her to tell him that I wasnot taken in when she next S3W him.June 3rdWe had a meeting of the R.S.S. Committee atwhich priorities were discussed. It wasalso agreed that the exolanatory noteson the ISOS system should be circulatedto those who received ISUS material.I handed in the reorganisation plan today.I told Charies that it, was makin; the bestCatalogue of what etereseedkyfrigz) refereng T PIght bad on job. Paper. I hoped Ina71practice we should in anyrespects haveto continue as at present since most ofthe people in the division would have tocome either to Dick or myself. Curry omight have been of use to me waS now divert.ed on to work for which he had no ualifi-cations and where his resence was super-fhuous. He would undoubtedly be of uS!anybody in the long run, but in this casehe would have to learn his stuff. Thatwould probably take him 6 months.June 4thI saw Herschel Johnson about Tricycle andexplained the whole circumstances. He isgoing to teleghaph to the United Statesabout the visa. I also told him aboutSIMA of the Hungarian Embassy who is nowin the United States, and concerning whomwe have grave doubts.I arranged with V.V. about SEMMELBAUER andMAAS wh are to be got don from KnapdaleRudolph is going to see somebody ofconseouence and wants a Nazi to bepresent as a witness.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED3 IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONACT (4) OF 1958 THE PUBLIC RECORDSQsoc)Catalbgastrelestenc8kv94/18s Joubert in order tobe quite sure that somebody was accepting929the responsibility for intercpeting VHFfrom spies in back areas in time of invasionThe military are responsible for intercept-ing these signals in the zone of the armiesbut if large quantities of parachutepiesswere dropped in the back areas therewill be nobody to deal with the messagesthit they are transmitting to the enemy.Joubert admitted that there was a gap hereand said that he would bring the matter tothe notice of the .Committee at the nextmeeting.I also talked to Joubert about the possibility of establishing RDF masts on the Eastcoast of Eire. He said that this was avery vital matter from the point of viewof the defence of this country. He hadthe masts and would be pleased to give themto the Lire Govt. The diificulty was thatthe P.M. had placed an absolute ban on anywar material being sent to Eire unless theyagreed to let us use the ports. I saidthat Eire had considerable difficulties toovercome in these matters as they might wel.be accused by the Germans of not adheringto their position of neutrality, but thatthe present moment however for makinga concrete suggestion seemed particularlyopportune owing to the recent bombingof Dublin. The Lire Govt.. could perfectlywell say that they were forced to erectthese masts in their own defence. I toldJoubert that if he could get over the difficulty with the P.M. I thought that wecould get the matter arranged through ourCatalogue Rfeferehce.k\/4/18aJune June 5th 5thWe have considered the position of pro-Axis foreigners in time of invasion. Theonly two countries that are likely to causeus trouble are Spain and Japan. PersonallyI feel that the consulates of both thesecountries should be dealt with.Swinton has been asking about SEMMELBAU,and MAAS. He has been told about theirvisit to Camp Z.Capt.Savage of S.0.E. called today aboutone Arthur G. SANT, who had put forwarda proposition for dropping unbreakablegramophone dises with appropriate speechesby parachute in German occupied territory.SANT was getting difficult and threateningto call in the assistance of M.P.S. Itwas agreed that we would have SANT upto Room 055 and hint to him that if hedid not behave himself there was such athing as D.R.3Lennox tells me that the America ns areto take over Iceland. This will releaseat least one of our divisions.June bthThe concentration of Germy forces on theRussian frontier continues. It is thoughtthat the Germans may attempt to take Cyprusand it seems doubtful whether weshall beable to hold it. The Japs are sh wingCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188430signs of coming in. They have liquidatedalmost all their business in this country.Shigimitsu is to return to Tokyo and thereare doubts whether he will come back.His influence there should be good but it-seems doubtful whether he will be able tostand up against Matsuoka. The attitudeof the French in Syria is doubtful.They have retired to a line north andsouth of Damascus. So far there have beenno large German troop landings butaerodromes at Aleppo and Damascus are intheir hands. The Turks are anxious tooccupy Aleppo but have been dissuaded byu. On the other hand they have letthrough two train-loads of ammunition toSyria. The Italians are showing consider-able activity against India. heirgerationsare concentrated in Afghanistan and takethe usual form of trying to instigatefrontier trouble. Ibn Saud has askedthe Americans for 1 million men. Hisrequest has been tr insmitted through H. M.G.Therein now an American Military Missionat the War Office, and some Americanofficers are flying out to North Africaon reconnaissance.I spoke to the D.G. about Section V.I explained to him all their difficultiesand said that I thought it was in ourinterests to build them up so far as itwas within our power.the D.G. has finally agreed to the delCAMPO party.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188aISOS traffic shows that Celery is beingtreated with some scepticism. SESSLERis goingto meet him and the doctor isreturning from Cyrenica.I saw Sir Horace Wilson who was interestedin the case of Selit-Renny. I told himwhat we kne and said that I thoughtSelit-Renny was more likely to be a crookand a charlatan than a spy. I thoughtthe proceedings agiinst him by theMinistry of Supply should therefore go onand not be inf luenced by anything we hadto say. He said that the matter wasin thehands of the D.P.P.and that in the meantime he hoped we would try and clear upthe case from the espionage angle, parti-cularly the relations between Selit-Rennyand Ashton-Gwatkin. I referred to thesuggestion that had been made by theAdmiralty that we had been reluctant totake up the case owing to the rathereminent personalities involved. I saidthat nothing was further from the truth.The Admiralty had wanted us to takecertain rather exceptional steps in thecase of Gwatkin and on the evidenceavailable we did not think that this wasthe proper method of approach. We there-fore proposed to make enquiries in otherways. We should not however hesitate toemploy any suitable methods if we thoughtthe facts justified the action. pirHorace ilson quite understood thisexplanation. He said he would let me knowD.P.P.S opinion as soon as he received it.Catalogue the Reference he hoped we would proceed32June 7thWe again discussed the case of Sam STEWART.It was decided that J.C. and I shouldinter ogate him. I would cover the earlypart and J.C. would deal with Snow'sinformation. T.A.R T. R. and Victor wouldsimultaneously interrogate CALDWELL andBaxter would deal with DAVIES.I had a talk with Stewart and made thefinal arrangements about MAAS and SEMMEL-BAUER. It was agreed that they should bekept apart, that SEMMELBAUER should remainat Ham and that MAAS should visit Camp Zalone.June BthWe have entered Syria. There has beenlitulresistence SO far.Sir Robt. Renwick has received a curiousletter from a former Attache of the ItalianEmbassy amed PATRAZI, written from Lisbonwhich looks as if he may be throwing outa peace feeler. He was closely associatedwith VOLPI who was the owner of severalelectrical companies on the East Coast.If S.I.S. and the F.O. approve I amsuggesting that Renwick should arrangea meeting with PATRAZI in visbon.June 9thGrogan and Gibbs have discovered a ratherCataloguerReference.K12/49188 in the Censorship.Ordinary telegram of enemy origin fromEire to neutral countries are held 36hours, but only stopped if highlysuspicious or objectionable. Press tele-grams from Eire to U.S.A. are unofficiallycensored and occasionally stopped.Those from Eire to Europear countries are nnot censored or examined at all. Presstelegrams from the north of England i.e. i.a line north of the Mersey to the Wash,go uncensored both to Ulster and Eireand vice versa. The remedy seems to be toroute all telegram thro' thro'C.T. C.T.O. The netresult of all this is that information inthe form of press telegrams can go fromthis country to Eire and from Eire to Stock-holm without scrutiny. These tele rams runup to 3,000 words and it would obviouslybe quite simple to introduce a code. I amsuggesting that they should be closely serut-inised and that they should be passed overanalysis.I saw Jock Whyte. He has nearthed anotherof Simon's friends, a man called GORRISON.GORRISON has admitted that he insertedan advertisement in the Times before thewar and in this way got in touch with aman called KOLLINSKI, a German. KOLLINSKIwanted somebody to go as a salesman forphotographic and blue-printing apparatus.Nothing however materialised. It seemsquite clear that KOLLINSKI was a recruitingagent for the Germans. He was internedsometime ago and subsequently rele sed ongrounds of ill-health. We are going toCatalogue give logueReference:kvf4/788see if by any chancesuhe is still active, and then get himre-interned.Lennox tells me that we have 3 columnsadvancing into Syria. So far not muchnews, but the Germans are leaving. iGerman or Italian ship with supplies hasgot through to Benghazi. It is thoughtthere were tanks on board. It is for thisreason that Benghazi has been subjectedto heavy bombardment. I sometimes wonderwhether the Germans or Russians are con-templating an attack on India. B.J.S showthat they are very active there, usingAfghanistan as a base. Perhaps theexplanation is that they wish to causetrouble and prevent troops from going tothe Middle East. The Americans have twobrigades in reland. Certain membersof the Polish forces in Scotland have beenplotting to kidnap and murder HESS. Itis difficult to say how far the matter hasgone but it is of course the kind of thingthey might attempt to do. He are takingsteps to get hold of either the C.0. orthe officers themse ves and explain tothem what serious harm they might do bothto their own cause and to the Allied causeif they attempt to do anything of the kind.This quite apart from what might happento themselves. I think the Poles imaginethat HESS may be making peace overturesand that this will be listened to by theBritish Govt. Nothing of course could befurther from the truth.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188June l0thThe position of B.R. was discussed at thedirector's meeting today, but unfortunatelyI was not able to be present as I wasinterrogating STENART, who has just beenarrested. The suggestion was more or Lessadopted that B.R. should in future beplaced in A.Branch. Logically this isentirely incorrect but it probably willnot make much difference provided theinvestigation branches are consulted aboutany major move of personnel and they areallowed as formerly to issue directivesto R.S.L.O.S and correspond with themdirectly on matters affecting their work.iIt was evidently a great shock toSamuelSTEWART to find himsel under arrest.1 went over all the early ground, where hefound no difficulty in crossing most ofthe fences. The only really interestingpoint was brought out with reference tohis association with an apparently quiteharmless German named POHL. This man wasa refugee and had left for Haiti. Heassured us that he had had no communication with this man whatever after heleft this country. He then went on toexplain how in his position D as theshipping agent he would of course havefacilities for passing letters out of thecountry. J.C. then to up the interro-gation on the subject of his journey toAntwerp and subseugnent relations withSnow. Stewart's memory had been veryCatalogue ReferencebKv/4/egt, but he soon936became hesitant and evasive. He admittedthat he recognised the photograph ofSnow and recalled having travelled withhim on the aircraft to Antverp in Feb.1940. He said that he had met him onthe aerodrome. In fact, he met him onVictoria Station and travelled with him toFolkestone. He said that he had lunchedwith him at Antwerp and had seen himthere on one other occasion. He hadnever seen him in this country nor hadhe kept up the acquaintanceship. J.C.had read him out the gist of some of histelephone conversations with Snow andasked him whether these were consistentwith his statement that he had entirelydropped the acquaintanceship. He wasobviously rather confused and when askedwhether he had seen Snow on any otheroccasion made a further denial. He wasthen told that we had positive evidencethat the German S.S. had confidence inhim and it was suggested to him that heshould consider very carefully whatpeople he had seen at Antwerp and Hamburgand how this confidence in the minds ofthe Germans could have been built up.It was on this note that we left him.June llthWe discussed STEWNART'S case in the morningand it was suggested that I should godown and see him next Sunday and have aquiet talk. If this failed to produceanything other forms of interrogationCatalogue Refererice:RV14/188On 31.5.41 the total number of enemyaliens, Italians and Germans and Austriansreleased in U.K. Canada and Australiasince the general internment order was16,130. (13,917 males and 2,230 females).June June 12th 12thSTENART has applied to see his solicitorand the H.O. are reluctant to refuse tthis request. This means that his soli-citor could warn everyb dy concernedin the case to keep their mouths shut,and will seriously impede our investiga-tions. I went to see Maxwell who wasreluctant to give a definite refusal.He thought it would be best if theGovernor should tell STEWART that heshould write to his solicitor. Theletter would then be submiute forcensorship and would probably notreach the solicitor until Monday. Thiswould give us the necessary time tocomplete our enquiries. This is a typicalillustration of how difficult it is tocarry out investigations properly in ademocracy which is fighting a totalit-arian enemy.I saw V.V. today and G-P was also present.I told him that at cur meeting of theR.S.S. committee we had discussed verycarefully the importance of building upour staffs concerned in the productionof ISOS. It seemed that G-P was alsogoingto intercept an increasing volumeCatalogue Referenee:KV/4it8gia therefore necessary93Sfor all trrose concerned in its productionto increase their staffs. I thought alsothat it might be necessary to get higherauthority to say that our requirementswere to be met without the usual obstruc-tions The material was pure gold andeverything should be done to develop it100%. At present we only took 20%and even then we have difficulty inproducing it.We are making an offer to section V of 5or 6 officers. Their Nork is so essentialto our service that I think we are fullyjustified in making thesacrifice. atpresent Felix is grossly understaffed andthe work in Lisbon and elswhere is suffer-ing in consenuence. Many of ourenguiries remain unanswered for a consid-eraple.period.Celery has returned with an interestingreport about SESSLER. SESSLER returnedto his project of selling out on theGermans provided he could get a freepassage to America. He has furthersucceeded in confirming to himself thatCelery is working for us. This may havebeen his sole object. There is howevera 30% chance that he is quite genuinein his desire to get away.. He has toldCelery that he will be back about the29th and will apply to the barman at theConcha Bar in Lisbon for a note givinghim instructions how to meet Celery orCatalogue SRererence:KV/4/188i meeting the planfor SESSLER' escape to England will belaid down. Dick was very keen to go overto Lisbon himself to arrange this and tohave a look at the S.I.S. organisation onthe spot. Personally this I think would -be entirely wrong. It is obviouslydesirable that we should send somebodyhowever, otherwise t e job will not becarried through to our satisfaction.June 13thI had lunch with Canning. He told me quitconfidentially that he did not have a veryeasy passage with Kendal who was alwayssaying that much of the work that S.B.did for us was unnecessary, Canning wasvery anxious that we should take S.B.more into our confidence when writing tothem. This would greatly facilitateenquiries as his officers would havea better idea as to what specific informa-tion was required. I said that we triedto do this but that in some cases, shortof writing him 3 or 4 pages of foolscapit would be impossible to put him pro-perly in the picture. I thought thata better plan would be to get .B.Officersand our own officers more together.All our enquiries were addressed toCanning. If therefore he could tell theofficer who had the case in hand to keepin touch with our officer the whole casemight be discussed including the bestmethod of approach. Personally I am notvery keen about putting too much onpaper to S.B. as although I would trustCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188THIS IS A COPYIN ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDDEPARTMENT UNDER3 ACT (4) OF 1958 THE PUBLIC RECORDS 0ooo SECTICoLemost of them there are bound beone or tho about whom doubts wouldarise from ime to time. Pie hadrecently learned for example that arepresent tive o1 the Daily Expressnamed HUSKIIvS is in fairly close touchAith S.I and in fict has details ofa number our cases.S.I.S. report tat the German avanceon Russia ill take Place towirds theend of this month. The Lutzo hasbeen hit by an aerial torvedo.Dick and 1 dined withHegave us rather a sorry picture of hisdifficultiesin Lisbon. He refusedto work any longer under his sectionleader in S.I.S. One athred t SOother job is to ce found for nim.He told us tait suite adequate machin-ery existed in Lisbon for carrying outour enmuiries and that he could onlyassume that tae delays vere due tosortage ot st f. at Central UIticeOand cerhips to some degree at Lisbon.June 14thLunched wita D.G. Ruert ana TronclarTrencrd has in very oor form. Hebeen much imressed by our i. i.S. oomD-er cilots wom he na seen off to thenuhr tao nithts ago. He talked a lotapout nis difficulties at the Yard.de did not think that he had made moreCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188, than a SRL.L dent. He had evicentiyanyhad a very hard time ith the Federation.The first time ne met them ne found theroom full of smoke. He walked out againand did not return for half an heur.He had then proceeded to ive them heilabout discipline. He thousht.that noneof them knew anything about how to lookafter their men or now to triin them.He seems to have ended by commandingtheir resect.A Spanish cat in called martin OCRANAhasxx turned uD ith high grade secretink disguised as D.medicine. When hewas examined it was found that he hadnever had V.D.We have decided to sent Cyril to Lisbonto make the necessary contact, as itwould obviusly be impossile forCelery to get anther visa.R.S.S. have located one and possibly toillicit ireless sets.June 15thI sav Samel STEART at Erixton. I wentover the previous round very carefuilywith him. He nad recalled quite anumper of things and 1 impressedupon him how important it was from hispoint ofview to crovie us with someexplanation oi his build-u ith theGerman S.S. He gave me certain particularCatalogueRererenee:kbi4hgsou really explainmatters.942I had a discussion"ith the T.G. zheit thoreorganisation of W.5a,W.6 and W.7.The illicit wireless transmitter has nowbeen traced to a radius of 5 miles in thevicinity of Fighter Command.Rainbow has been further questioned. Headmitted that he had been out takingphotographs with SCHUTZ and had seenhim using a micro-camera. When askedwhy he had not told us this before, hesaid that he had s oken to Sinclaiabout 18 months ago.June l6thThe illicit wireless has now been foundto be in the possession of the Poles,who were trying to communic te with oneof their agents in Warsaw. They shouldof course have informed either ourselvesor S.I.S. what they were doing. It wasonly when the head of their servicewas pressed that he made enquiries andfound that one of his subordinates hadbeen operating for the last 6 days. Whilea good deal of time has been sastee itis at least satisfactory to think thatR.S.S. have located the station.I went to Iunbridge Wells with the D.G.this evening.June 17thTheD.G.wanted to inspect Tunbridge ellsCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188enquire into certainallegations that Grassby was not goingdown well with the military. We calledon the Assistant Regional Commissionerand the 4th and 12th Corps. We also sawa lot of Col.Halland, the DistrictInspector General of Police and Sir ChargeStead the Regional Inspector General.Most people seemed quite satisfiedwith the working of the regional system.Colonel Halland,thought that althoughthe Special Branches had done verygood work in the time, they were notqualified to carry out highly delicateenguiries except in big cities likeLiverpool or Birmingham. It vould pehopeless to give most of them a B.6 case.Neither would they be able to handleagents of the kind we usually employ.I had a talk with Glover who seemsgereral y rather unhappy. Grassby hadevidently taken a thorough dislike to him.think that although Grassby is a veryefficient oliceman some change will benecessary. Either he rGlover will haveto be transferred to other spheres. D.G.suggested to Grassby that ne mightperhaps go to Lagos and he seemedquite pleased at the idea.June lothDick and J.C. saw Snow yesterday andwent over the whole ground of hisrelations with Sam STEART. His storywas fairly consistent and in somerespects amplified the information hehad previously given. Personally Ithink STEWART has got a lot to explain.Catalogue ReferEnCe:KV/4/188qu4The general impression is that he didwet his feet some time ago, althoughhe can never have become very deeplyimplicated. Probably the Germans had atalent srotter on him and came to theconclusion, owing to various smallservices he had rendered them, that hewas the kind of person who could beeasily approached. Things may not havegone further than this, but the generalindications are that some kind of servicewas rendered at one time or another.The Turks have signed a pact of non-aggression with Germany. It is thoughtthat this is onlyfor the purpose ofbringing pressure to bear on the Russiansas it prevents the Turks ffom coming toRussia's aid.In Libya we appear to be more or lesspack where ge started. In Syria de Gaulleforces in the centre are held up butwn the left we are advancing towards thecoast. Two more supply ships to Tripodihave been sunk. The Russian situationis still obscure. The Americans havestarted to fly the Atlantic patro] withunits operating from N. .Ireland.I had lunch with Borum, who is soon goingback to America. He has not been home fora good many years and has 23 years servicein this country.I doubt whether he willreturn. I took Ramsbotham along in orderthat he might have a direct liaison withthe American The Americans haveCatalogue Reference:closed down all the German consulatesin the U.S.A. and also the TransoceanService and the Railway Travel Bureau.This shows clearly that the Americ ins areoperating on the right lines. They havealso refused to admit any more Germans whohave either relations or property inGerman-occupied territory.The lines of communication with theU.S.A.are getting a little complicateaas all sorts: of soldiers, sailors andairmen are arriving and they all want tohave liaison with us. Personally I amall in favour of sticking tothe one channethrough S.I.S. to the F.B.I I haveasked Borum to make some enquiries. Hehad not apparently heard of Colonel Casewho has been wandering round the W.O.saying that he is the head of the AmericanC.E. service. Probably ne is not.June o9thWe had a director's meeting. Thequestion of Bahnpolizei was discussed.I was asked to explore the positionwith Sylvanus Vivian.D.G. has ordered that auxiliary Officersare to go to the Regions for a week assoon as 0O sible. There has been acomplaint from ingapore that the Japan-ese activities are not satisfactorilycovered. Everybody here seems to thinkthat they are and that the U. in C isCatalogue not Referencetre/4/ise what is going on.4146I duscussed the MANIFOLD case with theD.G. It has been decided to get himaway to some suitable colonial post wherehe can do no harm.We had an R.S.S. meeting. It was decidedthat the question of the circulationof Trevor-hoper's analysis of ISOS shouldbe discussed privately between him, Felix,Dick and myself. Dick and I feel thatthere is value in the work that he isdoing. Cogill's point is that he onlywants the material to circulate if it isproperly blanketted. Trevor-hoper nasa scholarly approach to the whole questionand perhaps a better underst indnyof the syS-tem than anybody else. He is howeversomethatx of an ntellectual snob. It wasdecided that if there was disagreementon the n.S.S. Committee, Maltby and I shoultake the matter to the D.G. and C.S.S. andif it further became necessary to Swintonas the final arbitrator.June 20thCharles came in the morning. We discussedcertain domestic difficulties. He hasexpressed his views rather forcibly to theD.G. Endless day of interviews.June 2lstWe discussed uennox's position vis a visthe I.S.S.B. and the organisation that heCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188auwould require. The D.G. is L think infavour of the scheme which was put up.The main difficulty is Gen.akin. ithas been suggested thit possibly he mighttake the security job which is going inS.0.2. Lennox will discuss this withCalthrop.June 22ndHad a meeting at Bletchley at 11.30which lasted till 4 p.m., with G-P, ,Maltby,Felix,V.V. and Denniston. We discussedthe requirements that would have to bemet in connection with ISOS and get aconcrete programme.. G-P said that heexpected 65% increase. He hopes to have30 double channel YIStations making atotal of 120 sets in the first year andhe will add aother 60 in the second year.At present R.S.S. are only listening towhat is group material. They are doing noresearch work and no policing of servicetraffic, neither are they taking anyItalian S.material, which might well beinteresting. Further they are doing nofigure cy her work. If R.S.S. aresuccessful in breaking enigma another65% of material will be added to theexisting flow.The Germans started marching into Russiaat 4 a.m. The Fuehrer made one of histypical bombastic speeches. The situationin some respects is almost uilbertian.The Poles are our allies and are fightingGermany and Russia who are fighting eachCatalagueReferenceikV/4ls8slease and surprised445if the Germans are not in Moscow withina fortnight. They may however get severelydamaged in the process. It is difficultto foresee what may happen if they subdueRussia and get the grain from the Ukraineand oil from Baku. It is not unlikelythat they will then march on India andEgypt.June 23rdI discussed the MANIFOLD case with Hollisand Knight and it is thought that weshall be failing in our duty if we donot have MANIFOLD interrogated. In myview our primary consideration should beto isolate MANIFOLD and important informa-tion of which he is in possession. Heshould be got away soon as he is toldthat heno he no longer to remain in IntelligenoKnight thinks that he may be thoroughlycowed into silence and that his connectionwith SPRINGHALL is extremely sinister.Whilelagree that it may be, I do not thinkthere is evidence. It is one thing totalk vaguely about your job in M.I. I.and another thing in time of war to commitwhat you must know to be an Ofienceagainst the Treachery Act. It is inthinkof paramount importance to get the manout of the country and away from hiscommunist contacts as early as possibleI broughtIbrought Machell and Shillitotogether in order that we might finallyget a solution of the W5a/B.1 controversy.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188c(waShillito tells me that B. 10 at the momenthave gota lot of spare time on theirhands. This seems curious as Jock hasjust been shouting at me for extra helpand has enlisted the aid of Horrocks intrying to get the matter through quickly.I lunched with D.G, Pilcher, Gen.Petit andKenneth. Petit had three grievances(1) the fact that Frenchmen could notbe visited at Patriotic Schools. Hesuggest d that we should have some sym-pathetic person to receive them andexplain the security difficulties. (2) healso wanted an arrangement by which agentsof the 2eme Bureau would be allowed tocommunicate direct with their H.O. hereinstead of through S.I.S. (3) his lastcomplaint was that the pinching ofFrenchmen by S.I.S. and S.0.2 was goingon without consultation with the French.Doth Kenneth and I thought that thismatter had been settled uD long ago.Petit was very friendly. 2I saw Joe this afternoon. He told methat a new type of aeroplane. beingmanufactured by the Power Jets Co. hasbeen tested for 10 hours. It is a lightcraft, run on paraffin, has no propellerand works on the rocket principle. Ithas been flown at a height of 6,000fwhere it reaches a speed of 380 miles p.h.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188soI saw Stewart Menzies about Section V.He has obtained the necessary sanctionfrom Cadogan and very much welcomes theassistance we are to give in personnel.He said that the Finns had for some timebeen decoding the Russian cyphers andpassing the information to the Germans.I gather that we also have had the benefitof this service. We have now been obligedto inform the Russiin of the position.June 24thConference of RSLOS in London. Dick andT.A.R. gave interesting accounts of thework of their section. Forrest raiseda query about RSLOS making more activeenquiries. I said that in addition tothe NorK they did by means of 1.0.1 Sand the police I thought there were possi-bilities on B.6 lines. This would dependhowever to a considerable degree on theefficiency of the local S.B. Most RSLOSseem to think that this would not be of avery high grade. I said that on thisparticular line I thought there was a gooddeal to be done with suspect consulates.If observation could not be discreet itmight be carried out indiscreetly withconsiderable advantage. Our Consuls werecontinually being harrassed abroad andI saw no reason why in the cases of theJaps or Spaniards we should not ratherobviously follow their consular officialsabout. This might well act as adeterrentand in the light of our knowledge of whatCatalogue SRelerence:kOr4/18gin could not very easias'easily be a cause for serious complaint.I thought that RSLOS might also try alittle provocation. Hay lor asked whetherwe could give the Regions an officer fromB.5 for this purpose. I said that thwould depend very much on the circumstancesAn easier method migt be to put the suS-pect on check, eliminate his good friendsfrom his bad ones and after nking policeenquiries about the reliability,approach one of the good ones. This mightbe a quicker way of getting things, sincea B15b officer would obviously have tostart from scratch unless he had somedefinite connections. Hart gave aninteresting talk about plans he has beenmaking with the Registrar-General totighten up the ration book and registraticard system. In future people who wish totravel would have to get a special rationbook which will be renewable every month.To obtain this ration book they will haveto give particulars about themselves andabout their registratio cards whichwill be checkable. These particulars willagain be checked if an extension isrequired. Had this system been in forceit is certain that the Dutch parachutistTer BRAAK would not have been able toreside in Cambridge SO long unnoticed.Registration cards of a new type are to beissued in certain defence areas. Thepurpose of this is 2-fold.Firstl to havea checkin the area, secondly to harrassthe enemy by keeping him in doubt as tothe time and location of changes inCatalogge gaheferenceRv/arisfs 11 measure The Registrar as it willgive him an opportunity of bringing hiselaborate records into action and testingwhether abuses of the registrition systemare going on. The matter is to be raisedat the H.D.S. E.Lennox tells me that in our successfulsweeps by the R.A.F. over France carefultests are being made as to the proportionof fighters required to rovide adequatedefence for our.bombers. The enemy isshowing very little inclination to fight.T'he Me. 109F which is the latest Germantype of fighter may possibly be nearlyas good as the Spitfire at altitudes highethan 32,000 ft. but is not nearly SOeffective at lower altitudes. Our fighterare flying at ,000. The Germans seemdisinclined to come down and attack them.The Germans estimate that it will takethem 6-7 weeks to bring the campaign inRussia to a suecessulonclusior Fairprogress is being made in Syria. Thedefences of Malta are to be e strengthened.The C.P. have issued instructions to theirDistrict Organisers on the attitude theyshould adont towards the Russo-German wr.They are to organise proa United Frontsolidarity with the Soviet Union. Theyare to demnd immeicate diplomatic agreemerwith the Soviet Union. They are to urgethe removal of reactionarie from placesof porer in the Government. Iney are toadvoc te the raising of the bn on theDaily Worker, the olacing of HiESS on trialand tnepuplication CI all documents.Lastly they are to work for the formationCatalogue Referenee:kVf4/i88ntio which can betrusted to demand the interests of theTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL OCUMENT RE RETAINEDa53IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONACT 19583 (4 OF THE EPUBLICRECORDSBritish people, which are identical withthe Soviet people.June 25thLunched with-He is going toLagos. He is very anxious to cet intotouch with our representative as soonpossible as he thinks they should workin the closest co-opertion and navetheir offices in the same building.He would be working under Section V andwould have nothing to do wit.h the otherside of the office.I had another discussion with the D.6. andM about the MANIFOLD CESE. I pointed outclearly that our objective should be thesafeguarding of ISOS rather thn thepossibility of obtaining information whichmight incriminate MANIFOLD. I thought thatif MRNIFOLD were interrogated and deniedany close connection with the C. C.P.he P.would be bound to associate his removalto other spheres with any feelins thamight have about hispoliticil views.This might possibly lead to difficulties.On the other hand if he gave a ireeconfession the Army might wish to kick himout. Wie should not have sufficientinformation to intern nim under lOp. Hewould be disgruntied and we could notprevent him from passing information hichhe might have obtained in M.I.0 3 to hiscommunist friends, if he bas not alreadyCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188I thought that if he could be transferrredin an M.I. capacity to some remote islandthis would probably be the best solution.I learned that the D.G. later decided thathe should not be interrogated.June 26thThe D.G. has looked into our domesticagency project and it has his fullapproval. We are going ane ead d and Eunderstand that several quite usefulapplications have alre dy come in. Thequestion of having some relations withthe Russian Intelligence Service hasarisen. I feel that they should know agreat de 1 ab ut German espionage activitesagainst this country. The approach israther a delicate matter and we are proposing tonopen the b 1l with the Czechs.June 27thTin-Eye has had a row with Dearden. Itall arose from a rather trivial incident.Dearden as might be expected went toCrocker and has written a rather carefullyworded solicitor's letter. It was sugges-ted that Tin-Eye should send an acknow-ledgement and suggest that Dearden shouldtka e a few days leave. I said I thoughtthis might perhaps be unwise. It wouldprobably bebetter to acknowledge the letteand say uite simply that,as Tin-ye wasnot in a position to accept Dearden'sresignation he had forwarded the papersto the D.G. I hive ve sent the papers downto the D.G. who is in the country andCatalogue Referente:kv/47188 see Dearden955personally and then decide whether theincident can be smoothed over, whether heshould accept Dearden's resign tion orwhether he should conduct some enuiryinto the incident and the relations be-tween Stephens and his officers. I thoughtthat an en iry of the kind indicatedwould probably strengthen our hands whenquestions arose at a later date.A man is expected from the other sidein the course of the next 2-3 weeks. Hewill be bringing money for DragonflyArrangements have been made for him todeliver this money at a special addresswhere he will hand it over to the womanin charge.Lakin is going to S.0.2 on Monday andwants to take Senter and Foulkes with him.June 28thThere is a curious association betweenAl Massy the brother of the CountAlmassy who has been working for theGermans in Egypt., Lisboa of the BrazilianEmbassy and Matsumoto of the Jap Embassywho is known to enggage in espionage.We are rather well-placed in this matterand hope to get useful information.The D.G has rung up from the country tosay that he entirely disapproves ofLakin's attitude in trying to take awayCataloguetreferencekv/4/sswhilelag the matter956was badly andled by Lakin who should havegone to the D.G. in the first instancebefore making any suggestions to eitherSenter or Foulkes, I did tell the D.G.we were on a rather poor wicket in so faras Senter was concerned. We had keptimmkicking his heels for about 6 monthsand had finally offered him a job insection V which he did not feel was accep-table as it virtually meant that he wouldhave to keep two establihsments one inthe country and one in London. Apart fromthis he was not very keen on doing a lotof committee work which was the purposefor which he was mainly required.He had a definite offer of a security jobin S.0.2 and was very anxious to employhis time more usefully than he had,through no fault of his own, been able todo in the past.Lennox came over about a rojected raidon the coast of France. There are to beelaborate cover arrangements, and theobjective will probably be Le Touquet.I feel rather doubtful about the valueof an operation of this kind unless thereis some very definite objective, whereworks of importance could be destroyed.If we make a raid and destroy a lot ofprivate property and probably civilians,we may cause those elements which aresupporting us to come out into the openwith any stocks of arms that they may havehidden away. We shall then leave themin their devastated surroundings to beCatalogue Reference:kVr4A88 andshot.057I have sug ested that we should convey tothem some warning through Les Trois Amis.It could be said on the lines of NBBS "Wehope to be coming over to pay them a shortvisit some time but that we should notbe stying very long. The Germans wouldprobably think that this was merely ajitter campaign on our part for thepurpose of relieving the Russi n front.We have sunk 5 or possibly 6 submarinesin the last 40 hours. Gen.Dentz ismaking tentative pe ce overtures throughthe Americans and through the Turks. TheFrench want a guarantee that all those whoso desire will be allowed to return toFrance and that the remainder will begiven their present rates f pay underGen.de Gaulle.Our planes over France have been comingdown to 20 ft. without any seriousopposition.June 20thI saw Medhurst in the morning andconsulted him about the project to setup wireless masts on the east coast ofEire. He said that this matter had beendiscussed by the Air Staff about 10 daysago. The Chief of the Air Staff wasreluctant to give the Germans theopportunity of inspecting these maststhrough the good offices of some Quislingmember of the Eire Govt. unless thereCatalogueReference.KV/4/f88" which the Irish955authorities would be prepared to ransmitthe information obtined to our Air force.Personally I think they would do so inthe same way they have given us informationabout submarines on the west coast. Thisinformation is transmitted by wireless toDublin on a known wavelengt th which wehave been picking up; The same methodcould be adopted with regard to aircrat.There is I gather a scheme on foot togive the Eire Govt. a flight of Hurric nes.This will enable them to deal with Germanaircraftflying over their own country butwill not help us in getting advanceinformation about raids on Liverpool whichcome up the east coast of Eire. Ifhowever the sug estion about the flightof Hurricanes is ado ted the question ofproviding RDF apparatus will be reopened.Medhurst to ld me that a certain FrenchCol.G. had arrived here from France under-the auspices of M.I.6 . He is said tohave come from Petain and Hunziger. He isanxious to get as much information as hecan about our powers of resist nce andabout the effect of Americ n cooper tion.The matter came up at the J.I.C whenMedhurst refused to give him any facilitieto visit aircraft establishments unlesshe knew more about him. As is usual inthese matters Col.G is being dealt withon a high plane and has been seen byEden and the P.M. We have been toldnothing about it.Lennox tells me that the C in U. of theCatalogue CatalogueReference:KV/4/88 88tinisticutat his Chie:05aof Staff is pessimistic. We have sunk 3more supply ships off the coast of Sicpiyand 2 more submarines elsewhere. Edenhad converstion with Maiski the otherday about our mission to Russia. Maiskisaid that he wanted this to be on a recip-rocal b sis. When asked if that meantthat he wanted a mission here he said no.His govt. merely wanted to assist us as wehad offered to assist them. It seemed tome that there was a good deal behind trthis. I sense that the Russians areangling for a binding agreement is theyppobably fear that at some future datewe may make peace at their expense. Thisview has subsequently been confirmed inmy mind by attempts that are going on inMoscow to obtain full political agreementbetween t is country and the USSR. Weare saying that we have only justgot amilitary agreement and that it is notpossible to move uite so fast, withoutdamaging the cause for which we are bothworking, namely the defeat of Germany.I am inclined to think that if the Germansare successful in establishing a linefrom Leningrad to Moscow and possiblyto Astrakhan they will invade Syria anaIrag and Egypt via the Caucasus. they mayeven have a go t India.July lstDirector's meeting which lasted the wholemorning. The Shipping Cttee was discussedin the light of sugestions that had beenmade from the Swinton Executive that itsCatalogue talogaeReference:KVi4/188 co-ordinated.960It was alleged that we should not have putforward 2 suggestion to the ministriesconcerned about the establishment ofsecurity officers on ships withoutreference to the Centre, It was suggestedthat such an arrangement might get acrossthe Wall Committee and the Seamen' Union.Personally I feel that the Wall Cttee shou.confine itself to its original terms ofreference, namely the preven i n of thesuborning of British and allied seamenin foreign ports and the provision ofcounter-attractions. Security on shipsshould be a mitter fo the Security Serviceand for the Shipping Cttee which we h aveset up. The D.G. deferred f irther discus-sion until he had had n opportunity oflooking at the minutes of the SwintonExecutive. These minutes appear to me totie our hands unnecessarily and in fact insome respects to seriously hamper thelegitimate functions of this office. Wenext discussed the question of vagrants.It was decided to let the C.C.Birminghacarry out a check in his area beforerecommending that similar checke should beput into force all over the country.After the meeting hd E discussion withHorrocks about v arious Registry problemsHe told me that the scheme for a jointregistry had been revivea nd that he waswaiting for cert in inform'tion from SectionV before t king the matter up agiin withthe D.G. I said that i was convinced thatif we were not in fu ure to card extensivelyall documents which affected the work ofCatalogue RefiereneerkV/4/d88ss of their sourceor the area which they affected somethingin the nature of a pooled registry wasabsolutely essential. He agreed. I toldhim that although in theory people weresupposed to make reference to otherregistries they would never do so inpractice. Quick answers were oftenrequired and if you h dto go to 3 or 4sources for information you ended byrelying on your own records which werevery often inadequate.We then had a discussion with Bird aboutthe Holorith. Horrocks thinks thatvisual cards under about 5 categorieswould be more effective in dealing thcensorship materi since likes would bemore easily thrown up. The holorith cardswere filed only under the n me of theaddressee and therefore relied on some-body's memory or on information from othersources. Bird is going to study thematter but feels that the visual systemwill involve a great deal of work andthrow up an enormous number of perfectlyuseless likes which will have to beput up to some competent officer fora deicsion as to whether they are ofimportance or not.July 2ndI attended the meeting os'the SwintonExecutive. Hart's scheme with the Repis-trar General and seemed to find favourwith most of those present. The H.D.S.E.uestion whether the labour involvedCatalogue ReferenCe:KV/4/18867-would be commensurate with the resultsachieved but were very much in a minority.A small committee is to be formed to workout the details.Protected Area No.1 was also discussed.The Censorship feel that the work theyare carrying out at present is not reallyjustifiable, if it is sucha simple matterfor any body to cross the frontier with aletter in his pocket. The Admiralty wereasked if they could limit the areas wherecensorship was really necessary. Theywanted censorship maint ined as they saidthey contained useful informtior aboutindiscretions. We ere unable to say thatwe had any information which even led usto suspect that somebody was communic tinginform tion with malice.Lastly a proposal tha a Red Cross shipshould go from Eire to some port inoccupied France was dealt ith. Weopposed the scheme on security groundsand suggested as an alternative that theship should go from Englind There wereapparently dif iculties about this as inthe transmission of Red Cross materialthe goods are supposed to pass via aneutr 1 country. Stevenson Oi the D.O.objected on the grounds that acquiescencein the scheme postulated recognitionof Lire's neutrality while Herbert pointedout that there would be nothin to preventCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188ab?the Irish Red Cross from putting parcelson board in Eire which ould be destinedfor their own nationals. There could be nocheck on these parcels or their contents.We had insisted on the most stringentregulations in connection with the newAir Service from Foynes to Lisbon and itwould be entirely inconsistent if we nowagreed to uncensored pareels going by aship.The D.G. has seen Derden nd Stephensand neither of them appears to desireto continue under existing conditions.The D.u: has ordered Pilcher to hold anenquiry before he decides whether toaccept Dearden's resign tion.We had a long discussion about Dragonfly.We were all agreed that at all costs hisposition should not be compromised.HORSEFALL-ERTZ has admitted before theAdvisory Cttee th t he knew Mrs. KRAFTand KHUGER. He said that he had formerlydenied this as he was threatened withtheTreachery Act. We have deeided tointerrogate him further as so n as wehave got hold of Mrs. KRAFT.Neville of N.I.D. has brought over whatwould appear to be an interesting espionagecase. The German standing orders t akenfrom a captured submarine disclose thatthey have accurate information about ourminefields and it is alleged in oneCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188964instance about a projected minefield.The Admiralty do not think therefore thatthe leakage could have occurred throughour cyphers being compromised. I havedetailed Hart to carry out the investiga-tions and have said to Neville thathe must be given freelaccess to allrelevant documents.July 3rdWe had a further discussion about Dragon-fly. It was decided to go on the ir andtry to get the date narroNed down. Wewould then arrange for Dragonfly to bepresent at the address to accept the cigarbox and question the caller. Arrangementswould alsobe made to take a photographof the caller and get a record of theconversation.I sent the full report about the Polishplot case to the D.G. today suggestingthat he might wish to show it to Swinton.It has disclosed that some 17 Polishofficers and possibly 2 British subjectshad worked out a scheme to assassinateHESS but it seemed that as the plot wasdue to take place on May 19th the projectmight well have been abandoned. Alley saysthat the Poles are always formulatingplots andschemes, most f.which nevermaterialise, but that you can never bequite certain that they ill not go offthe deep end without much warning.The Poles seem to think that HESS mayCatalogue ueReference:kV/4/188 peace negotitionsalsand thatthe British Govt.ma succumb tothe idea leaving the Poles in the handsof Germany.D.G. was very annoy ed that this matterhad not been previously brought to hisnotice. He rate tha if anything shouldhappen his position and that of the wholeoffice would hve been quite untenable.He had no fault to find with the wayin which the enquiry had been conducted.I said th t L quite agreed that I shouldhave informed him but that I had nointention of deliberately withholdin theinorm tion. The fact was that my day wasso full thit if I could nos get into himat a given moment it was sometimes diffi-cult to recollect what I had told himand what I had not:July 4thWe had a conference with.D.G. with G.,Lennox,oulke > Lennox,and Boddington.D. agreed theconstitution of Lennox's branch, afterhearing what all those concerned hadto say about their work.Ihhad lunch with LAPORTE who is nowthef de Cabinet to Muselier. He gave mea long account of himself, how ne had leftthe Matin, gone to the Agence ournier,and on the outbreak of war had been sentto this country as Asst.AirAttache. Whenthe collapse came his chief returned toFrance but he asked Archie Doyle that heCatalogusrelerencetkive4/itsserned. This was done966and when he emerged he was posted toMuselier's staff. We discussed t e Museliercase at great length and I think I convin-ced him of all the various difficultieswhich we had encountered. I explained tohim how the whole thing had happendd andhowI hoped for once and for all thesuggestion had been dispelled from theminds of theFrench that we were in any way-trying to pry into their privat affairs.We h id helped to set up Howard's Bureaumerely because we wanted some represen-tative French body with whom to deal onsecurity matters. We were interested inFrench security matters only in so far asthey affected the security of this countryand we felt that the closest cooperationis necessary. ve had a great deal ofmachinery at our disposa and we couldundoubtedly re der great deal ofassistance to the French. Laporte wasvery friendly and I think he vill be auseful ally. I am goi g to introduce himto Kenneth when I come back from theregions. In the meantime he gave me thename of awoman illed Jeannette Hart whohe said was pursuing the cypher officer.Celery has got an offer to go to Brazilor to work for S.0.2 in France. I amgoing to try and get section V to use himin Brazil.Mrs. KRAFT nas been arrested.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188061July 5thI saw Gen. Hunter ind Col. .Coates about thePolish plot. Hunter knew Hesketh Pritchardwho was one of the Englishmen thought tobe concerned, Pritchard seems to be ofan S.0.2 type. He attached himself to theGuards at the beginnig of the war and wasrather a nuisance. He was a very goodshot and interested in sniping. Huntersuggested that as Pritchard had not beenat hingway with de, RAMER we might interrog-ate him about the whole affair. He couldbe very useful to the plotters since hewould have access to the Guards Mess atPirbright and might find out quite a lotaboutHESS. We also considered the questiorof putting checks onthe Poles in Scotlanand in London. Cookie is to go down toCamp Z on Monday with Coates in order toacquaint the Commandant with the positionand study the general layout.I saw Loxley at the F.O. and told himabout the case of the Comtesse deJONGHE who has now arrived here carryina Belgian bag which seems to have beenopened. It was decided that we shoulddraw the attention of somebody at theBelgian Embassy to this fact when return-ing the bag.I also saw Stewart ind expliined theposition to him. He agreed to this pro-cedure. He told me tht HESS hadCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188965attempted to commit suicide by throwinghimself over the banisters. He had onlysueceeded in breaking his leg.His mental st te is said to be improvingand he may possibly broadcast, at somefuture date. He is not SO suspiciousabout his food being poisoned as he was.Le nOx tells me that Sen tor whelan'spronouncement to the effect that noton y Marines but regular Americar troopswould be sailing toards the end of thismonth for Iceland has throw a realspanner into the works. The sendi oftroops other th n Marines would betantamount to a declaration of war.The Japs are said to have given instructiorto have their shins clear of the ranamaCanadal by the 27th July. It locks there-fore as if they intended to come in ifthe American do. It depends to someextent on who is the agressor.Our submarine Urge landed men on the eastcoast of Sicily near the Straits ofMessina. They place explosives in a longtunnel which not only blew up the tunnelbut also a tr in which was passing throughThis means that this r other importantline will be blocked for some considerabletime, and will impede passage of suppliesto N. Afirca. Coming out of the Straitsthe submarine torpedoed the Italian 8"guncruiser Coritza and sank her. Two morelarge supply ships have bben sunk ofSicily (Italians). The French have sentreinforcements to salonica but SO farCatalogue Reference:KVf47188 to let them thro'.I had a long talk with Hart about ISOS.He is quite convinced that if Trevor-Roper goes a great de l will be missed.Hart is quite convinced that Trevor-hoperis right ind Felix wrong. He feels thatyou cannot sep rate the technical sideof ISOS from the intelligence side. I amgoing to have another try with V.V. toarrive at some compromise. Hart also toldme about his Admir lty case. He doesnot think that the leakage is due toc phers but cannot yet give any definiteopinion. The indications are that some-how or other the enemy has been gettinghold of our charts. Minefields arereported by bearings on their 4 cornerS.In one instance two of these cornerswas reported inaccurately by so manyseconds both in the German document andin our ow n. chart. In the process ofmaking enouiries Hart has come to theconclusion that the security measures inthe Admiralty are in many respectsextremely bad. He himself got into theAdmira ty without any pass and he founda Naval Officer who had intentionallyfaked a pass using only a le d penciland a blue ch alk pencil. He had been usingthis pass with complete success for somemonths. Hart thinks that the calibre ofthe operations officer in the AdmirI ltyis far higher than that of the intelli-gence officer.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1889yoJuly 6thMme. de JONGHE has been interrogated andseems to have given a fairly good accountof hersdf. We have tried twice to returnthe bag to the Belgi n Embassy but on e choccasion have not succeeded in finding aresponsible official who could take itoverBlunt rang up to say that the SpanishConsul General was going out on Tuesday.-We decided that if his bag was notproperly sealed by the F.O. that weshould send him back or take it over andreturn it ourselves.July 7thI saw de REMA about the Polish plot tomurder Hess. De Rema made a very goodimpression. He has obviously handledthe whole business with gret ability anddiscretion. He thought that it would bewise for him to go upto Scotland on somepretext in order to find out whether therewere any developments t here. He couldsound Col. SOSABOWSKI and also visit FortWilliam, where the Foles had a specialschool. I suggested to im that theit might be a good plan ifsome Ministerof standing, preferably the P.M. if hecould spare the time, could visit Polishunits and explain to them our aims andobjects in the present struggle and themeanging of certain politic l events whichtook place in this country. They wouldCatalogute Reference:K//4/i188 their eads abouta7'irresponsible statements made by politiciarin the House and elsewhere. thoughttoo that something in the nature ofentertinment might also pe a good thing,and suggested films with Polish captions.De Rema was enthusiastic about bothideas and pressed me again and again to-get something done on the lines suggested.He said the gre t thn was to keep theminds of the Poles occ pied duringtheir leisure hours. They were intenselypatriotic and desperately keen to be inthe fight and but there were times thatthey felt very much at a Loose end. It wasduring these moments that they were likelyto be scheming and hatching plots. Imentioned this matter to the D.G. and heis having it taken up by Lord Swinton.De Rema told me that they were having acertain amount of trouble with the oldermen who felt that it was a point of honourfor them to join the parachute troops.T Tae result of this hid been rather serious.The jump apparently affected their hearts,they bec me unconscious and then injuredthemselves when landing.The D.G. and I saw the Lord President andLord Swinton about the Polish plot. TheLord President seemed satisfied with theaction taken and agreed with us that it wasessential that De Rema's position shouldin no way be compromised. He thoughthowever that Heskith Pritchard might peinterviewed since this could be donewithout raising difficulties for de Rema.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188972He thought that we ought to endeavour toreach a position where we could disclosethe whole matter to the Polish authoritieswithout jeopardising De Rema's position,as he felt that if any incident occurredthe results would be disastrous whetherit was successful r not.The D.G. and I left this evening forBristol.July 8th-9thBristol. We did a tour of the Regionseeing both the police and military,and travelling as far as Taunton andExeter. The relations everywhere seemto be excellent and there were no complaintfrom any quarter.I discussed with Ferguson the questionof his going to S.I.S. While I think heis quite happy where he is, he is uiteready to join Section V. and thinks hewould find the work interesting. Airy isto take his place. This creates a cer-tain difficulty with regard to Lane whohas twice been passed over for No.1Ferguson thinks that while he does hiswork extremely well he is not reallysuitable for a No.1 post. Most peoplefeel that they c innot entirely trust him.He is always practising some petty decep-tion. For instance he will ask for aGovt car for one purpose when he reallywants it for another.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188avWe visited the Bristol Aircraft factorywere we saw Beaufighters under construc-tion. To the uniniated the machine appearsextremely complex; the most importantpart of the RDF apparatus is not installedat the Bristol works.July lOthCardiff. Ye did the usual round ofpolice and military and also arrangeda meeting with the S.C.Os. The questionof their relation with the RSLO was dis-cussed. They all seemed to be in agreementon the point of the RSLO conducting investigations. The S.C.0. at Newport was worriedabout coastal vessels being in the portwhen troops and stores were being emparkedfor operational purposes. He cited thecase of the City of Dublin which had beenalongside a troopship and had left forLisbon some days before the troop convoyhad sailed.July llthReturned to London. There has been asuggestion from the Russians that Marti,Torres, and Guillaume, 3 notorious Frenchcommunists should be sent over nere andshould assist in fomenting a revolutionarymovement in France. I am glad to say thatthe idea has been turned down. Negotiationare on foot for a political agreementwith Russia. The Russian front has beenstablisied but there is strong pressurein the north. We are carrying out exten-Catalogue ReferenGe;Kv/46188a over France with a974small number of bombers and heavy fighterescort. At night we are making a dead setat German's railway communications. It issaid that the damage here has been con-siderable and has led to an increased useof coastal shipping. This has givencoastal command an opportunity to attackGerman convoys and their operations appearto have been highly successful. TheGermans are putting out quite a number ofpeace feelers and if their campaign againstRussia is successful a general peace drivemay be expected. The German Ambassadorsto Spain and Portugal have been hastilyrecalled to Berlin. The reason is not knownJuly 12thHad a long discussion with Machell aboutCensorship.A woman called FRASCHINI, dressed in cordurshorts and shirt, is said to be posing asa boy. She has been arrested at Paisley.Her story is that she left Italy a goodmany months ago and wandered across Luropewith a bicyele till she finally reachedNorway. She said that she came over tothis country in a boat with several Nor-wegians and landed on the east coast ofScotland, sinc e when she has been swander-ing about on her own. it is a littledifficult to see ho she Could have doneall this on 300 lira which is all she saidshe had when she left Italy.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188a15Her story is full of inconsistencies andshe is being held at Holloway till we canget her properly sized up. She is undoubtely a Lesbian, probably alightly crackers,and just possibly a spy.Gehrt van WIJK who arrived here from Saaina short time ago has now confessed thathe was sent here by theGermans. He ori-ginally had a business in Spain. Onmobilisation he joined his regiment inHolland. After the defeat of the Dutchforces he applied to go back to Spain.He was appraoched there by a German agentcalled PABLO and suggestions were made tohim that he should work for Germnany. Hewas reminded that his wife and family werestill in Holland. He was first sent onsome finaial mission to Holland but wasnot able to bring the negotiations to asuccessful conclusion. Finally it wassuggested to him that he should go toEngland and after considerable difficultieshe managed to get away rom Lisbon. Hehad been instructed in the use of secretink.July 13thThere was a discussion last week by theExecutive on the CPGB and enlistment inthe army. The general opinion seemed tobe that communistically inclined workmenmight be less harmful in the army than ithe factory but the whole question is to bereferred back to the army. The generalmost important point as to whether communisCatalogue RefereinceKV/4/1oe should be eligible forofficer rank does not seem to have beenraised.An agreement has been reached with Russiathat neither party will negotiate a sep-arate peace. The present attitude of theCPGB to the war may be summarised asfollows: 1. Britain is still fighting animperialist war and the S.U. is fightinga just war. 2. The C.P. will supportthe Gov t. so far as it assists the latterwar but not to help Britain to victory.3.The C.P. has merely pushed its re-vious campaigns into the background andhas not renounced them. At the appropriatemoment the demand for a people's Govt.and a people's peace will be renewed.4. the C.P. is not prepared to abate anyT.U. privileges in order to secure agreater output. All delays on productionwill be blamed on the pro-Fascists andreactionary nagement. 5. tne C.P. stillregards the Govt. as an instrument of thepro-Fascists and Imperialists who may tryto switch the war. 6. The C.P. regards thenew turn of events as a great opportunityfor strengthening its position. 7The C.P.is seizing a unique opportunity for obtain-ing the removal of the ban on the Dailyworker which it regards as essential forsecurin recruits and conducting its camp-aign.July 14thSaw Maxwell about SEMMELBAUER and MAAS.I explained to him our difficulty,namelyCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188that there was information in the possess-ion of MAAS concerning which we could notrun the slightest risk of Leakage. MAAShad to have a companion and the onlysolution seemed to be to put him togetherwith SEMMELBAUER and keep them at Ham forthe duration. This would mean that theycould not have communication with theprotecting power who would undouptedly getto know that they were no longer atKnapdale and probably make en Tuiries.There would be no harm in their correS-ponding with anyone else as from theOratory Schools provided their letterswere strictly censored. If the protectingpower made enquiries they would have tobe warned off. There was a precedentfer-the- of a corresponding nature inthe case of Best and Stevens to whom nobodyhad been allowed access since they wereillegally removed from Dutch territory atthe beginning of the war. Maxwell agreedto the plan and said that he would arrangefor the necessary ministerial backing ifan awkward situation arose.I saw Medhurst about the associationof Joubert with a pro-Fascist named E. D.RICE. Medhurst said he would give Jouberta friendly warning. He said he knewJoubert very intimately and could do thisquite easily. It was Medhurst who beforethe war h d given the arning about Mrs.Brownhill.We talked about the suggestion to establisbCatalogue RDE Heference:Riv/4/188eas CO st of Eire78There is a definite gap in our defenceson the Welsh coast which can only besatisfactorily covered from the other sideof the caannel. I explained to Medhurstthat we had an arrangement with the Irishfor reporting submarines on the westcoast through intercepting their wirelessconmunication on the subject to Dublin.Some sort of similar arrangement couldpresumably be made to intercept warningsfrom the RDF stations if they could beset up. He agreed that this eliminatedone difficulty and said that he wouldbring it to the notice of the Air Council.There still remained however the possibi-lity that the RDF station might ht beinspected by some representative of theGerman Leg tion under the aus ices of anEire Quisling.I had a short talk with V.V. about Trevor-Roper. He said that he had washed hishands of the wole business, as T.R. now saihe did not wish to set up a separate organ-isation for dealin with ISOS. V.V. didnot know yet whether T.R. was prep aredtoaccept his position in Section V. I toldV.V that I had a slight feeling that thewhole T.R. incident might have created abelief that we were trying to interferein the affairs of Section V and to under-mine Felix's authority. Nothing was reallyfurther removed from our minds. We werehowever very seriously concerned about thehandling of ISOS material. We did not feelthat service. full adv Latterly vantage I was had being become taken extremely ftheCatalogueReterencetkvi4/teslations between anumber of officers in B.Branch and Cowgill.At least half dozen of them had come tome and said that they did not feel thatthey could now discuss their problemsfreely with Section V. as Felix merely dughis toes in and refused to move. Thesituation seemed bad when Dick felt boundto tell me that he had postponed his weeklyvisit to P.W. as he felt that he mightblow up. V.V. was very concerned aboutthis and said that he would like to talkit out very thoroughly at the earliestpossible moment.Frost told me about a curious cise of oneHARZBURG in the U.S.A. who had written toone of our P/W in Germany and also to theman's wife in this country. He hadoffered to give assistance to the P/W byhelping his wife and asked the wife topass on. any letters which she might receivefrom the P/W. It is difficult to see thereason for this r ther curious manoeuvreand enquiries are being made.The Irish frontier uestion has boiledagain due to questions in the House bySir Willi m Davison who complains thatthere is no control wntever on the frontieMorrison has been over and has been talkingto members of the Ulster Govt. It lookslike another political stunt. As frr ascan be seen everything practic l is alreadybeing done.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1889790July 15thV. V.telephoned to me about Cowgill. Hehad just seen him and asked him for thehundredth time when he was going to takesome leave. Cowgill thought he must goaway since when he found himself on theverge of having a row with Dick he thoughtthat there must be something wrong. V.V.seized the opportunity to tell him aboutmy anxiety. Felix very generously aamittedthat everything I had said was absolutelytrue. He agreed to take ten days leave.In the meantime V.V. is going to take overSection V.There was a Directors meeting. We discussedthe nuestion of the position of RSLOSin time of invasion. There are only twostatic units in the area. The Regionaiommissioner and the Command. Magnus, theSecurity Officer with Southern ommandthought that the auxiliary Regional Officershould be with Command, ready to be sentout to any area where their services mightbe required. I thought that they shouldremain with our Regional Officer, sinceif there was any friction the RegionalCommissioner would know, whereas CommandH.Q. would probably hear nothing. If anyunit in Command tikes the law into its ownhands it will sny nothing whereas thepolice will squeal immediately to theRegional Commissioner.A batch of American workerand techniciansCatalggye has h gueReterencerkyr4/t88in arrived Reference New York State and, Police. accompnied Theyar by ato work on the air base.I lunched at the Savoy with williamCharles. He seemed in verygood mood.Before lunch we had a cocktail withNewnham, the ex-editor of Truth, GordonLennox,Michael Lennox, Arlen and CommanderGrenfell, who had just written a book onsea power. Gordon Lennox remembered havingmet me at the house of Brocas Burrows andhaving talked with me about Russia. Hewanted to get hold of me for some time.I told him he could ring Room 055. I amnot very anxious to meet him, as I do notaltogether trust him.We had an R.S.S. meeting but there waslittle to discuss except ISOS priorities.Mills failed in his mission to Lisbonand an arrangement has been made with thelocal S.0.2 representativ to h ndleSESSLER if he turns up at some later date.Archie Boy Le has gone to S.0.2. and willbe at the he id of the planning section.July l6thThe Twenty Committee have got a planknown as Midas. The idea is to get theGermans to send over a large sum of moneywhich will be held here by some selectedindividual who will make the necessarypayments to agents in the U.K. Tricyclehas succeeded in getting the Germans tobite but they propose to send over theirown representative who will effect the dis-Catalogue bursements Reference:ky/4/t88 Reference reimbursed the money by from theTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION983 (4 OF HUBLIGRECORDACT1958opening of a thich Tricvcle willtake with him to AmericaThe office of the Jap Nava Attache haswith characteristic impertinence askedsome electrical institute were to givethem full details about the grid system.The writer of the letter is WILLIS whohas been known to us for some time. Wedo not think that Willis engages inespionage but ne knows which side hisoread is buttered.IA plan is being worked out for making 100%low grade test for secret ink on all mailsgoing to certain destinaticns. It isrroposed to get a suitable agent to inserta letter written inwhich can be brought up, expunged andbrought uD again. In this way it is hopedthat the Germans seeing that our test hasnot apparently brought to thewriting will get confidence inthis ink and use it more extensively.te can then have a major test of all0letters for a. .V. V. One of the advantagesis that we shall be able to watch thecorrespondence without being forced tostopthe letter.Dragonfly nas had quite a success inputting over a story about possibleinvasion oi Norvay. ISOS material disclosesthat his reports is confirmed from othersources.Catalogurreference:kv/4/s Catalogue that the drive on Leningrad,THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION93 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACI 1958Smolensk and eontintee ane that theGermans have made considerable progress.The German tank losses are said to havebeen heavy and resumably owing to lackof petrol the number of hosee draamn vehicleare being used by the Germuns. Germanfighter strength is not very high, conse-ouently there has been no transfer ofplanes to the west to deal with our dailysweeps over France. Mason Mac isfairly optimistic. The W.O. are ratherpessimistic. The "Georgic" has been sunkour r beached at Suez. The Germans wereattacking a aummny ship which they believeto be the "Anson" one of our latestbattleships at present ander construction.They missed the duminy ship and hit the"Georgic".Archer has been made Asst. Chief of Staffin Eire. This is rather a serious blow,as I doubt whether his number twc issufficiently strong to resist pressure fromabove.July 17thI had a meeting With1and HaighWood about Lagos.is taking out13 people. It seems to me impossible forHaigh-Woo who is going out with no assis-tant and no secretary to run territorieswhich are more than 1500 miles apart.If he is attending tae Governor's conferencehe cannot possibly be tourin; round thecountry, making contact with the variousCatalogue eReferenee:K/4/h88 he must rely. Thereare port officers at Bathurst, Freetown, Accra983and Lagos who are under Wharton, the G.S.O.II,I.B. Haigh-Wood will have relationswith them similar to that of RSLOS withSCOs. He will also be in touch with Stopsford with whom re will share an office, andwith Frank of S.0.2 who runs what is knownas the Frak Mission I hive suggestedto the D.G. that he should get Mavro tofly over here in order that we may get abetter idea of ourrequirements. I am sureth t Haigh-Wood will want one or two moreofficers and he may want one in eachterritory. The D.G' thinks that this willonly cause further delay and feels thatHaigh-Wood should concentrate on gettingout to Lagos as soon as possible.There has been no development in thePolish plot situation. All seems quieti,Mutt and Jeff's plan for assisting theImmigration Authorities in the ex aminationof Norwegian arrivals seems to be develop-ing satisfactorily.Hart is making considerable progress withthe Admiralty case. He is fairly satis-fied that the leakage is from charts andnot from cypher telegrams. He thinks hecan narrow it down to a particular type ofchart and that it may turn out that theinformation was obtained by divers fromsunken warships.Alcazar de Velasco has returned owing tothe spineless attitude of the F.O.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188Swinton and the Lord President haveexpressed the view that he should notcome but just before we had been notifiedof this fict, not directly but throughV.V., we had given the F.O. whit we feltwas an overwhelming case for declaringVelasco to be persona non gratea. Theday before the man arrived they sent usover their files which concluded with aminute in the following terms: It seemsthat Velasco is likely to be with us aglnbefore long. the only action taken hadbeen an attempt to enlist the support ofAlva and his councillor Villaverde.Villaverde was to try and persuadeAlcazar not to come, but if he iled itwas felt thi nothing could be done,without runnin the risk of risals.Swinton was extremely annoyed that the casehad not been reinforced by nis view andthat of the Lord President and doled outa raspberry to me in front of the D.G.On examining the minutes of our file Ifound that the D.G. had approved our actionHe readily recognised the position andvery generouslyotook the file over toSwinton and told him that the fault waspartly his for not writing to him inst dof V.V. and partly the D.G.S for notweighing in and making use of the minister-ial backing at an earlier stage. It isvery refreshing to have a ch ef who isready to st nd up for his officers andthe department.I spoke to Stephens about putting SEMMEL-BAUER AND MAAS together.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188assLennox tells me that fighting is stillgoing on the vicinity of Kiev and molensk.In the Leningrad sector the German tankshave run out of petrol. Some of thebridges behind them have been cut.Therehas been a successful rid on Rotterd m and21 merchant ships have be n sunk. AnItalian transport has been sunk off Libya.Maiski appears to be arrnging tre tieswith everybody,Poles,Czecns,Yugoslavs etc.The business is almost being done on thetelephone.July l8thA Pole named EY SEMONT arrived here with3 other Poles from Lisbon. The 3 otherswere apparently put on to make contactwith him about some Polish representativein Lisbon. They say that EY SEMONT wasapproached by the Germans and has beensent here as a German agent, with definiteinstructions The Poles are very excitedand want to give him a run in order to see-what contacts he makes in this country.We shall have to go very carefully intothis case as it seems that the 3 Polishf'riends are not altogether above suspicionthemselves. EY SEMONT is equiuped withsecret ink.We had a meetin today with Sir FrankNelson, Archie boyle, and Taylor lor of S.0.2.S.0.2's harter covers (1) politicalsubversion; this includes bribery ofministers and of whole political parties.(2) large scale operations, for example theCatalogue Lofoten Reference:KV14/188 Reference: small scale day y toatday sabotage. This includes train wrecking.(4) distribution of subversive propagandaThere is a certain overlap here withS.0.1. who m ke and di seminate propagandain foreign countries. S.0.2. disseminaterumours through their own staticns abro d.The Russian Mission here are asking fora lot. They want 20,000 light .A.guns,300 fighters and 300 bombers. Naval Mines,aircra ft bombs, Asdic and night fighterapparatus.July 19thP.W. reports indicate that the German aregiving up automatic bemb releaseng.Formerlthe bomb was released automatically atthe intersection of 2 beams. We have beenthrowing another beam producing an inter-section at a differ nt point, with theresult th Germ n bombs have been droppingin open fields instead of on the targets,and vulnerable points. From st atements ofP.W.S it seems fairly clear that theyounger pilots ve very little navi-gational training. They nsequently liketo stickto the beam but they realise th tin so doing they lay themselves open toattack f rom British fighters who can layup on the beam and wait for them. Onlythe older pilots seem to ha've sufficientnavigational experience to be sure of theirposition if they get off the beam.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188987B.5b have made cont ct with GeraldHAMILTON who wants to go to Eire andstart a peace campaign through the apos-tolic Delegate and the German Legation.When asked how he could get the entreeto the German Leg tion he said that hewould be known on reference to Berlinon account of his forer connection withthe Casement Rebellion.July 2lstWe have decided to pull in HAMILTON. Necan hold him temporarily if necessary ona charge of registeriny at a London hotelunder a false n me.David has just returned from Tunbridge towhich Region he is to be posted as anAuxiliary RSLO in time of invasion. Grassb]plan is to out his two auxiliaries withCorps H.Q. David says, quite rightly, thathe does not think that he will be much use,since communications will be bad and hewill be expected to act on his own initia-tive with a full knowledge of the area adall the problems involved. He will arrivedown there in the middle of the battleand will merely be a useless cypher. Hethinks that it would be f arbetter for thenumber two in the region te be posted tothe military and for the ayxiliaries toremain at H.Q. there they could at leastanswer the telephone, take down messages,and go and see people on the Regionalstaff. I entirely agree; and have put thisview both to B.R. and the D.G.Catalogue ReferenCe:KV/4/188EYSEMONT has now told ushis story, andwe cannot regard him otherwise than as aGerman spy put in here to double-cross us.Meanwhile the Poles are going to test outthe other three. They have considerabledoubts about two of them.Mason Mac has not been allowee by theR ssians to go to the front. He finds themsomewhat uncommunic tive but apparentlypleased with the present turn of events.There is a salient south-east of Smolenskbut there is no positive news of itscapture. Kiev is not yet in German h ands.The Germans are said to have suiiered asevere reverse in the Leningrad sector.I lunched today with Herschel Johnsonto whom I introduced Theo Turner. Heexpresse himself in very warm terns aboutStephenson and the work he was doing inAmerica - Everybody seemed to like him,and regard him as extremely efficient.July 22ndWe had a Directors Meeting. It wasagreed that Civil Servants on the Inv visionList should be dealt with without referenceto their respective departments, sincethey were all working in a very minorcapacity and could not possibly damagethe machine. I raised the question ofRegionalAuxiliary Officers and explainedDavid's point of view, with which thereseemed to be tentative agreement. AllCatalogue Refetence:K/4/188 of their OfflcerIrregions are to be asked to send in a planastime of invasion. I made the suggestionthat Lennox who alre idy represents our-selves and S.I.S. on the ISSB should alsorepresent S.0.2 if they were in igreement.I thought that this might enable us toobtain more information about S.0.2's plansThere has recently been a bad case ofuncordinated action betwvees.0.2. andD.u.0. Both had planned an operation onthe same night, and the conse sequencesmight have been serious.I spoke to harles about Lagos, andexplained to him what I felt was animpossible situation for Haigh-Wood.Charles will speak to the D.G. and seeif there is anything to be done.Curry is very worried about his positionand feels that either for geographicalor other re asons he cut out of discussionswhich affect his division. He is I thinkquite ready to join B.Division even if itvill mean a loss of status.A message h is come through from Banhamthe R.S.S.man in Ulster that a man calledJoseph LENIHAM, an alleged parachutist,was sitting in his office drinking a cupof tea. The story is thi LENIHAM camedown in Lire on Sunday, made his way acrossthe border ind gave himself up to themilitary. He has left his tvo-way wirelessset in Eire but has with him an auxiliaryone-way set. We have arranged that Ceciland T.A.R. shall go over in the morning andCatalogue fetch Reterence:kv4/188 him country.Findlater-Stevart is worried aboutTate's reply to a request for informationabout Coventry. He thinks that if Tate isallowed to report everything th t he has seenCoventry will inevitably be bombed. He hasaccordingly mended the message which nowgives the impression that a great deal ofdispersal h s taken place. He wishes toraisethe whole question of policy with theW.Board.Hart who is continuing his en uiry into theleakage of nformation about our minefieldshas now discovered that there is anotherdocument IN ich shows quite clearly that itleast 4 of the minefields were disclosed tothe enemy through charts taken from thesunken submarine "Shark".. This documentproves Hart's previous conclusions that theinformation contained in the originalGerman document was probably ob gained fromoperational charts., taken from sunken warshipsIf we had had the second document before wemint have been saved a good deal of time andtrouble.July 23rdHad a t lk with Grogan and Gibbs about Censor-ship. They now incline to the view tnatthe machinery of Censorship having beenthoroughly explored, there is,no longer anynecessity for tivo of them to be employed onthis work, and that Grogn could prob blyhandle the Censorship end from this officeby making to or three visits a week andCataloguenRelerence!kvt4/18s.qa-I have seen Wood ind discussed with him thefuture of B. 24 He agrees that agents couldperhaps be more profitably run by the sectionsand that his control of them is really nolonger necessary.. I asked him whether hewould be willing to take on the job in M.E.W.if there was a vacancy. He said that he wouldbe quite prepared to do this if there was noother employment for him here.A meeting was held at Kinnaird House today todiscuss various aspects of Stephenson's workin America, particularly th t which affectedthe vettin of technicians etc. Stephensonhimself who had just rrived from America,was present. It has been agreed that heshould extend his security co-ordination tothe .America ports.There has been a Dad case of leakage regardinga special convoy which is proceeding directto Malta. The result has been that one destroyehas been sunk, a cruiser torpedoed ind oneof the supply ships torpedoed. The cruiserhas got ack to Gib. and the rest of the convoyincluding the damaged sapply ship is going on.It is clear from an Italian intereept thatthe approach of this convoy was known aboutthe loth. Enquiry shows th t the securityarrangements for the assembly of the goods andthe convoy were absolutely lamentablePacking cases arrived labelled..N Malta. NAAFItelegraphed in an obvious code about thearriv 1 of stores and the Crown Agentsnotified at Le ast 100 firms about goodsrequired for Malta. There were moreover aCatalogue CatalogueReference.KV)4/188wr hile the loadingwas going on. A good many of them lef't for04Eire and other destinations before the convoy.There is not much news from Russia. TheGermans seem to be short of supplies and theRussians say that the German fighters are not.anxious to attack. Mason Mac thinks thatthe German air losses are higher than theRussian estimates.July 24thBalloon has got a cheque for E350 from Lisbon.I saw Maxwell about Joseph LENIHAN. Heagreed to his being detained at Ham andsuggested that pending the clearing up of hiscase he should be detained under the arrivalfrom enemy territory act.I lunched with Jebb. He told me that $.0.2had been rather worried by the D.G.S letterwhich they construed as bein a projectedattack on themselves. E said I was quitesure that this was not the D.G. s intention.He merely anted to find out what every bodywas doingand get the position cler.Jebb tol me that S.0.1 now have 23 rreedoLStations which are doing valuble work.He said that the German att ck on Russiahad been carefully thought out from thepoint of view of self-sufficiency. Hebelieved that the Germans had, calculated thatthey could hold out for several years ifthey succeeded in tapping certin of Russia'sresources. These of course included the oil.I gathered that Stalin had iven anundertaking to Criop to destroy the Baku oil-Catalogue ReferenGe:K/4h188 emanded such action.July 25thWe had a conference about LENIHAN. We cameto the conclusion that the only use we coudmake of his set would be by impersonation.LEIHAN was dropped in the Curragn withinstructions to send weather reports to Sligo,and to proceed to England in order to obtaininformation about air rid damage. He hadgiven himself up in N, Irelind becausene had a criminal record in the south. He iswanted for unlawful assembly, presumbly inconnection with an I.R. A. meeting, and has alsodone time for fraud. The Irish have alreadydiscovered his parachute, and his set, whichhas not so far been t ken, is left at a houseon the Eire side of the border.The group traffic shows that 3 Norwegianswho arrived here a short time ago, are in factGerman agents. The principal is a man calledNIELSEN. Another is named LUNDE. The shipin which they arrived is the "Hernie". Oneof them is now on a coastal vessel, thanotherat a Londo hotel, and NIELSEN has been sentto join the Norwegiar Forces. he are t kingsteps to pull them in. The Norwegians henquestioned said they had never been very satis-fied about them themselves.Had a talk with Stephenson ind gave nim as muchabout the general situation as possible. Hewas very worried about the flow of information,It seemed that we had sent hima number of thingsyhishofeshadingt received, and tht he nad sentdo not seem to have reached us.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188\aauI said that e attached very great importanceto our request that he should recruit agentsamong the technicians and plant them on theGermans. He said that he had received a wireon this subject from Section V which conclu-ded with the words that "oindlair wouldunderstand wha was required. Sinclairwhen shown the telegram apparently did notunderstand, with the result th t nothing hasbeen done. Stephenson will look into thematter as soon as he gets ack.Lennox tells me that the Russians areadvancing very slowly. They have apparentlymet with areerse in the Leningrad sector.Gen.Golikov is flying to America having justreturned from Moscow. There are signs thatthe Germans are contempli ting an attack unaTurkey or the Black Sea on Bartum, but thismay be merelybluff. The Japs have startedto occupy Indo-China. We have rxxexrequested the Persians to get rid of theirlarge German tourists popultic but havevirtually been tol to mind our own business.The P.M. was e tremely annoyed and intends tooccupy Abadan and if necessary to bombTeheran.July 26thKan STQESSERA manshas been discovered in Dorset in battle-dress. He states that he isa German. He camehere with a ditler Jugend Party in 1937. Ithas been discovered that he is a deserter.Moore of the R.U.C. has come to an agreementCatalogue tnith his Reference:KV/4/188 in Garda by which we are995lentto be eeb LENIHAN'S wireless set for 8 days.We are to lend the auxiliary one-way set tothe Eire Govt for a similar period. Beforethe agreement was signed the matter wasreferred to Dev.RoTHSCHLDVictor and I lunched with Alan Hodgkin. Hesaid that R.D.F. was making considerable pro-rress. I gather that A. L. is limited in itsscope. The number of ground sttions dependsa good deal on the contours and each stationcan only work one aeropline at a time.. Wehope before long to eliminate the round sta-tion altogether. Anti-jamming is now ell inhand.We have scored a great success with Alcasarde Velasco. He has handed E50 to G. W. in thepresence of Calvo. This money was a repay mentfor a sum borrowed by del Pozo. Alcazar haspromised to obtin inother E500. I hope theF.O. will now be convinced that Ne vere rightin saying that Velasco was a Germn agent andshould be declared persona non grata. Thetrouble is that we are not able to get rid ofhim owing to the delicate source of ourinformation. We may however succeed in workinghim to our adv ntage.Our agent has discovered that Lisbon has areport on our aircraft. Matsumoto, with whomshe is also acquainted, has under the influenceof drink, disclo ed that the Japs contemplatean attack on the Dutch Last Indies.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188The Snark @ Kissmequick has arrived with themeagre sum of -10.Lakin called today with Brig.Gubbins who isworried about the Polish escape organisationwhich works via Ankar,Jerus lem and Cairo.He thinks that some of the Poles are employedon this work are of doubtful reliability.Apparently Maunseil de some report poutthem a short time ago.Gubbins would likefurther enguiries made as his organisationis to some extent linked with theirs.July 27thHad a long talk with Stephenson. He seemedbo think there was a good deal of informationon genera subjects which we could give himand which would be ofgre t value. Dick gavehim copies of some of his reports on thevarious German agents who ad arrived here.Collis has promised to send him reports onthe Communists.I am putting up a note to the J.I.C. on thedesirability of closing down Jap consulatesalmost all of which are engaged in espionage,and are transmitting information of value tothe Germans. I suggested to Stephenson thatthe Americ ins might in the pr sent tmospherebe prep red to make a simil r move. He saidthat they got nothing from their consulatesin Japan and might therefore be ready to co-operate.I spoke abou the case of Max JORDAN of theN.B.C. Stephenson said he would Look into theGatalogueReferencerkV//4188r There had been so997much wire-pulling that it was almost impossibleto know where we stood.July 20thSaw Stephenson again. He told me about certintechnical ppiratus which the Americans wereusing. They have a very good camera which canbe easily concealed in a wireless set.there is no click, it merely m kes the ordinarywireless no ses. The Americins also use aspecial device for tapping in to telephones.This can be clamped on an outside vall and isapparently very effective.E lunched with Lapage, of the Belgiin SureteHe seemed very co-operative and evidently getson very well with Kenneth. I gather that hedoes not. much like S.I.S. presumably bec usethey will not allow him to communic te directwith his agents in Belgium. S.I.S. quiterightly feel that they must maintain controlof these natters.After lunch I visited the R.P.S.wit! ingham.and had talk with t he Comm nd int, who isevidently to some extent under Bingham'scontrol. On the whole the place seems to befairly well run and there should be verylittle cause for omplaint. The position Withregard to prisoners property is not howeversatisf ctory. No lists of property are obtiineat the ports ind the property is not verycarefully checked or stored at the R.P.S.It is very important that there should be aproper chain of evidence otherwise xhenxanyGatalogueReference:ky41188 to deny ownership.q9sI told the ommandant that we were proposingto appoint de Geijer as a Welfare Officer.He welcomed this appointment as ther is agood deal of clerical work with which de Geijercould oceup himself in his spare time. Ihope also that eh will be able to extract acertain amount of information from the guests.He speaks fluent French,German and Swedish.July 29thWe had a director's meeting. I raised thequestion of property at the R.P.S. It wasagreed that the matter should be looked into.Had adiscussion with Horroeks about theRegistry and c arding. He said that he had putforward a memo to the D.G. recommending thatall foreign reports should be should becarded and that something in the nature ofa joint registry with S.I.S. should bestarted. I explained to him that the presentsituation was extremely unsatisfactory.did not think that S.I.S. were doing muchcarding and in any case the m terial whichwe require for interrogatior purposes atthe R.P.S. was not ready to hand It wasimpossible to say that the addresses ofindividuals and their names which were ob-tained in foreign orts were of purelylocal significa nce. They might be highlyimportant if they were found in the diaryof a new arriv 1. At present we had noinformation to pit inst a man's story.I had a ilk with Charles about the registryand explained to him that although apersCatalogueReferenee:K'V/4/188 it at a more rapidrate there was evidence to show that theTHIS IS A copyORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDINDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONr'gs3 (4) OF THE PUBLIGRECORDSACT 1958look-ues were singilorly unintettisent uninte this1 think is the real defect in the System.It may be a soo regitry but it is not anintelligoence registry. It is essential tohave people with the necessir: languageualification and knoviedge of the workwhich they are handling.. Other: ise the look-UE is purely mechinico, and obviously unintellbent. Nothing cen but this rith exceotsomething in the nature of a return to theold system, where 31 reristrv section workedfor section of the Office ind knew its filesLick and I luncned with slewveilyn Lloyd. He nahad an extraordinarr career, starting with anelementry education, he has been 9 ste ewarda stoker, a sculptor. painter, and is nowthe writer of one of the best novels writtenduring te rast 5 vears.. He has also had agood deal to do with the fiim business and iswidely tr ivelled. He no' finds himself in theleash Guards like ficn out of water. Hecomplains tat he only S to think or 2 noursout of the 24 ano is very anxious to get someCwork which Nill give nim more score.both vicK and I liked nim, but he may berather diilicult to fit into the orgnisatione hao n R.S.. feeling at which Isosocleswas discussed. This is tehe ichy-Berlin groutwhith we do not normally receive. Tcre havebeen t least 3 cases vaere ive have ot beeninformed about matters which have deiiniteC.E. could interest. not ororerlv The assess meetine priorities felt that uniess theyGatalogue-References:KV/4/188of all intercetedmateril 1 was even to t ke this matter upwith V.V. or C.S.S.THISISACOPYPETAINEDORIGINALDEPARTMENIUNDERSECTIONRECORDS3(4)OFTHEACTWe had another meeting about LENIHAN nadecided that he should abindon the idea Ofusing his set. He propose to send a messagein secret ink indicatinp that he hosmanaged to get over here ind nas estiil edcontc with an I.R.A. friend in Liverpooi.He will 3sk for instructions. e shall hveto keep him permanetly at Ham but we may beable to work him through a cut-out.Reports indicate tht tere is shortige ofessential products in Ireland.Juiy 30thThere was a meeting at Kinnaird House todiscuss a plan put forward bv V.V. to bringll shins into Dermuda. There was longdiscussion at the end of which it S ecidedtoform a committee to further into thematter. There is aoundant evidence thata gooa many agents are crossing the Atlarsicin neutril ships and neither the navicertsystem nor searching on the high seas areadequate to deal with the sitition.I had a talk with V.V. afterthe meeting. Hehad seen Steshenson who had spoken to himabout the slowness of communication and theCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188small flow of information. V.V. seemed to thinthat he had got a rather exaggerated view ofthe position and that in fact he had eithernot been seeing our reports or that they hadgone to the bottom of the Atlantic.I lunched with Archie Boy le and Lennox. T'heD.G. had apprently alarmed S.0.2. by hisletter summoning them tc a conference.Archie thought the letter was an extremelyoffensive one and said it vas only due tohis intervention that there had not been ashow-down. He appears to have a good opinionof certain aspects of S.0.2. although he fullyrealises their defect.sI attended a meeting of the W.Bo rd at whichfindlater-Stewart raised his quary aboutCoventry. He seemed to think that we might beoffended if he blue-pencilled our messages.I said tha we did not mind in the least andthat we could attempt to do this work ourselveOn the other hand I thought it was importantthat he should have a full account of ha theordinary observer could see. All we equiredwas that something should go over the airwhich would not jeopardise the position ofour informant. I pointed out that we couldnot stop the bomos from dropping and that wehad machinery at our disposal which mightassist in getting them dropped in the pl ceswhere they would do the least harm. Themeeting was uite friendly and we are goingto proceed as usual. I read out reportprepared b. J.C. showing the adv advantages ges weined by the XX network.Catalogue Reference convinced that theseadvantages were considerable.I spoke to Stewart after the meeting aboutthe advantage that might be tined by someof our fellows who are engaged in answeringGerman uestions having look at his traffic.They had learned the art of evasion and mightbe able to detect it coming from the otherside.I thought also that his people could give ussome useful hints about pitfalis to be avoided.He agreed and quoted to me an instance Nnerhe had become convinced that one of hispeople was under control because he had movedhis people to the vicinity of a known Germaneadquarters.July 3lstArnold and Ryde came to see me about the caseof a man called GUNN who has been employedwith a company which is engaged in construetingmodels from aerial photographs. These modelsare used by troops who are to be engaged inspecial operations, and therefore disclosevaluable information. GUNN who had left thefirm, which has for some time been under thecontrol of the A.M., was found to be inpossessio of a number of ierial photogr phsincluding one of Devonport Dockyard. He saidhe had taken these as souvenirs. He wasapparently associated with another employeenamed EGAN whose bona fides wer in doubt.I lunched with Col.Davis of 3.0.2. He isapparently engaged in looking after the tech-nical side of their operations, and their equip-ment.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1883-rugust lstWent with D.G. to Reading to see the region.We went down to Portsmouth where we visitedthe C.C. and the C in C. Admiral James (BubblesHe had made his he dquarters on the Victory,having been bombed out of his own house.He was full of regrets for the departure ofPiggott for Bermuda. P. hs been S.0.0.at Portsmouth for sometime and made a goodimpression all round. West, the C.C. hasI believe done very Nell and is a tremendousimprovement on his predecessor. Both heand C.C. southampton seemed very efficient andvery ready to co-operate with us in everypossible way.We saw quite a lot of Sir Charles Cunningha m,A/Inspector General of Constabulary. He seemedvery atisfied with Ryde and had no complaints.Spicer,C.C. I.O.W., seemed to think thatM.I.5 kept C.C.S rather in the dark. He wasvery anxious to have something in the n tureof an M.I.5. bulletin once a fortnight.D.u. steered him off this and urged him to visius in London more often.August 2ndWe visited c.C.Bucks ind Berks. bucks is asplendid fellow but Berks is apt to createdifficulties for Ryde. He is very independentand resents anything which he thinks may bein the nature of in interference by M.i5.He was very pleasant to us.Catalogue Catalegue;Reference:kV/4/188 Reference VI4/188office we returned toAugust3rI learned tht during my abeence there hadbeen a certain amount of trouble with Muttand Jeff. Jeff and his keeper had apparentlygot rather tight MAberdeen and had endedby getting themselves arrested. C.C. wasextremely annoyed because he had not beeninformed about their presence in the area.He was also deeply shocked tha M.I:5 shourconduct their affairs in such a minner.Unfortunately we cannot expl in to him thefull facts and the difficulties in runningthe double X business. Jeff was apnarentlyasking very indiscreet questions in pubsand taking do m the answere in his notebook.This very naturally aroused the suspicionsof the publican who informed the police.There has been great nxiety over Plan Midas.Tricycle made a number of mistake and beganby sending his telegram Eric Sand instead ofEric Glass.this led to endless complicationbut the situation cleared up when we foundthat instead of somebody from the ther sidearriving to collect the money,Tate receivedin tructions to do the job. It then bec ameclear that kas what we thought to be anindependent pl n by the Germans to build, upT te and nake him a centre for running agentswas in the minds of the Germans Plan Midas.The two plans were married ind all is now well.Tate is in the position of paymaster and weshould before long have 120,000 to our creditin New York.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188SAupust 4thTwo Frenchmen called Poullain and Gonhouilouhave arrived at the R.P.S. with a curiousstory. They are both journalists of somestanding and one of them was formerly editorof "La Petite Gironde". They say that onthe excuse of going to Morocco to buy up anumber of French papers they succeeded ingetting an exit visa. They had previouslyhad vonversations with highly placed individualat Vichy including Gen. Hunziger whom theyregard as being anti-Nazi. In Morocco theygot in touch with a member of the FrenchAir Force called Giradot who had some plotto overthrow Vichy elements at Morocco andtake command. The success of such a ventureseemed somewha problematical at the momentsince the Navy was anti-British, the Air Forceready to take orders from its High Commandand the Army doubtful. It had been suggestedthat POULLAIN should intimate to Giradot afterthe French broadcast on 5th August whether hewas to start eh revolt or whether he was totry and come over here to join de Gaulle.As this was a matter of high policy we feltit difficult to release these two Frenchmenuntil we had some idea of the view taken inhigh quarters here. Being Bank Holiday nearlyall those concerned were away. We succeededin getting in touch with the D.M.I. whoagreed that we could not hold thexe men anylonger without causing a good deal of troubleparticularly since one of them was a personalfriend of Muselier. D.M.I. did not thinkdesirable at themoment and underet into touch withbMortoh. In the meantime they are being seenby Willoughby of the >pears Mission and willbe fixed up at the Cumberland Hotel for thenight.August 5thWe had a director's meeting this morning,when the question of property arriving atthe R.P.S. was discussed. It was agreed thatAdam would make arrangements for theImmigration Deptto have articles listed andsanction has also been given for assistancein looking after property when it reaches theP.S.I visited Barnet with the D.G. and also P.W.We were shown the whole progress of ISOS fromits interception to the finished article.I had previously had a talk with Maltby whoresents any interference on the technical sideof R.S.S by Frost. He says he does not thinkthat we need representation on this side ofthe work as he regards ourinterests and thoseof S.I.S. as identical. I tackled him on the2 questions which worried us. Would thepresent machinery be adequate to detect aone-way transmitter of the kind that wemight expect immediatly prior to an invasion?He said that he thought this ground would becovered as soon as the Y stations were func-tioning but he did not expect to have one ofthem going for another 3 months. The otherpoint was whether he was satisfied that theGermans were not rying anything in the natureof high-frequency transmission from the groundto aircraft. He admitted that we were workingon this ourselves but that at the moment thereGatalagyerbererengeikve4cainter-neasure.7He hoped to improve on this before very long.Frost's point of view is that if we are notallowed to query the technical arrangementsto cover what was in fact the primry purposeof R.S.S. namely the detection of illicitcommunication from this country, we may findourselves rather badly let down. In the mazeof wireless technicalities it is extremelydifficult to know who is speaking the truth.August 6thI have seen Gompertz who it is suggested shouldtake Gooch's place in the Japanese section.Gompettz was ormerly with Shell and has agood deal of business with the far East.He does not however read or speak Japanese.I lunched with uakin who seems anxious tocanalize the relations between ourselves andS.0.2. through &xk. himself. This certainlyhad advantages as it should ensure that weare not flooded with eX-SinnFeiners and otherundesirables. On the other hand I thinkdirect contact in some places may be moreprofitable.Rainbow has received a letter in Portuguese.One of the full stops on examination has beenfound to contain a message of 100 words.Rainbow had been warned that he might expectsome communication in this form. The processis micro-photography.Snow's son has made France a suggestion namake that he with shouldgotooccupledandmakecontactamnumber of our agents. He intimated that heCatalogereeReterenee:kut/aet with the Germans whichwould make him acceptable if he went toLisbon. After an hour and a half's interro-gation by T.A.R. sand J.C. he confessed thathe had before the war supplied informationabout the aerodrome at Biggin Hill to hisfather's postbox address in Hamburg. Wehave now to decide whether he should belocked up. He is a frightful little worm.There is a story going about Fleet St. thatthe P.M. has gone to meet Roosevelt, whois on a cruise in his yacht Potomac. Thestory is said to have reached this countryvia the Trans-Ocean German News Service inLisbon. The story of the meeting happens tobe true. It is not surprising that it hasleaked because Brendon Bracken has beenhinting to the Press that they will have agrand story before long. They certainlywill have a grand story if the P.M. and thePresident go to the bottom of the Atlantic.Special material shows that GEROTHWOHL haspassed the story on to someone in the GreekLegation and that Dulanty is talking aboutit to Walsh. The whole matter seems to havebeen h ndled extremely badly. The wholePress know aboutit here and doubtless thestory is raging across America like anadvertisement for a new tooth paste.August 7thI have seen another candidate for our Jappost, one Pilcher, late consul at Tsingtao.He is now working in M of I. He reads andspeaks Japanese and seems fairly knowledgeable.I am not sure however whether he would fit intoCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188the organisation very well. He seems to beof the F.0. self-opinionated type althoughhis views about the Japanese aresound. Hethinks that they have made up their minds togo south and that only a show of force willprevent them. They will clearly grab anythingthat they can if they can get away with itwithout too much damage to themselves.We h d a meeting about the Irish Brigadeat which the various Depts. of the W.O. wererepresented. There is no doubt that theformation of such a brigade on Casement linesis being seriously considered by the Germans.The Germans are trying to get some represen-tative of the Vatican to send anti-Britishpriests ostensibly to look after the spiritualwelfare of Irish P/W M.I.9 have certaincontacts among P/W but only among officersand it is known that a move is on foot torecruit anti-British Irishmen - Things donot appear to have gone very far at themoment. A careful sensorship of prisoners'mailes would have to be carried out and at themoment there is no dept. of the W.0.doing this work. Cecil is to see Herbertin order to find out about the distributionof censorship material and its volume.hugust 8thI attended a meeting of the J.I.C. at whichthe question of closing down Jap consulateswas discussed. India,burma, the A.M. and S. S.were in favour of general action, S.I.S., thewatalogue ntelligence ic a measure. branchesAdmiralty and the10The only valid argument against seemed to bethe danger of retaliation against Shanghai.This woudd be a serious loss as a good dealof Y work is going on there. It was finallyagreed to stop bag and cypher facilities atCalcutta,-ombay,Karachi and Simla. We couldthen note the effect of this action which wasnot thought likely to affect Shanghai.Our highest cards are probably singapore andRangoon, and if action were taken therewe might expect action ag inst Shanghai.It was agreed that consular and diplomaticstaffs of the Japnese Govt. should beharrassed through out the Empire and thataxxempkx the position here with regard toBEPPU should be considered. the F.0. thoughtthat he should be told that the Leg ition inEire would in future have to be treated asa separate unit and that frequent journeysof consular officials between Liverpool andDublin would have to cease. It was not fletthat communication by bag could be stopped.The question of restricting the movements ofService Attaches was also considered. Itwas decied that with certain exemptions theyshould not be allowed to move outsde a5 mile radius of London without permission,or outside a limited radius from their countrystations. They will have to follow an aprovedroute between thir London and the country,and take steps to have their cars XRXXmarked C.D. It will be explained to themthat all these measures are only for theirown convenience.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188lIAugust 9thI saw Barbara's brother who has just got backfrom Crete. He had been sunk with one ofour destroyers. She was zigzagging at about30 knots in order to avoid dive-bombers, andhe was swept off the deckHe felt himselfgoing down to a considerable depth, whensuddenly he shot up like a cork. He hadon a Jeeves waistcoat, which he blew up,and after getting rid of as many clothesas possible he swam towards a small knot ofsurvivors in accordance with the standinginstructions. He found his captain and anumber of other men singing "Roll out thebarrell". This they found rather exhaustingSO all singing was stopped. They watchedtheir ship go down by the stern and gaveher three cheers. When he had been in thewater some time they sighted a sister shipwhich eventually picked them.up.It took themsome time to pick up other survivors, anddive-bombing from various heights went onincessantly for from 6-8 hours, till theysucceeded in getting out of range. Many ofthe Fleet O erations, both to the Northand West of Crete, seem to have been almostsuididal, as they were within easy dive-bombingrange and attacks could be made on them by thesame aircra ft about once every hour. Thenight before his ship was sunk he succeeded insinking a number of caiques. One of thesecaiques approached with a white flag andthen opened fire. It was sunk immediately.There was a bad moment for the rescue ship,which had to decide whether to pick up certaincataregugeference.KV/49188e their orders and12get back to their base as soon as possible.The balance was between leaving a numberof men to drown or getting another ship sunkwith all its crew and the survivors alre dyrescued. They therefore pushed out all theirboats and left the few knots of survivors tofend for themselves. J. was very impressedby the Fleet barrage, which he said wasabsolutely terrific. The Navy seemed to havecompleted their task in a wonderful way.They were ordered to see that no no troopslanded by oat and these orders were suecess-fully carriedout although the whole projectwas abandoned. After returning to AlexandriaJ. made his way home via the Cape. He washorrified by the situation at Durban, CapeTown and other ports, where ships lay in theroads sometimes for weeks. There seemed tobe very little security and the dilatorymethods of the local aythorities were appall-ing and had an extremely depressing effectupon all the survivors.August llthTheo and I went to see Stewart about thevarious allied Governments. In many cases weemployed the same contacts. We got on verywell with them on C.E. lines but S.1.S. fellout with them on offensive operations. Mostof these Governments want to run their ownlittle S.S. without proper control, and theresults are extremely confusing. We feltthat it would be a good thing if we pooled allour information. Stewart agreed and thoughtthat Theo should discuss the whole matterwith Dansey. I went on to see V.V. and had aCaldogletrelereneesv/4sesicles. He took the13 3view that Felix should not be the guardianof our consciencies; if he thought that wewere wasting our time in study ing thismaterial it was no business of his. He felttherefore that this information should infuture be passed to us. He also saw theforce of the argument that the R.S.S.Committee could not very well assesspriorities unless they were in possessionof all the groups.I lunched with Herbert and brought him backafterwards to see the Dot. He was very muchimpressed and said that it would entirelyrevolutionise censorship methods. He wouldthink outsome method of making the best useof the information without running too greata risk of the enemy becoming aware that wehave knowledge of their methods.The Germans are making a certain amount ofprogress in the Ukraine. The Russians aregoing to create a kind of Tobruk at Odessa.It looks as if things were fairly stableon other parts of the front and that theGermans are concentrating all their effortsn the south. The Russians and ourselves aremaking a joint request to Iran to expel German"tourists". Iran are prepared to meet ourrequest up to a point but are pretty sticky.A joint request has also been made to Turkeythat we should be allowed to put in techniciansand tourists who would be engaged on preparingaerodromes for possible use ag inst attack bythe Germans via the Caucasus.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188August 12thWe had a Director's meeting, but no mattersof any consequence were discussed. I spoketo the D.G. about Isosicles. He is inclinedto agree that the information should be madeavailable and that we should be the judgesas to whether it was of interest to us or not.Herbert rang up task me for Rainbow'sname and address. Ireferred the matter tothe D.G. who said that on no account couldwe communicate the name and address of an agentHe would not mind doing it to Herbert person-ally but he could not do SO to Herbert in hiscapacity as headof the Censorship, since thiswould imply that he WO ld have to make someuse of the information nd that in SO doinghe would of necessity passit to others.There is a suggestion that we should try toget Jim Hale to run the intelligence side ofthe R.F.S. R.We held the fortnightly meeting of the R.S.S.Committee. I reported on the progress ofmy negotiations about Isosicles, afterapologising to Cowgill and Maltby that thisrather conttoversial matter had been raisedat the previous meeting when they were bothabsent. I made the offer to Felix that hecould, if he still felt strongly on thequestion, express his views in a personalinterview with the D.G. He Said that he didnot wish to do this and that he was perfectlyprepared to abide by whatever decision wasarrived at as between the D.b. and C.S.S.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188I5The meeting was very worried about thepaucity of material obtained on the lineKirkenes to Tromso, which is the counter-part of messages going in the oppositedirection. Quite clearly there is a gooddeal going on and various expeditions againstthis country are being prepared. It istherefore vitally important that we should geas much information from this quarter aspossible. Maltby said that there were agreat many technical difficulties. He finallagreed to allow Felix to explore the positionwith the Admiralty. It WiS thought possiblethat if detecting apparatus could be installon one of .ships patrolling the Norwegiancoast, that the required signals could bepicked up.Jock Balfour came in. He has been appointedminister in Lisbon. He and 1 and Felix hada discussion during which Felix and I triedto give him as complete a picture of thevarious organisaticns. existing in Lisbon aspossible.The message in the Dot contains over 80words and refers to formulae for secret inksIt is quite clear that this method has beenin use for some time. There is a referencein ISOS to Punkte as early as November 1940and another one early this year. The indica.tions are that this method has been used asbetween German-occupied territory and Americabut not in the reverse direction. This isconfirmed by an examination of the Joe K.correspondence. Eastward bound it disclosedCatalogue Reference:but bound the examinatio]nas given no reaction.THiS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED1bIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONAugust 13tOF THE PUBLIC RECORDS1958.2r122000 1958.I had a talk today with Allan G.P.O. aboutCensorship measures to compete with the Dot.We thought that the information for thepresent should be confined to certain specialexaminers both here and in Bermuda.Theo, Dick and I had a discussion with the D.G.about the liquidation of B. 24. Wood is befound a job in M.E.W., Acworth, McKee andKoetrick are to go. Bygott will be transferredto B.1, Posthuma to R.P.S., Van Der Reydt ndVan Houton to D.4 and Jannings probably to M.There is another suggestion, that Duncan shouldjoin Craufurd. Characteristically Kennethseems to be liquidating the whole of E.Division.B.Division are in the meantime taking oversome of E and engaging new people. It seemsto be like a sort of magnet. Eventually weshall get back to the old position, and Hor-rocks will start splitting us up again.August 14thI lunched with V.V. and the D.G. when vediscussed the question of B.J.S. I triedto press home my point that if we were tomake a proper study of developments hereit was essential for us to have as muchinformation, both positive and negative, aswe could obtain. B.J.S were especiallyvaluable since it was in communications ofthis sort that they expressed their innermostthoughts.V.V. was rather inclined to take the viewCatalbguetReferencaikwe/noslimit to our require-ments. I said that it was for this reason17that I ha a suggested that Blunt should godown periodically to G.C.&.C.S. and makenotes. This would save everyone a great dealof trouble and avoid filing a large amountof this material in our office.T A. R?Dick, Allan of G.P.O.,Felix and I hada discussion about methods for exploitingthe Dot discovery. We all agreed that thefirst step was to clarify the position in theJ.S.A. It was essential to know whether therecent arrests there had led to the discoveryof this new method and whethe the Americanswere proposing to make any use of theinformation in open court. If this were SO,it would probably be advisable for us totake the risk of informing all examinersinstead of restricting it to a few. We allfelt that every possible pressure should bebrought to bear on the Americans to keep themattersecret.After the meeting I had a long talk withFelix about the differences between our twodepartments. A good deal of suspicion hadarisen in his mind on account of a number ofminor and rather trivial incidents which hehad pieced together. What he had reallyliked doing more than anything else wasrunning special agents. It had been agreat wrench for him to hand over Tricycle andthe situation had been aggravated because hethought that T.A.R.S S people did not trust himto do his work and felt that they had to givehim minute in tructions about what Tricyclehad to do abroad. He felt that he was bedomingcafalogue eRererenee:kvi/tgge to explain to himto him that there was a certain feelinghere that he was reluctant to give usinformation about what was happening abroad,and that this was vital to our work here.I did not think there could be any dividingline between us. We ought to have a free runof his files and he ought to have a free runof ours, since our interests were identical.At the moment I felt there was a hiatusand that for that reason the informationin our two departments was not beingproperly collated. I think the meeting dida great deal to clear the air, at any rate Ihope SO. I drew his attention to the vitalmass of information which I thought wronglyhad been often referred to as being ofpurely local significance. We wanted eetailsof cafes, rendezvous, enemy and neutralorganisations abroad, otherwise we hadnothing to pit against the stories of arrivalsfrom abroad at the R.P.S. It was essentialthat this information should be carefullycarded and readily available.August 15thJACOBS was shot this morning after trialby court martial. Cookie saw him a few hoursbefore and was very impressed by his pluckand calm bearing.A cousin of Pilcher's who is commanding abattalion of the Guards at Windsor is underarrest for communicating information obtainedfrom an intelligence summary to de COURCY.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188I talked with V.V. on the telephone for 14hours this morning about the relationsbetween our two departments. There are stilla number of things to get straight but Ithink we shall end by getting a satisfactoryconclusion. There must clearly be bettercollation of S.I.S. and our own information,and we cannot have any hard and fast dividingine.I lunched with Herbert. We decided to m kethe following arrangements with regard tocensorship: Herbert will select 10 examinersof proved reliability, and attach them to Webb.They will deal with the westbound air mailsfrom Lisbon, mails from Stockholm and thetransit mails to Eire. A similar organisationwill be set up in Bermuda. T.A.R. is toexplain to the special examiners exactly whatthey are to look for. We have heard in themeantime from Tricycle that the D.O.T. is beingextensively used. It may on occasion befound under the lower flap of an envelope.A telegram has already come from America whichindicates that the F.B.I. have discovered theDot method and also the microscope for re dingit. They have not found any apparatus formicrophotography.I saw Maxwell and put before him MAASS andSEMMELBAUER'S petition. I pointed out that theHome Secretary probably knew nothing aboutthe Chancellor's visit and that before thisdocument was shown to him an approach shouldbe made to the Prime Minister's departmentsince I thought this matter would come betterCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188from there than from us. I have sent thepetition to Stewart asking him to do thenecessary.August 17th-24thOn leave.August 25thI saw Eddie Grant yesterday. He wasrather worried about the reports he was gettjfrom officers in the Belgian Army. Thereappeared to be a great deal of politicaldissension and that a good many of thehigher officers were more interested inpolitics than in military efficiency.While this information was interesting itwas obviouly undesirable that junior officersshould be making reports to him without theknowledge of theirsuperiors. There was nosuggestion in any of these reports th t anymember of the Belgian Forces would be likelytoassist the enemy. He had therefore askedthat they should be discontinued. It seemsto me that the only effective way ofdealing with this situation would beto brigade the Belgian Forces with Britishunits. This might put an end to politiesand le ad to greater efficiency but it wouldmean that the Belgian Army would no longerbe a symbolic force. I thought that thiswas a matter which should be seriouslyconsidered by higher authority and I under-took to speak to Theo Turner on my return.Catarogtieshererencesevr4r188rces have entered Iran21and do not appear to be meeting with anyresistence.I learned on my return that Campkin whomwe had recently sent to Section V. hadcommitted suicide. There is no reason tothink that he had any sinister motive.He apparently suffered from some nervousdisease for which he had been receivingtreatment. He may have taken an overdoseof the drug which was given to him and underits influence placed his head in a gas oven.ALL his papers have been ex amined withoutresult.WALLEM one of 3 Norwegian who arrived onthe Hernie has broken after interrog tionat Ham. He admits that he is a German agentthat he was sent over here in order thatthe British might employ him as a double-crosand send him b ck to Norway where he wouldhave operated a wireless set under control.He says that his colleagues NIELSEN andLUNDE are not involved.Plan Midas does not appe ir to be working quias we arranged. The traffic indicates thatthe money is to be used for building up anorganisation under Tate rather than forpayment of other agents alre dy established.This isdeduced from the fact that Dragonflyused to receive his money from other sources.Tricycle has arrived safely and our E20,000has been safely banked in New York.August 26thCatalogue Reference:KV/4/18We are t aking steps to get hold of CourtneyYoung to replace Gooch who is goingto S02.Gooch finds it difficult to get any ything inthe nature of specific instructions from S02He was told that his territory stretchedfrom Valparaiso to Alaska and that hewould be expected to recruit Jap agents tocarry out sabotage in Japan. He is gettinga salary of E150 per month plus a house,plus travelling expenses, and any sumsthat he may require for the payment ofagents.We had an R.S.S. meeting at which thequestion of T-Rs notes and their circulationwere discussed. These notes are excellentvalue in explaining the significance of ISOSmaterial. For some reason or other Cowgilldoes not wish them circulated to the recipierof ISOS.. Montague is pressing for themand Strachey of G.C. &c. C. S. wants them too.I had a long talk with Felix after themeeting about Section V. and our requirementsI tried to convince him that it was of thehighest importa ce for us to get as muchinformation as we possibly could from Pplaces like Lisbon,B.A. Rio, etc. and thauwithout it we were unable to carry out asatisfactory interrogatio of arrivals atthe RPS. I also discussed other aspects ofour work and the feeling which I felt wasgrowing up that we were interfering inmatters which were not really our concern.I thought too that there was a gener:atmosphere of suspicion that we were ryingto go behind Section V's pack and havedirect conversations with Stephenson. ICatalogbeeReterencaiktV/rege meetings had arisen23in a very natural way and we had merelydiscussed our difficulties and the desirability of a very free interchange of iformationCowgill said that he had always beenbroughtup never to pass information anybody unlessit was absolutely necessary. I said thatI thought this was an excellent doctrinebut that it all depended on the interpreta-tion of "absolutely necessary". He seemedto take a much wider view of this term thanAction V. anoX I was absolutely certainwilat we could not do our work properly unlesswe had the fullest possible inform tion.Brigadier Sherer D.D.A.I. Cairo called tosee the D.G. T.A.R. R. and I had a talk withhim about XX methods in Egypt. It is quiteclear that the system there has been highlydeveloped and that large movements oftroopsdustclouds etc, are all set in motion at thebeck and call of T.A.R.S S opposite number.We explained to Sherer that things were notuite the same here. He was in the middleof active operations whereas we were buildingup to a point where we might be able tomislead the enemy on a big scale. Shereragreed that it would be highly desirable foransell to come over here for a tilk and hewould arrange this immediately on his return.August 27 27th thI spoke to the D.G. today about the RPSand said that we were very anxious to putJim Hale in as our intelligence representa-tive. He took exception to this on accountof Hale beinga lawyer. He said that lawyerswere all right when they had briefs but thatCatalogueneeference:khee1sat abtracting information from people aboutwhom nothing was knowny4I said I did not think his argument appliedin Hales case since hehad considerableexperience of this office and had done a lotof useful interrogation work. It was obviou;ly no good pursuing the matter at that stageSnow's on has been interned under l8b.August 28th-THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 19580ddI said I thoughtthe idea was an excellent. There is ofcourse a certain risk of disseminatingthe names of individuals in whom we areinterested, but I imagine that the cirduioof such a list WO ld be a very limited one.There has been an interesting developmentin the Hernie case. WALLEM, LUNDE andNIELSEN arrived on the 8th August. On thellth there was a statement in the Norwegianbroadcast about Quislings in the Brandt clubwhich I imagine is a club in Oslo. ISOSmentioned on the same date that the safearriv 1 of the Norwegians trivelling on theCatalogue Reference:KV/4/18825Hernie had been signalled through theNorwegian broadcast. NIELSEN stated thathe heard a Norwegian broadcast on the llthwith the statement about the Brandt Cluband that this was the signal for theParty's safe arrival. We wondered how themessage had reached the Norwegian authoritiThere is a good deal to be cleared up here.There is a suggestion that the informationOmay havebeen passed to the NorwegianGovt. by BJORKELUND the Norwegian Consulin Lerwick. One OXENWALD is concerned withthe Norwegian breadcasts at the B.B.C. andit ranspires that his wife is actuallythe owner of the Hernie.We had a long discussion about securitymeasures in Bermuda, Trinidad and the WestIndies generally. Craig had prepared along report recommending the establishmentof security officers nd F.S.P. atBermuda, Trinidad and Jamaica, and suggest-ing that they should work under Stephenson.This was thought to be undesirable sincethe responsibility for security measuresin the colonies was definitely M.1.5.s.It was however agreed that there should bea co-ordinating officer for the Islandsand that he should work in the closesttouch with Stephenson, since it was quiteclear that security easures in the islandswere more closely linked with America thanwith this country.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188August 29thI saw Jock Why te about his section. Heseems to think there is a great deal ofwork going on whereas as far as I can seethere is very little. He is stronglyopposed to anybody being transferred.Dick has suggested Ronnie Hay lor for theRPS. He would certainly do the job wellbut the D.G. may object on account of hisbeing a lawyer.The P.M. has decided that provided theygive an undertaking to divulge any informa-tion MAAS and SEMMELBAUER can go back toKnapdale.Forrest came to see me. He is very anxiousthat RSLOS should be given instruction inagent provocateur work. There is I think agood deal inhis suggestion. While we areprobably doing as much as we can bout long-term espionage and about new arrivalsI feel sure that there remains quite alot to be done in the 5th column field.I am sure that there are a number of peoplewho would be prepared to assist the enemyin time of invasion. For the moment theyare dormant and only by provocation willthey be induced to show their hand. I amarranging for a meeting it which specificcases shall be discussed in onsiderabledetail by the officers who have been hand-ling them. I am also suggesting that RSLOSCataloque cases forgenera Refetenc and advice.17August 30thMutt has been asked whether a German agentwould be likely to get in here in the guiseof a deserter 9 and what his fate would belikely to be. We have replied that theEnglish are SO gullible th it provided hehad a good story he might quite easily getaway with it. We thought however that itwould be preferable that he should be anAustrian or Sudeten German.The WEGENER case is boiling up to a climax.familyThe ENGERT/arE now rather deeply involved.Arrangements are being made for KUZNETZOFFto be seen by some member of the ovietEmbassy. In the meantime he has been writinghis early history which is quite interesting.He has done quite a lot of espionage workfor the Soviet Government.There has been a little trouble withLENIHAN who was being held under the Arrivalfrom Enemy Territory Act. We had to get an18b order but we refrained from serving itas we did not wish to upset LENIHAN beforehe had been seen by Moore of the R.U.C.Moore still thinks that LENIHAN made somecontact in Southern Ireland before crossingthe border. There is a gap of 3 days betweerthe expiry of the arrival from eemy territoryand theserving of the lob orders. This hasbeen made clear to the .0. and I do notanticipate that we shall have any trouble.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188296August 31stHad a discussion with the D.G. about SectionV. and explained to him what our difficultiewere. I think he understands and appreciatesthe necessity of our being supplied withmore information.September lstHad a meeting about SCOs and RSLOS. Adamhad put forward anote trying to define theirrelations. D.G. has already issued a circulalstating that police enquiries initiated bythe SCOs should be continued by the RSLOwho should keep the SCO informed. Adam istry ing to define the relations more closelyand to guld what is in some way a ratherbitter pill. None of this trouble wouldarise if all the SCOs were intelligentpeople and had a better knowledge of thework of the office. Unlike the RSLOs theyhave never been through the mill, neitherhave they had much contact with officersin the investigation br anches. There is nodirect contact in writing between theSCO and the investigating officer. Every-thing has to be bottlenecked through D.4While there may be certain advantages inthis. It entirelyeliminates the personaltouch. Many SCOs had never visited HeadOffice until a few veeks ago when it wasdecided to have an SCOs conference. Person-ally I think they ought to come up regularlylike the RSLOs, and that they should maRea point of seeing individu l officers,, whomay have been handling certain cases.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1882They would then be much more in the picttre.An added difficulty has been that D. .4 4 havehad their headquarters in the country andhave generally been rather inaccessible.Adam is now going to be in London for twodays a week and Burn will take his placefor another two days.Gibbs tells me that that there is a seriousgap in cens rship between S.America andEurope. There is a regular service by theItalian Air Line known as Lahti from B.A.to Rio, to some Island in the Cape Verdes,to .Spain and thence to Italy. Everyeffort is being made to find some meansof squeezing out this service or forcing itto submit to censorship at Gib.D.M.I. does not want Celery to go to Brazil.T.A.R. and I went to see him and persuadedhim of the desirability of this move. Heagreed thatCelery should go provided wecould obtain the sanction of the othermembers of the Board. Personally I thinkthe D.M.I. is rather going outside hisprovince and had he refused to let Celerygo I should have raised the matter with theD.G. The question of sending agents abroadmust be a matter for S.I.S. and ourselves.It wouldb e an impossible situation if wehad to consult the D. S of I. every time wewanted to send a man out of the country.A parachute corps is being formed and Stonetells me that mmbers of the B.U.F. er thosewho have had any connection with it in thepast are being turned down automatically.Catalogue Reference:KVt4/188He wants to know whether members of theA.M.I.C. should be treated in a similarmanner. I said that I thought each caseought to be treated on its merits, that ifa member of the BUF had severed his conn-ection with the organis tion after theinvasion of the Low Countries he should notautomatically be barred. Having discoveredthe extent to which the BUF was trying toassist the enemy he might wish to expungehis past association with the Party bygiving his services to the country for whatmust be regarded as a dangerous job. Ithought that both as regrds the BUF and AMPCenquiries of a positive nature ought to bemade. Vetting of a negative kind was notmuch use. I recommended Stone to get intouch with the sections concerned andsuggested that when they had come to someagreement they should put the matter up tothe Director's Meeting.Trevor-Roper came to see me. He seems to bevery worried by the fact that his work isnot given official recognition. He hasbeen recommended by a doctor to winterabroad. He does not want to go unless hecan be sure that the work he is doing will beallowed to continue. He was still very keenon having an ISOS bureau officially estab-lished, and he questioned the right ofSection V. to control the circulation ofand action on ISOS material. On this latterpoint I told him that he was not on verygood ground. It had for years been theprerogative of G.C.&.C &. S. to deal with codesCatalogue aloguepReference:ks/ts&e that we had to some31extent been instrumental in discoveringthe group traffic, but we had to admit thatit KxEXX& relatedt information obtainedabroad, and that in that sense S.I.S. would bthe sifting office. Somebody had to takethe responsibility for safeguarding thesource and owing to the nature of theinformation and the way in which it wasobtained this duty would normally fall toS.I.S. As regards the presentation of thematerial and the action on it T-R was Ithink on sounder ground. He thought thatthe blanketted reports put up by Section Vwere both inadequate and inaccurate. Thesections in various departments receivingISOS were therefore ill-informed about itsreal significance. They could not make aproper study of it unless they considered itin its communication setting. He feltthat even if they had the time and opportun-ity to study it from this aspect there wouldbe a waste of labour unless they were allow-ed to draw for their information on acommon pool. It was for this reason thathe was keen on the establishment of anISOS Bureau. Personally I think that thereis much to be said for this suggestion,and were it not for the difficult personalitof T-R and his wuarrels with Felix thewhole matter could have been settled monthsago. I told T-R that I did not think hewould achieve anything by putting his casein an abstract way. He would have to showby concrete example exactly why certainpoints where elucidated by his approach tothe subject whereas other sections inreceipt of the material remained in theCatatogele Reference:KV/4/188I was as anxious as he was to find somesatisfactory solution, but the wholequestion had been immensely complicatedby his personal quarrel which had driven awedge in between ourselves and section V.He said that his health was bad and that hehad been ordered to spend the winterabroad. He would be quite ready to do thisbut would prefer to take the risk ofstayin here if the organisation which hehad set up was going to be pulled to pieces.September 2ndAfter the D.G.S meeting at which nothing ofany great moment was discussed we had afurther discussion with Craig and Strattonabout the establishment of securityorganisations in Bermuda, Trinidad andJamaica. I felt very strongly that theofficer who was going out to co-ordinatesecurity matters in the 3 isands shouldhave his headquarters in close proximityto Stephenson in New York. From theintelligence and security point of viewthere would be far greater activitybetween the islands and New York than theislands and London. The D.G and Jelfwere opposed to this mainly I think becausethey thought that the Governors would notlike any suggestion that their securitymeasures were being run.A It was decidedtherefore that h. h.g g. should be in Jamaicabut that very close liaison should bemade with Stephenson. There is no doubtthat as the islands are full of AmericanCatalogue ReferenCe:KV/4/18813the problems will be more American thanBritish.I had a talk after the meeting with StrattonHe told me that John Maude had really beenside-tracked into a job in Washington wherehe was looking after the security of thevarious missions. Stephenson had begun bybeing very enthusiastic about him but hadfound him rather superficial and inaccurate,and the mission were annoyed with him be-cause he sent a report home without showingit to Craig or Stratton.Frost came to see me about Gibbs. Hesugested that he should be attached to theB.l in order that he might apply anyknowledge gained there to Censorshipproblems. Personally I doubt very muchwhether there would be any job on thoselines. The Censorship problem is nowa fairly simple one. The whole machineryof Censorship h is been explored by Groganand Gibbs and there is not really room fortwo people at Censorship H.Q. It is quiteclear that communications will in future bein secret ink and in the micro dot. Theproblem is to discover what form of corres-pondence is carrying either. Searches arebeing made for the dot on certain mailsoutward bound from the continent andperiodical tests are being carried out forsecret ink. This seems to be more or lessthe limit to what can be done effectivelyPersonaly I think that Gibbs could easilybe absorbed in B. lb where there is a greatdeal of work going on.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1883uI saw Farrer about Wood. He is still tryingto find him a job. Farrer was quiteinteresting about the oil situation. TheGermans are evidently short of heavy lub-ricating oil and they had tosome extentmiscalculated their requirements for theRussian campaign, Owing to the roughnessof the ground over which the tanks had toproceed they are more often than not inthe lowest possible gear. This means afar heavier consumption both in petrol andoil.I attended a meeting at the F.0., with C.S.S.and Cadogan, to decided about the suggestedexchange of GERLACH and others for anumber of our diplomats and consular officersI had previously drawn C.S.S. S attentionto the fact that GERLACH was an S.S man andshould therefore be exchanged on an S.S.basis. He made this point very clear toCadogan and said that had he been acquain-ted of what was going on at an earlier datehe would have suggested Stevens as anexchange for GERLACH. Cadogan was afraidthat if such a suggestion wene nowintroduced it would wreck the negotiationswhich had been going on for months. Heaccepted the principle however put forwardby C.S.S. I mentioned Baron OYENHAUSENas another man who should be bargained foron an S.S. basis. He is not included inthe present party and his status will beborne in mind in any future negotiations.It seems that the P. M. had put in a lastminute suggestion that we should bargainwith the Germans captured in Iran insteadCatalogue Reference:KV/4/18835of with GERLACH and company, but the F.0.turned this down, on account of the negotia-tions being SO far advance.d Cadogan thoughtthat if we could effect one exchange confi-dence would be established and otherexchanged would be possible.I saw Maxwell about SEMMELBAUER and MAASS,and informed him af the P.M.S decision thattheir undertaking should be accepted andthat they should be allowed to return toKnapdale. He was anxious to know whetherhe couls now inform the S. of S. I saidthat I thought that he could but that Iwould make quite sure. He telephoned laterto say that quite accidentally he had foundout that the S. of S. knew all about theproceedings at Camp Z. He therefore proposedto tell him of the latest developments.Spptember 3rdI had a discussion wltn withJ.( J. and T.A.R.about T-R. They both feel very stronglythat something should be done, to smoothout the difficulties and retain his ser-vices. I told them that I was quite surethat the only way this could be achievedwould be for Hart to put up a note to meshowing by concrete examples the value ofT-Rs system and that I had asked him to dothis. I then proposed to take the matterup once more with Viv.G.W. has received 2l60 through CALVO fromALCAZAR. This is merely in payment for abogus document showing divisional signsALCAZAR is apparently extremely pleased withhis purchase. He will doubtless sell theCataloguereference.kt4/tss considerably larger sul36and in due course be reprimanded for makingsuch a fool of himself. We now have a fairlclear case for having him declared personanon grata.The expedition to Spitzbergen seems tohave been ompletelynsuccessful. We tookoff about 2,000 Russians who were delighedto come away and very keen to fight.There were in addition about 200 French-menwho had escaped into Russia across thePolish frontier and a fair number ofNorwegians. The Frenchmen had had someincredible experiences, since most of themwere suspected of being German agents, andtreated accordingly. They were made tosit on blocks of ice and were interrogatedfor hours by the OGPU. The hussian mineswere set on fire andall the machinerydestroyed. The whole of the Russian settle-ment was also burnt. The machinery of theNorwegian mines was also destroyed. Theexpedition met with no resistence whatever.It would be impossible to get anythinggoing until next spring and even then thecost and labour involved would be verygreat.The Germans are moving convoys up towardsthe north of Norway and the Admiralty arelying in wait for them.The Germans have asked the Turks to repre-sent them in Persia. Aftersome delay theTurks have refused. This is Ithink a goodsign. Meanwhile there is a report thatthe Germans have been digging a tunnel fromCatalbguereferenee:kti/188 the turkish Legation31The Turks are anxious about the situationin Persia as they fear that it may lead totheir being invaded by the Germans.September 4thA Belgian seaman named TIMMERMANN has beenarrested and has confessed to being a spy.He had with him all the requisitesincluding secret ink.September 5thWe have had another meeting about the N.In-dies to decide about taffs etc.Dick and I had a talk with the D.G. aboutHaylor taking over Intelligence dutiesin the RPS. This has now been agreed toand he will begin work on 22nd Sept.I saw colonel Vickers of M.E.W. aboutthecase of Ruth GLOVER. I put the matter asfairly as I could. She had certainly beenunfortunate in the selection of her friendsOand her connection with them might bee agreat deal or nothing at all. On the wholewe were inclined to think that she wasmerely a type who was interested in foreign-ers. While we felt that possibly she wasn'tentirely suitable for highly confidentialwork we did nt think that she should bebarred from an appointment in any governmentdepartment. I explained to colonel Vickershow difficult thesevetting cases were, ,sincethose who did the work were not alwaysvery certain about the value which should beCatalogue ReferenCe:KV/4/188356attached to the papers in a file. Thiscould not be avoided as in times of stresswe were called upon to vet as many as1,000 names in a month.I had a talk with V.V. on the telephoneHe accepts the view that our office shouldbe responsible for the collation of materialfrom abroad about Axis intelligenceorganisations and subversive movements.This had always been his view. Logicallytherefore we should do the carding. Hewas a little hurt at the references tooverlapping and to reluctance on the partof section V. to pass the information tous which they did not consider was ourconcern. I explained that I had never seenHorrock's minute and that I was not awarethat my minute, which was addressed to theD.G., had been sent to S.I.S. I did notmind however as I had nothing really thatI wished to hold back. I thought it muchbetter that there should be a clear under-standing, that we should put all our cardson the table.There has ebeen an interesting ISOScase. It became apparent that 3 NorwegiansSVERRE, STEFANSEN and ELVERSTADT, werepreparing for some expedition. The messagesaid Irag but it was difficult to see why3 Norwegians should be going, to that country.T-R discovered that the was probably amisprint for X and that the r was probablya misorint for a d. This left Ida ininverted commas since X is used for thispurpose. Xkx Ida is the speller in GermanCatarogere Referencetkva/is8ves I in inverted32commas and from the context it seemed likelyto be Iceland. A telegram to Iceland hasproduced a reply that a boat called theHornfjell recently arrived with 8 crew andpassengers. Three of them being SAETRANG,STEFANSEN and ELVERSTAD. They are all beingsent over here for examination. This caseis a clear indication of T-R's value.Lennox has given me our Army casualties upto date.They are equal to our casualliesin the first two days of the battle of theSomme. 120,00 killed, wounded missing andprisoners. This figure includes 19,000Dominion troops and 7,000 Indian. 56,000of the total casualties were in the MiddleEast. 11% have been killed against 20% inthe last war. 57% are prisoners or missingagainst 10% in the last war.September othDe Gaulle seems to have thoroughly blottedhis copybook, in Africa Egypt and yria.He has been talking a lot against theBritish and saying that he would like toplace his movement under the American flag.The P.M. is extremely annoyeo and has givenorders that no department is to have anyrelations with him for the time being.As this order had never reached us we arein the ironical position of being his onlyfriends.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188De Gaulle has apparently become very swollenheaded. Muselier on the other hand has madea declaration of loyalty to the P..M. Thereis some anxiety lest De Gaulle shouldattempt to leave the country. We have beenasked to do what we can. Our task is notan easy one since in the classic phrase"it is important that his suspicions shouldnot be aroused in any way".I had a talk with Makins about ALCAZAR. 1told him that we had caught him out butthat we did not wish to make use of thisinformation. ALCAZAR had talked a greatdeal in an anti-Britiah and pro-Naziwayduring his stay in this country and I hopedthat the F.O. could make use of this informa.tion in telling the Spanish authorities bothhere and in Madrid that he could no longerbe regarded as persona grata. An alternativsuggestion that a question shouldbe askedabout him in the House was not favourablyreceived. I said that our object would beachieved if we could let it be widely knownin Falange circles that people of the typeof ALCAZAR could not come here and act ipthe way he had with impunity. If thiswere not done we might expect to see moreof his kind. Makins said that if Iwouldlet him have a note he would take thematter up.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1884September 8thI had a conference with Dick, T. A. R. andGrogan about inks. Tests are going on twica week on different days nach week. Do farnothing has been discovered.It was decided:1. to continue the major test on Lisbonmails for another 2 weeks and then to tryall towns in Spain and Portugal where it isknown that cover addresses exist.2. that Mr. White would consider, afterconsultation with Major Cowgill. the circultion of a list of cover addresses obtainedfrom secret sources to Censorship atBermuda, since a recent case has shown thatat least one of these ddresses is commonto both agents in this country and in Americ3. that copies of all information aboutthedates of each major test be sent direct byMr.Grogan to S.I.S. S.0.2. have said thatthey are not affected, although exactlywhy I cannot understand.4. that Major Robertson would consult withMajor Cowgill about having certain of hisletters submitted to the major test, sinceit would obviously be suspicious if all theletters from his agents bore no trace of atest. Mr. Grogan pointed out that we shouldnot get an exagserited view about thismbecause even though a bi-weekly test wasCatalogufeipfeference!kv/4/188ver Catalogs be possible to saythat a letter on a certain date should havelibeen tested. Much would depend on theoffice of origin of the letter. If itcame from Scotland there might be any thingup to a 48 hour internal delay.5. that Major Robertson would considerthe advisability of putting throughan antettins letter on a dayOthat a major test ras being made.6. that Major Rovertson would make enquiriesabout Basket's ink ind any other inksbeing used by the Germans in order to seewhether tney can be successfully broughtup and expunged.THIS IS A COPYDOCUMENTORIGINAL IN 3 ACT DEPARTMENT (4) OF 1958 THE p PUBLIC UNDER RECORDS RETAINED SECTION 2000OCatalogue Reference:KV/4/143I discussed with Hart and Dick the questionof the carding of ISOS. At present we areonly carding to a limited exteni the namesin Europe and the Midde East. Nothing hasbeen done about carding American ind S. Ameri-can names. There is no duplicate card inthe registry and there is no automaticlook-up of all names. We shall have toconsider this matter very carefully, bothfrom the point of view of secrecy and effi-ciency. Personally I think that all namesshould be looked up and that a duplicatecard should be placed in the registrybearing the name only suggesting referenceto B.I registry. This will of course placea good deal of extra work on B.I who willhave to look-up possible connections forall sections of the office. It is probablethat only on rare occasions there will beS likely case. A possible compromise mightbe looking up and carding of all names byB.l and the placing of a card in the registrywhenever there are sufficient particularsto make it reasonably possible to establishidentity.Further enquiries have been made about theNorwegian broadcast in the Hernie case.As far as we can see at the moment, thebroadcast was an extraordinary coincidence.Before the departure of the Hernie thequestion of Quislings in the, Brandt Clubat Bergen had been a matter of general talkand speculation in Norway. As a matter ofhot news certain data on this subject hadbeen transmitted from Stockholm via theNorwegian Legation through the NorwegianCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188uusection of the B.B.C. here. By a coincidencthose travelling by the Hernie had chosena reference to the Quislings in the BrandtClub as their code message signifying theirarrival in this country.It is now established that OXENWALD'S wifedid not own the Hernie but one of the otherboats that had been suggested for theexpedition. There is still a certain amountof doubt about OLSSEN, the NorwegianVice-Consul at Lerwick who is to bequestioned. It is clear that in futurewe shall have to arrange that Norwegiansat Lerwick are set straight down to theR.P.S. without making contact with eitherthe Consul or Vice-Consul. The presentarrangement by which the Norwegianauthorities and local representatives ofS02 make contact in the first instance willhave to cease.September 9thWe had a .G.meeting; Adam was asked toprepare a note about the listing ofproperty and despatch of suspects frantothe RPSY from Ports.Had an R.S.S. meeting this afternoon. Itwas of the usual rather controversial type.It had been arranged some time ago thatwe should receive a copy of T-ROs notes onISOS, but somhow or other they had neverreached us. I asked that the minutes aboutT-R's notes should be read out and it wasquite clear that we should have had them.They had been sent to Section V. and hadCatalogueereferepcatkkV/4/1884sWe are now to get them. Strachey of G.C &C.D. asked to have them too and stressedtheir great importance to him in carryingout his work. He is evidently think ingon the same lines as ourselves about some-thing in the nature of an ISOS bureaubut is clearly in a very delicate position.September l0thThe R. J.C. have received a request throughtheir contact in the Garda for informationabout Dr. GOERTZ, the Gernan spy who got5 years here sometime before the war. Heserved about 3zyears and was released beforethe war. It would be interesting to knowhow the Eire authorities have got hold ofhis name.MTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 958pal 20o0Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188Inthe meantime he reconstructed the documentand also gave us certain coded messages withthe en clair underneath These should provevaluable to G.C &c C.S. I think we are wellout of a difficult situation.The Russian news is bad. It seems that theGermans have got across the Dnieper and arepressing on to the Don basin. Stalinhas sent an S.0.S. message to the P.M.We have promised 450 planes immediatelyand 250 per month plus 200 tanks permonth. Stalin wants double this amountand hopes to get the remainder from theU.S.A. Unfortunately all the indicationsat the present moment are that U.S.A. pro-duction is far behind what it should be.Quite clearly we are not going to get verymuch from there for some onsiderabble timealthough a tremendous drive is being madeto speed things up.Catalogye Reference'kt/4h188 the W.Board to47discuss the vetting of wireless trafficand secret ink communications, in answerto questionnaires put to Tricycle. It wasdecided that this should be done by thelocal J.I.C. in Washington I put forwarda paper about sabotage which had beenprepared by B. .la. We wanted to get itaccepted in principle that in order tobuild up Mutt and Jeff we shouldbe allowedOto blow things up. We thought there was anadvantage to be gained from getting somesort of control over enemy sabotageactivities in this countyy. If we couldsatisfy them that they had an organisationfor the purpose they would be less likelyto attempt anything of the kind throughother channels. It was thought on the wholethat we should use service rather thancivilian establishments for the purposesince the inevitable activities of thepress,police etc. could be more easilycontrolled. We have in fact been asked toblow up food dumps and we shall have tothink out ways and means, for inducing theenemy to concentrate more on bomb stores orthe like.September llthGibbs has sent in his resignation, as he feltthat a job was being made for him. I haveassured him that there is plenty of workfor him to do in B. l, quite apart from Censor-ship matters, and that I shall be glad toabsorb him there if he felt that the postwould be congenia to him. It was agreedCatalogue Reference:k/4/1ont without obligationon elther S1de.Bingham has been told about Haylor's appoint-ment at the RPS and asked to be allowed toconsider his position. Dick has talked himround and he has decided to remain.NAKIMURA has applied to go to Straford andthence to Leamington Spa. Orr thinks thathe will almost certainly lose his way andgo on to Coventry. D.M.I. is anxious thatwe should have him followed and ifpossible catchhim out. This all seems tome to be rather a waste of time. It wouldbe much simpler if there wis a general rulingthat attaches could not go to any placesof military,naval or air importance and thatif they applied to go elsewhere they shouldbe onfined to a radius of 5 miles.I have arranged with Scotland Yard to laveNAKIMURA followed.September 12thOrr is in a fever about the Japs. It seemsthat Antony had made careful arrangementsabout NAKIMURA and was going to have himwatched at his hotel at beamington Spa.He therefore C alled off the police obserVottion by Scotland Yard. Orr says that thishas let him down in the eyes of the W.O. andeverybody else. I told him that it wasentirely my fault for thinking that I wasdealing with the case de noyo. Had antonybeen here I should have course asked him tomake the arrangements and he would then havetold me that this had already been done.Orr seemed to think that he ought to havebeen kept informed of every move in the game.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188He did know in fact that certain arrangementswere being made and these arrangements shouldhave been known to D.D.M.I. who approachedOrr with the suggestion about Scotland Yard.Carlisle of M. I. L was au fait but evidentlydid not tell D.D.M.I. There is a greatdeal of confusion about Room 055, largelybrought about by Harry Allen's dual roleof Director of Security Service and D.D.M.I.Security War Office. The situation iscomplicated by the fact that nobody in theWar Office knows the difference betweenM.I.5 and the Security Service. An addeddifficulty is that Harry is now a permanentmember of the J.I.C. When the question ofclosing down the Jap consulates was raisedthe other day it was done through himalthough when the meeting was called I hadto go and fight the case. Another anomolyarises when the D.G. writes to the M. I.and the D.M.I. hands his letter to HarryAllen who is really the D.G. 's subordinate,for advice or action.There has been an interesting sabotage caseIt was noticed that a curious white powderwas coming out of a large tin of eggs whichhad been imported to this country from Shang-hai on the "Tacoma Star".0 further examina-tion it was found that the case was packedwith magnesium and contained a clock bombof a type which has been definite identifiedas German. A large number of the tins hadarready been taken away and placed in coldstorage, and the labour involved in diggingthem out would be SO colossal that a chancewill have to be taken. The indications areCateloguetReferangeakvoieampere Cataloguet ampered with en route5bcand that it was probably filled by the packinfirm. Enquiry in hanghai shows that thefirm is Henningsen & Co. and that the headof the packing dept. is a White hussiannamed J.M. KOPELMAN.September 13thTwenty Committee have started a new ideawhich is to be known as Plan Trellis.A bank representative here with a Germanbackground goes to Lisbon and say s that hehas been sent there by the British to actas a double-cross. He declares that he isthoroughly pro-German and suggests thathe should be taken on in his present roleas a German agent. They will know that any-thing he sends from this country will beunder control. He willhowever have theopportunity of sending them other informationand will of course be able to visit themfrom time to time. He suggests further thatthey will be able to learn something fromour misleading traffic. He will ask for awireless set.Lt.Glen who went on the Spitzbergenexpedition came in to see Dick, and gave usinteresting impressions which are largelycovered by what I have already said. TheMetereological tition was kept going untilthe party was ready to leave, Within afew hours of its closing down a Condor C ameover to see what washappening and found allthe mines and huts ablaze. There were a fewdoubtful elements on the island but on theCatalogue whole LO Glen friendly travelled and many backTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIOK3 ACT (4 OF 1958 THE PUBLCOECORDSwith the manager of the Norwegian Mine,one SVEDRUP. This man had proved difficultat first and had been regarded by theCanadians as suspect. Glen did not thinkhe was really a bad man and if properlyhandled might be extremely useful. Thehis Norwegians internment. had in Glen the meantime thinks thit asked as Nor- forwegian mines had been created by SVEDRUPand was really his life's work it would beunjust to regard him as being disloyalif he had been rather naturally lacking inenthusasm when the Canadians Came to destroyit.The two Poles MUHLSTEIN @ MILLS andSUKKEINIKwhO denounced EISEMONT are SOunsatisfactory that te propose to hold themunder the arrival of enemy territory actpending interrogation. This is being donewith the full approval and cooperation ofthe Poles.The situation in byssinia is not verysatisfactory. There has been a recrudescenceof Italian propaganda, largely owing to thepresence of E. African back troops who areinsulting the Abyssinians and treating themas an inferior black race.Japan seems to be moving away from the Axis,and inclined to come to some agreement withthe Americans. This is doubtiess due to theclose cooperation between ourselves and theAmericans and the firm line which has beentaken. Japan evidently does not feel tooCalaloguefRererenceuki4/188/ti man itary circles hereit 1S thought that if Germany loses52and Japan is still a member of the Axiscombine Britain,ussia and america mayforce her to withdraw from China.September 14thI discussed with Dick his note, Hart's noteand my covering letter to V.V. on the sub-ject of ISOS. We agreed that this shouldgo forward. We also had a discussionabout Curry and the possibility of absorbinghim in B.Division. Dick thinks that hewould be best in the role of a collatorof all information on the axis intelligenceorganisation.September 15thIt has been arranged that Tate shall becaught in the general round-up of thosewho have not registered but that his excusesshall be accepted by the authorities here.This will result in his having to do certainwork which will restrict his movements andmake it easier for us to decline to to givecertain information. Rainbow has receiveanconcealed insidethe packing of a tin of coffee. The ink wason a small piece of cotton wool whichhas to be dipped in water. The whole packagecame through customs and Censorship withoutthe slightest difficulty.I lunched with Z.0.R. He was steeped in hisuual gloom. He thinks the Russians aregetting a frightful thrashing but admitsthat a large numb,er of Germans have beenCatalogye Cataleayerretereefe:ky64l18s Reference and that valuable time53has been gained. I think that his horizonis clouded by the fact that any business withwhich he might be concerned is at a stand-still and that the struggle for existenceis going to be even harder in the futurethan it is now.. He did not think thatthe Germans would get very much out of Russiaeven if they occupied it for a long time.He said that there was no greater obstructionist than the peasant and that he wouldcommitany act of sabotage or murder whenhis own hearth and home were concerned.He would have little regard for the conse-quences. Few people realised how simple-minded and barbarous the Russian peasant was.He was quite capable of cutting his wife'shead off with an axe, bursting into tearsand saying that he did it because he had to.I asked Z.O.R. to find out from LevRabinovitch aboutthe Russian oil industry.How far is it possible to destroy the oilwells at Grosny and Barkum. Obviously themachinery could be destroyed but for howlong would this impede production. To whatextent was the whole of Russian industrydependent on supplies from these centres?He said he would let me have a reportBurgess came to see me about Peter Huttonof the views Dept. of the F.0. who had dis-closed to our Swiss contact, informationobtained from telegrams between Stalin andthe P.M. Hutton had done this in an off-the-record talk and was nervous lest hisSwiss friend might have passed the informa-tion further, since enquiries were beingCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188made as to how KUH had become SO wellinformed on the subject of these telegrams.The fact is that all these people in theNews Dept. have their own pet journalistsand that there is rivalry among all membersof the department in being sought after bythe most prominent journalists. Thejournalists of course like to go to thepeople who will tell them most and theresults may well be deplorable. Thedifficulty in this case is that if Huttonis made a scapegoat our very importantrelations with our Swiss contact may bejeopardised. I think we shall have to tellodrington and suggest to him that thisincident should be used more as an occasionto tighten things up generally in the NewsDept. than to take drastic action againstone individual.I have just seen the papers of the Rev.George Henry DYMOCK. DY MOCK who is a rectoraged 62 has been more or less associatedwith Fascist activities since 1935. Thepolice at Bristol have been making enquiriesabout him but could get no further.They asked for our assistance and M/Y wassent down. She provoked the old man bysuggesting thatthey Should compile a sedi-tious pamphlet and circulate it secretly.She also hinted that in time of invasionthere might be a possibility of cutting uptelephone wires and blowing up bridges.She got quite a strong reaction and inthe course of conversation with DY MOCK andBREWER who is now interned under lob itemerged that DY MOCK had a number of FascistCatalogue Reference:KV/4/18855uniforms concealed on church property. ThePolice decided to search. the uniforms werediscovered and the Regional Commissionermade an order for internment and submittedit for confirmation to the H.O. M/Y hadarranged a special code and pseudonym forcorresponding with DY MOCK before his arrest.He got frightened when she sent him atelegram and gave a copy of it to the policesaying that he knew nothing about itscontents or the sender. In the meantime ehetelephoned to M/Y instructing her not tocome near him. The H.0. eventually decidedto reduce the 18b order to a restrictionorder under 18a prohibiting DY MOCK frommoving outside his parish without reportingto the police. They also reported himto his Bishop for a raspberry. In minutingthe H.U.file file on this case Hutchinson andNewsam both took exception to the agentprovocateur methods of M.I.5 and Hutchinsonwent SO far as to say that the S. of S.would strongly disapprove of the use ofagents in this way. I put up a strongminute to D.G. saying that if these methodscannot be employed to investigate the 5thcolumn field we cannot be responsible forits investigation at all. Quite clearly theordinary methods will lead us nowhere, andit is learlyPRek ur duty to find outexactly where doubtful elements/s sound intnme of invasion. This can only be achievedby provocation. My own view is that actionunder D.R. should generally speaking betaken now only if it can be based on evi-dence other than the spoken word or actionCatatogue which Reference:KV/4/188 san be directly attributed to provo-56Otherwise the suspect should be placed onthe invasion list. I do not think howeverthat any exception can justifiably be takento the methods employed in obtaining theinformation. In the case of DY MOCK theevidence about the uniform although obtainedas a result of provocation related to factswhich had taken place long before the agentever met DY MOCK. Toby has some doubtsabout the lengths to which provocationshould go. He thought thatthere was alimit. I agree, but I do notthink it wasreached in the DYMOCK case. Theo Turnerfeels that as neither the D. of S. norMaxwell have commented on Hutchinson orNewsam's observations we should let sleepingdogs lie otherwise we mayget our wingsclipped. If on the other hand we areattacked we have a good case. I think theremay be something in this argument but it willbe for the D.G. to decide.There is to be a clean sweep in the P.W.Dept. Generals Hunter and Borrett and Col.Coats are all going. The nigger in the wood-pile is Col. Coats who is thought to havebeen making money on the side althoughI do not know whether there is any concreteevidence on this count. It is however cer-tain that he is an undesirable character.In 1923 he had a bankruptcy which wasconsidered SO near the wind that the paperswere sent to the D.P.P. He only refused toprosecute for lack of evidence.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/18857September l6thWe had a D.G. meeting at which Adam's noteon dealing with suspects destined for theRPS was considered. He holds the view thatresponsibility should be delegated throughthe SCO for examining and sealing up baggageand if necessary listing certain items whichare to be signed for by the suspect. He willalso be responsible for making the necessaryarrangement for their transfer by rail orcar to the RPS. He will endeavour to workout the necessary details with the Immigra-tion authorities.Had a talk with T.A.R. about Curry. Heseemed rather in favour of his joining B.Division in order to collate informationabout Axis intelligence organisations.He had a specific job which he would verymuch like him to do. This would consist ofplacing himself in the position of Dr. Rand reading through the whole of B.la'straffic. He would then be in a positionto say whether he detected any flaws.T..R. R. thought it would be useful to havean entirely fresh mind on this.The P.M. wants a report on Jap contacts inthis country. I have asked Blunt tocompile this and to said it to Loxley whowill collate it with other information fromthe F.O.I had a talk with Jones who is coming underT.A.R. in connection with a XX organisationto be built up among seamen. There haveCataleguerdeterenee:k4ettegie about this with58D. .4. who seem to think that such an organ-isation would be under their control andrun by SCOs. While E think that D. 4 shouldbe kept informed I think that the less SCOshave to do with this work the better. Thereare cases where they would do it very wellbut there are others where the whole thingwould break down owing to lack of knowledgeand efficiency.The new Commdant of the RPS, ,Major Begg,has packed up. He does not feel he can makethe grade.I spent the night with Charles. and discussedwith him to a fairly late hour my variousdifficulties. Wepeame rather heated aboutCurry. Charles I think has never quiteforgiven him for his support of the malconterat the Palace. I said that I thought Curryhad been placed in an almost impossibleposition. I think that in the end Charlessaw my point, and is going to say a word tothe D.G. about Curry's possible transfer toB.Division.September 17thStephens rang me up early this morning tosay that SAETRANG, one of the Norwegianswho arrived on the Hornfjell had committedsuicide, by hanging himself from a water-pipe with his scarf. He had' stripped him-self to the waist and gagged himself bystuffing a handkerchief down his throat.He had only been interrogated for 9 minuteson his arrival on the previous day. HeCatalogueebeference;kethlagac information which59connected him with the German S.S. andthat he had better consider the advisabilityof making a written statement. He had beenseen by the guard at 4 a. m. and must havecommitted suicide sometime between 4 and 6.On arrival at the office I got hold ofCookie and Cussen in order that we couldmake arrangements for a coroner's inquestwith the least possible publicity. Theyhave made arrangements to do this effective-ly, through a tame coroner in the north ofLondon.Swinton was in the office in the morning andI explained the facts to him. From theintelligence point of view it is a pitythat SAETRANG and done himself in. We thinkhe is identical with a man called SVERRAand that he could have told us a good deal.D.G. has writtena very strong letter to theF.O. about a complaint from Orme Sargentthat our action in sending a Norwegian namedBULL to the RPS was jeopardising our rela-tions with a friendly allied government.Orme Sargent and Collier, our Minister toNorway, had got most of their facts wrongand after dealing with these the D.G.embarked on a tirade against F.0. methodsof lightheartedly allowing aliens of everysort and description to come to this country.He said that he wished that for once theF.O. would put themselves in the positionof the Security Service and realise thatCatalaguereteepgekienss tlezone. should be He made thought tothis country60appreciate the necessity of security measuresthe lack of which in their own countrieshad to some extent led to their downfall.I must say that I hand it to the D.G. forthis effort. He has the courage to saysomething which has needed tsaying for avery long time.The D.G. has also written a very strongletter to the H.O. about Sneath's pamphleon the BUF. Inspired I think by JohnMorris of the Advisory Cttee Maxwell hadwritten in to say that he was anxious aboutthe circulation of this document to thepolice as he thought it might be taken asan expression of government opinion. D.G.took a contrary view and thought that afree interchange of information betweenourselves and the Special Branches attachedto provincial police forces was highlynecessary and educative. Without such aninterchange the police would be largelyworking in the dark.The Brazilian Embassy are suggesting thata released Italian seaman should beallowed to return to Italy and the H.O.have asked for our observations. A glanceat the file shows that he was released underCat. 19, namely "those who can satisfy theS. of S. that by their public actions andwritings or speeches have shown themselvesto be strongly opposed to the Fascist cause.Theo has minuted the file back to say thateither the Brazilian Govt. are trying tolure this man to perdition or that he hasCalaogueyReterence:k/4y98gl which releasedShould be reinterned.6/I have spoken to the D.G. about the DY MOCKcase. He is quite ready to weigh in if wegive him the facts.September l8thISOS shows that the Germans are proposingto send an expedition to Spitz bergen tosee what has been going on. There 1S alsoan indicati tion that saboteurs formerlyemployed in Bessarabia are being moved toParis in preparation for further work.This may be in connection with Spain orthis country. This is the kind of informatiowhich if read in conjunction with otherreports may be highly significant. I ratherdoubt however whether it ever sees the lightof day under the present system.The Air Ministry report at 10.30 last nightor the night before a German aeroplanecame to within 12 miles of the coast offAbbs Head, just north of Berwick. Theengines appear to have stopped for 15 minutesand then started up again. The suggestionis that an agent may have landed in a rubberboat. I have told Milmo to find out whetherat the time the tide was coming in or goingout, as this may be quite a significantpoint.Bingham tells me that in one' week RPS havedealt with 195 suspects and that the restof his staff have examined 750 Norwegiansand 180 French at Glasgow. He is veryanxious to get more staff.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/18862:I had a long talk with De Geyr about the RDS.He has had a pretty rough deal and since hisarrival there has been acting in everyconceivable capacity. In how own words hehas been a "bonne a tout faire". He seems to.have sound ideas as to how the place shouldbe run and would like to put in for thepost of commandant. He thinks there should bea commandant who would supervise generally.He should be a civilian. He should haveunder him an Asst. Commandant who would bemilitary and look after the Guard, Quarter-master etc. The Intelligence side wouldbe dealt with separately as arranged.Personally I think he might be very goodas the commandant. He would have thenecessary cosmopolitam outlook. He knowshow to handle foreigners and speaks theirlanguage. Just after I h ad seen him, theD.G. sent for me and introduced me toWebster, late SCO Port of London. D.G.thinks Webster might make a good Commandant.Personally I do not know very much abouthim but he seems a pleasant fellow. sincehowever he broke down owing to overwork atthe Port of London and has only justrecovered I should hesitate to recommendhis appointment. I gave him the lowdownabout the RPS and said that although I didnot wish to put bim off he would find thejob a pretty tough one. D.G. wants him togo down and have a look at the place.September 19thTwenty Committee have suggested that someoneCatatogue ference:kV/49188 in order to coordina63XX policy and the feeding of informationthrough the local J.I.C. The committeewant a decision from the V.Board. I havewritten to Stewart saying that I thinkthat this is primarily a matter betweenS.I.S. and ourselves and that before puttingthe matter forward to the D.M.I. as cha rmanof the Board I thought it would be as wellfor us to come to some agreement.D.G. has agreed to a 2500 guarantee toCelery' employer on whose bahalf he isgoing to Rio.I had my first flare-up with the D.G. todaywhen he turned down my scheme for the forma-tion of Machell's section. He Seemed toimagine that machell would have a full timejob sorting lettersmwithout doing anyenquiries and that the preliminary investi-gations which he had been doing should nowbe done by Jock Whyte's section. Theother matters he thought should also go toJock Whyte. He had been spending the weekendin the country and had evidently talkedover the whole matter with Horroeks and Jock.I told him that I could not agree and heeventually said that he would put his viewson paper and would like to discuss thematter when he returned from his holiday.He then spoke to me about the suggestedtransfer of Vesey and the lack of work.Jock Whyte had evidently put a fast one overon him and I told him SO. From a carefulstudy of Jock's work over a period of yearslogueRererence.kVA4ls8efinite opinion about1 t. sometlmes lt was good and sometimes badand I could not say which without personallylooking through it from back to front. D.G.said that he thought he had a very wideknowledge of his ubject, I said that hemight but that it was not always accurate,and that he was too much of an old soldier.We ended the conversation by talking aboutflyfishing. I shall have to get the matterstraight when he returns.We had a meeting with G.P,Maltby and Frost.G.P. presided. This was to consider Frost'scharter vis a vis R.S.S. With certain minoramendments it was aceppted and certainlycontains a good deal of eyewash.I have asked Bingha im to find out throughhis Air Ministry contact at the RPS whetherany allied aviators have mysteriouslydisappeared, when in charge of an aeroplane.This would of course be a very seriousmatter and I think we ought to know theposition.SCROGHEIM of the Hornfjel has amongst hiskit a bottle of medicine which he saysis for V.D. He is not at present sufferingfrom any such disease but we are taking atest to see whether he ever has. ufferedfrom sud a complaint, The medicine xxxaxcan also be used as a very high gradesecret ink and has been used by the Germanson a previous occasion. SCROGHEIM is aclose friend of SAETRENG.Lunched with V.V. when I covered an immenseamount of ground. He was very friendlyCatalogue Reference:KV/4/18865I still have difficulty in persuadinghim that T-R's approach is the right one.He does not however wish to show our documentto Felix until Section V has settled intoits new quarters and got its full staff.I asked him whether in the meantime hewould have a talk with Hart and Dick andpossibly T.A.R. in order to hear from themfirst hand what their difficulties had been.He has agreed to do this and will comeover some time next week. We cannot I thinkget much further until Dick and the D.G.return. I talked a great deal about thebuilding up of section V abroad. I thoughtthat at the moment they were very understaffedV.V. thought that we did not realise howdifficult it was to get information fromabroad. I said that I thoroughly understoodthe position and was always try ying to impressit on other members of the staff. It washowever difficult to answe r them when wecould not get the most elementary XEKXquestions answered from Lisbon and otherplaces. Such questions often necessitatedonly a visit to a block of flats in thetown to see what names were on the door platesI pictured the Section V man overwhelmewith work, having to dash out in the lunchinterval to do these jobs. Germans werethick on the ground and it seemed that therewas work for at least half a dozen people ina place like Lisbon.We also had a long talk about America. I saidthat I doubted whether Stephenson wasequipped to deal with our particular enquiriesThere had been no action SO far on my letterCatalogue Reference:KV/4/18866of April last that technicians should berecruited for XX work, and the Joe K caserevelations in the American press wereextremely damaging to our work. We hadnever received any details about the caseand we had never been told of the proposedaction. Surely if the relations with theFBI were SO good this could have been done.V.V. agreed that the present situation leftmuch to be desired, although he thoughtfrom reports he had seen that Stephensonwas sufficiently equipped to deal with thesematters.It now transpires that the interest of theEire authorities in GOERTZ arose from thearrest of certain members of the I.R.A,but we hope to hear more next week when theGarda will be aying a visit to the R.U.C.At T.A.R.S suggestion a comparison has beenmadebetween the handwritings of GOERTZ andthat on the document known as Plan Kathleenwhich was found at the house of StephenCarroll HELD about a year go. There is nodoubt that the two are identical. We maytherefore infer that the parachutistwho had left his parachute and wirelessequipment plus a considerable sum in dollarsat Held's house was probably Dr. GOERTZ.The Germans have under sentence of deathone Oloff de WET a South African. He ischarged with espionage or con'spiring againstthe state. They are suggesting that heshould beexchanged for someone under sentenceof death here and have asked for the namesof any suitable candidates. As de WET hasCataloguleeRetarenceskv/18oy known organisation67in this country or in .Africa this may bea ruse to get us to disclose what agentswe are holding in captivity. We could ofcourse give them RICHTER or FINKELSTEIN ofthe Jan Mayen expedition.September 20thMilmo tells me that the tide off Abbs Headwould have tended to carry a small boat outto sea for a period of about b hours. Itseems unlikely therefore unless the boat hada small silent engine that any attempt atlanding was made.I had lunch with Harker, and expressed myselfvery freely about the Jock Why te incidentas I believe he was to some extent behindit. I think he would agree with me if he hadhad SO much to do with Jock's work in thepast as I had.The Germans appear to have taken Kiev. TheSpiers Mission have rung through to saythat de Gaulle wishes to see the 5 Frenchmenwho escaped to this country in canoes.They are still under examination at the RPS.As this might be an awkward precedent andas everybody has been told that De Gaulleis to receive no special favours, I rang upDesmond Morton. He told me that ordershad just been given by the P.M. xKd that themen shuld brought up and would be seen byhimself and the General. It seems thereforethat a better atmosphere has been created.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188LSeptember 21stThere is an interesting P.W. report.A wireless operator from the crew of the J.57(which was captured off Iceland has said thatfrom the beginning of the war until themiddle of October he was in a Norwegian shipowned by a German company and was sendingreports by wireless about Lnglish shippingmevements. There were 3 people on boardincluding an officer. The ship was about3,000 tons and generally sailed under aNorwegian flag. Last Sept. the P.W. was ona fishing sm ck somewhere in the vicinityof Calais setting up communcation with W/Tunits. It seems probable that he was onthe ship which we picked up in the arlystages of the war communicating with Hamburg.The code was similar to that used by Snow,and it was the interception of these messagesthe really led to the development of theGroup traffic.September 22ndI saw C.S.S. and Viv. about the suggestiorof the XX Committee that somebody should goto America to co-ordinate our policy withthe F.B.I. They agreed with me that thiswas primarily the concern of S. I.S. and our-selves, but that there was perhaps a certainservice interest in the provision of informa-tion in reply to questions. We dame to theconclusion that if possible it would be agood thing to send somebody from both ouroffices and that if anybody from the servicesCatslogueiCatalogueibeference:kV74/188 wished to tack himselfo there would be noIt would have to be understood however thatthe Mission was in our charge. I said thatI should be very pleased to go myself if Icould get away. Viv thought that the bestsolution would be for Dick and Felix to go.He felt that they would have an opportunityof composing differences and that in themeantime they would have a suitableopportunity for putting SectionV on itsfeet. Felix is apparently adamant aboutnot going till he has improved his organisa-tion at home. I thought on the whole that itwould be less arduous for Dick to go thanto remain here in charge of D. .Division.September 23rdWe had a D. G. meeting. The D.. is away onleave. The only matters discussed were thoseon the agenda for the H.D.S.E.I went on to a meeting of the J.I.C. at whichrestrictions on foreign Attaches were dis-cussed. The Services seem to blow hot andcold at every meeting and never seem to beable to make up their minds about where thebalance lies. They are anxious to stopforeign attaches from picking up our secretshere but they are afraid of restrictions onours in the conntries concerned. They alsofind difficulty in coming to an agreementamongst themselves. The army say they donot mind restrictions on the Swedes, theNavy say their attache in Stockholm isgetting valuable information and they donot want to have his wings clipped. Stowellwas inclined to take the view that if theCatalogue Reference:KV/4/18870Security Service could not guarantee thatthe attaches complied with the restrictionsit was no good imposing them. I said thatwe could not possibly guarantee to keepevery attache under observation and that itwas for that reason we wished their move-ments restricted, to places where they coulddo little harm. We would certainly endeavourto see that the restrictions were compliedwith, particularly in bad cases. We quitrealised the advantage of catching one ofthe attaches out as thiswould give theServide Depos. a handle for tightening thingsup still further.I said that did notthi k it was altogether realised whatobservation on a man entailed. It usuallymeant a car, motor-cyclist and 3 or 4 menhad to be detached until the job was finishedThe local police could help up to a pointbut they could not do a great deal. It waseventually decided that a round robin shouldbe sent by all the Service Dept. and alsoby the F.0. sayingthat 72 hours notice mustbe given in future and that the departmentsconcerned would in future refuse permissionto travel to areas of military importanceThe Service Depts. will consult each otheron this matter and then informthe SecurityService. If the request is for a civilianattache the Security Service will beresponsible for getting the xn&exmakxnxte Xopinion of the Service Depts.I lunched with Neville Bland and Howard.Bland had been going as Ambassador to Brazilbut the appointment was changed at the lastmoment. We did not talk any business.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/18871In the afternoon we had an .S.S. meeting.the importance of developing the SouthAmerican traffic was stressed since it seemedfairly clear that both the Germans andJapanese were collaborating in building upan intelligence service in D. America which wato work in with the North and which mightto an increasing degree operate againstourselves. There was already evidence thatagents were being sent to W. Africa andS.America. I mentioned the P.W. reportabout the man from the U.570 who had inthe e rly days of the war been employed ona 3,000 ton Norwegian ship in candinavianwaters for the purpose of reporting on Britistshipping by wireless. T-R is going to framea questionnaire for this man, and Maltbywill make the necessary arrangements withKendrick. Hart mentioned that according toISOS a Germa.n agent was travelling betweenVige and Eire. It seemed likely that theship on which he was working was the Cityof Antwerp. I think this is one of SamuelStewart's boats.There has been a certain amount of troublewith Felix over the case of ELVERSTAD.We had reached a point in his interrog tionwhere it was necessary to establish whetherhe had acted as a conscious or unconsciouseourier for the German S.S. We felt thatprobably only the original German text mightenlighten us. Felix thought that this wasa contravention of our agreement and wroteme a rather embittered letter saying thathe was sending the information along as he"did not wish to be accused of withholdingCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188information from M.I.5". This is an obviousreference to my minute to the D.G. which hesent over to Viv and which I gather hascaused a good deal of ill-feeling. I explain-ed the position to Ferguson who attendedthe S.S.meeting. He said that probablyFelix wrote the letter at 2 in the morning.Brooman-White brought me a new officer,Edward Livingstone Clark, who he wants totake on in the S. .American section. Clarkappear to have had a good deal of experiencein the Argentine and on the whole seemssuitable.Warden of S.0.2. came to see me aboutFritz Wilhelm EGAR @ Gunnar JENSEN who hadhad been putting himself up at one of theirhostels and was causing them a good deal ofanxiety. AGAR may be a German, Swede orBelgian. Before Dunkirk he was employed byS.0.2 in Brussels and also by the FrenchDeuxieme Bureau. His information was goodbut too expensive. He was therefore paidoff. Later, according to his own story,he was imprisoned at Dunkirk by theGermans but escaped across France to spain.He said he knew Spain because he had foughtin the Internationa] Brigade. On the otherhand he seemed to know more about theFalange than the Republicans. He came toEngland in March this year and was internedat Brixton for 5 months. He has just beenreleased, but nobody knows why.Swinton came at 6 p.m. to discussed theCatalogue P. M. 8s Reference:kV/4/te anxieties apout various British3subjects who were making contact with theJapanese. We went over the whole ground withhim. He will reply to the P.M., who hadbecome very excited about the whole matteron account d a B.J., that for certainreasons GEROTHWOHL should be left at large,that SEMPILL should in accordance with ouradvice given years ago be removed from theAdmiralty, that EDWARDS was openly receivingCE4,500 a year from the Japs and it wasbelieved was of certain value to the F.0.,that Swinton would speak to MCGRATH, thatGeorge SALE knew very little but was indinedto put business before the country and thatPIGGOTT was a pathological Japophile buthonest.September 24thDiscussed with Charles and T.A.R. theacquisition of a new office where seamencould be interrogateo T.A.R. also mentionedJ.C.S reduction to the rank of Lieutenant.He thought this was unfair and proposed totake the matter up with the D.G. He wishesto get in a Miss Ralli, a W.A.A.F.. to takethe place of Mrs. Morse in B. la, who is notsatisfactory.I mentioned to Charles that I thought it wouldbe of great assistance if we could havean .Branch officer attached to B. Division.There are endess administrative questionswith which I personally have to deal andwhich could be very well handled by some-body who had a fair knowledge of the workand could represent the interests of B. Divn.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188I have raised the question of air mailletters to Gib. They go from here to thecountry, back again to London office, fromhere to Room 055, thence to W.O.Despatch,then to Airways who take charge of themuntil they get to Lisbon. In Lisbon theygo by Embassy car with two couriers to Madridand from there in the same manner on to Gib.It seems most undesirable that the mailsshould be left in the charge of Airnays aboabout whose personnel Ne know nothing.nothschild is anxious to sene someone toGib. to go into the case of MUNOZ, a Spaniardwho has given us specimens of German sabotagematerial and is by way of acting for a Germanorganisation in Madrid. We are a littleinclined to thing that Medlam is having hisleg pulled. Most of the material that hehas got seems to be rather out of date butit may be that MUNOZ is trying to work him-self in as a double-cross.At the 12 o'clock meeting today Hart mentionedthat ISOS disclosed that Stettin has beenasked to give sanction to some new projectwhich originates in Viga. It looks asif the Dr's presence is required there.Bingham tells that he has been approachedby the Norwegians who want to have someoneat Leuchars. The complaint was that thatpeople from there who should go on to theRPS are allowed to depart undisturbed totheir destinatio S.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/18875Milmo told me that EGER has been the subjectof considerable correspondence with S. I.S.,that they had no real case against him andthat he had therefore been released fromBrixton.//Th Norwegians are to be informedabout the suicide of SAETRENG.Eothschild brought me a rather interestingcase of a letter with a plan of an aero-drome sent to one P.O'CONNOR in Dublinapparently by a member of the aerodromestaff. WaxhxthEXTETTENXZEXIXNNSTCENTIXEXNRXa&X The letter is very conspiratorialand has an I.R.A. flavour. We are checking upon the details of the plan and Fish is goingdovnii to interview the 0.C. and try to getthe writing identified.Swinton has been asking for further particu-lars about Semphill. He is evidently goingto put in a pretty strong note to the P.M.I do not think that the Admiralty will comevery well out of it.September 25thI saw D.M.I. after speaking to C.S.S.. Hesaid that at another meeting at which allthe D's of I. had been present they had con-sidered the resolution of the Twenty committeeand all agreed that S mebody should go toAmerica. They left the arrangements to S.I.S.and ourselves. They did not' wish to sendanybody from the Services. As regardsFindlater-Stewart D.M.I. asked me to arrangematters direct with him and let the W.Boardknow what was settled.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/18816I went on to see A.D.N.I. about the case ofSTRACHAN of the H. I..A.S. S. Bulolo. It had beennoticed when this boat was refitting inBaltimore in August last that STRACHAN hadvisited Joe K. at a place called Pocono Pines.The local consul had commented on this andwhen asked what he was doing there STRACHANsaid that he had got particulars of the placefrom some PraveleAgency and had gone thereon a holiday. STRACHAN, who is secretaryto the Captain, is apparently unpopularin the wardroom. I visited the chartroom andfound that the Bulolo is now at Simonstownand that she had been escorting convoys betweethere and Freetown. It seemed now that shemight be destined for S. American waters. Inany case there was no prospect of her cominghere. It was decided that after gettingcertain further details from S.1.S., a signalshould be sent to the Captain instructing himto interrogate STRACHAN.I saw Robson-Scott and discussed with hima recent circular about the Czech section.He thought the matter could best be handledby some sort of Central European Groupconsisting of himself, Sneath and Dennistol.and Renton. I told him in the mean time tocarry on as usual and said that wouldorganise a meeting as soon as Dick returns.In the meantime I will try and prepare theground with T'heo Turner.Mrs. Gladstone ca.me to see me about the agency.I askedher about Acworth and Van Der Willik.She said that the conclusion that she, Dixonand Shepherd had come to was that Van derCatalogue Reference:KV/4/18877Willik was a good man and very loyal toAcworth who he thought had been wrongfullydismissed. They thought that Acworth waskeen and hardworking but rather simple.Without guidance they thought he might getinto difficulties. Acworth who I h d seenon the previous day was very worried aboutthe agency. While he accepted his positionhe thought we should be losing a good manin van der Willik. He was himself very keento stay on and run the agency with van der WiWillik as he felt it was the only decent jobthat he had been able to do since the begin-ning of the war. Acworth had also seenTheo Turner who had formed a g od impressiorof him. Both Acworth and van der Willikhave got the secrecy bug developed to thenth degree. Acyorth evidently thinks thatonly about three people should not anythingabout their work. I asked him how the officewas going to make use of his organisationif it didnot know of its existence. He didnot seem to have any real answer to thisquestion. From what I saw of it I very muchdoubt whether he will ever submit to anyclose control. I do not think he would mindworking under Theo but it seems rather abad organisation to have two agencies workingapart from each other. I am proposing to havea conference about the whole matter as soonas Dick returns.Burt told me abouta rather seandalous Casewhich may affect the Ministry of Supply.Afirm called Baird &c Co. who are making gearsfor tanks, had supplied a number which wereof faulty constructionCatalogue Reference:kV/4/188For some reason or7%other Baird & Co. have been allowed to dotheir own inspection and one of the managers,a man called LOWTHER, had subsequently depar-ted from the firm and joined another firmwhich were constructing the same gears. Itseems probable that LOWTHER supplied thefaulty gears from one company in order thattheir contract should be cancelled and thebusiness should go to the other company.There is obviously some dirty work going Gand there will probably be a prosecution.September 26thI saw Burt and Spooner about the case of tCarol MAHON. The case is not a very goodone from our point of view. I gather thatwe were informed by S.I.S. at the beginningof the war, if not before that this man'sname was on the books of the German MilitaryIntelligence. This might of course meannothing more than that he had been noted forhis pro-German activities in the last warand thought he might be useful to approach.He has been in censorship for some consider-able time and was apparently vetted andpassed for employment by us. Presumablythe files were not joined up. What has beenhappening in the meantime I still have tofind out. Latterly the case was given toJim Hale to go through and I am told he hasproduced a very good summary, and that aplan is being laid on through a maid who isin our employ to get certain documents outof his rooms. MAHON took a week's holidaya short time ago, and before doing SO hadthe locks on all his doors changed. my ownCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188view is that we should search his premisesnow but I am seeing Jim Hale about this. Burtand Spooner evidently feel that had they beengiven the case they would have had the maninside before now. The general indicationsare that he is making notes of all informationof commercial value and selling it to firms.I doubt whether he is carrying on espionage.He is apparently associated with a wellknowncrook.There has been very little night raidingfor some months. The largest number ofplanes over this country during a period of24 hours has not exceeded 40.I dined with Rupertthe other night. He told mme that he had had a confidential letterfrom the Internatioml Red Cross in Geneva, ShoNing that as the result of recent Europeantours they had come to the conclusion that ourprisoners were the best fed people on thecontinent. It seemed that the Germans werebecoming a little worried about this as Dr.Goebbels had been telling everybody thatwe were starving them. Owing to lack oftransport, which is required for feeding thecivilian population in Holland and Belgium,conditions are extremely bad and probablyowing to German pressure a number of parcelssupplied to our prisoners is to be reduced.The Germ ns send their prinsoners very littlefood, just an occasional sausage. The Popehas been supplying one camp of Britishprisoners in Italy with champagne. I gatherthat our prisoners there are extremely wellatalogteReference.kV4/ge work in the Red CrossRuperthas got hold of a man called Grimaldiwho formerly organised the Ideal HomesExhibitions. He puts in a certain amountof time at the M.O.I. and seems to be a manof ideas. His latest stunt which I be elieveis fairly well advanced, is to providebombers with some apparatus by whih they canbroadcast a record of marching feet. Thebroadcast will be a very powerful one andwill cut out other transmissions. Themarching feet will get louder and louderand the national anthem of the countryconcenred will come in through the sound;athe bombers pass over the marching feet willgradually fade out.T.A.R. and J.C. are a little worried by thelack of questions from the other sideregarding a possible invasion. This might bedue to three things. The Germans may be fullyinformed that we do not contemplate invasion.They may wish that for the time being theiragents here should not be inquisitive and SOrun the risk of being detected. This would im-ply that they wished to keep them in positionuntil such time as they themselves contem-plate invasion of this country. The onlyother supposition is that they do not trusttheir agents in this country.From information Lennox has given me it seemsfairly clear that the strong reconnaisancecarried out by the Germans the other day inLibya was due to their anticipation of anatt ck by us. They have eenaallowed tobelieve that such an attack would take placeby methods with which we are familiar. Thecataldgye Hfefererfoeekwhersguessing in this wayright to the last moment. Personally I feelthat the method goes a little too far byexaggerating our weakness there at the momentIt seems to me that we are almost invitingattack. Presumably Egypt know what they areup to and are quite ready to meet anythingthat comes. If I were Rommel and had readand believed their traffic, I should certain-ly attack them now.The Russians have tried our new plane theMosquito and consider it to be the bestfighter in the world. Vickers are turning out50 Wellingtons a week. The new M. 109F.is considered in some ways to be a betterperformer than the Spitfire. It operatesat 43,000 ft. Vickers are producing a planeto operate at 45,000.I had a talk with Haylo and Butler aboutthe R.P.S. Haylor would evidently like tobe Commandant but remain in charge ofIntelligence. He thinks that otherwise itwill be difficult to deal with all theproblems of the various intelligence organisa-tions with any authority. He would I thinkbe quite ready to see de Gey j as assistantcommandant and in fact performing all thecommandant's duties. I said that I wouldput this matter to the D.G. on his return.Hart produced an ISOS message today showingthat S.0.2's people in Norway are in consider-able trouble. The Germans seem to havesuccessfully planted an agent on them.I donot know how they are going to get out oftheir difficulty. but I sincerely hope thatCatalogue Reference:KV/4/18882they will be prevented from issuing a warningto some agent who may in fact be underGerman control. This however is a matter forS. .I.S.September 27thI saw Burt and Spooner about the CarolMAHON case. I said that I thought it wouldbe better on the whole to proceed as atpresent arranged rather than to taid thepremises. There was I thought a possibilitythat among the documents on his premisesthere might might be something indicatingespionage which we should prefer to workout before effecting the arrest. If wesearched now we might foul the ground andbe unable to pull up all the roots. Ithought however that he and Spooner shouldsee all the papers and tidy up all the looseends in the cases of associates of CarolMAHON who had criminal records. We alsoagreed it would probably be better ifSpooner made arrangements for contactingthe agent as she had formerly been in hisemploy. I said they should get intotouch with Jim Hale and Hunter.Felix rang me up to say that VIEJA, concern-ing whom MUNOZ had had conversation withMedlam, was almost cert in to be our oldfriend del POZO, whose name was Pierna ViejaHe certainly fits thedescription. Thismakes it fairly clear that MUNOZ is reallya German agent as in f act we thought fromthe beginning. The question now arisesCatalogue Retetence:/41988 attempt to get hold83of both MUNOZ and del POZO and bring themover to this country. This needs a greatdeal of careful thought. If they are tocome we shall certainly have to get the F.O.into line, otherwise they will succomb torepresentations by the Spanish ovt. Thereis another awkward feature, amely del POZOSrelations with 9. a.W. W.We have received a telegram from the W.O.about Germans taken prisoner in Iran. Thereis some proposal to send them to India andthence to Australia. I have asked Percevalof M.I.].a. to send a telegram requestingby wire a list of internees both in ourhands and if possible those in tae hands ofthe Russians. We can then pass them overthe records and see who are of interest.It may be that some of them could profitablybe sent here for further examination.I had about 3 quarters of an hour telephoneconversation with V.V. D. had written hima letter about Horrocks' and my minuteson the functions of M.I.5. and the cardingof S.I.S. material. In this letter hementioned the other correspondence aboutISOS. V.V. feels that it is now ratherdifficult for him to withhold these documentfrom Felix. On theother h nd he thinks thatif he shows them to him he will pack up.I said that I wished that it was possiblefor us to reach a point where we coulddiscuss things freely and frankly withoutgving offence People here had gt to thestage where they felt that this wasCatalogue Reference:kV/4ni8 Reference result was that onesat on things without saying nything, andthe work suffered in consequence. V.V.also touched on T-R's disloyalty to SectionV. and Swinton's interference. He stillseemed to think that Victor had said thingsto Swinton that he should not have said.I told him that I regretted Swinton'sinterference as much aS he did but as Ihad previously mentioned our officers wereplaced in an extremelydifficult positon.Swinton sent for all and sundry and askedthem for their views about everything.They were consequently placed in an extreme-ly awkward position. It was salm st impossiblefor them to say that they would not answerhis questions. I thought the whole thingwas grossly improper and I had told the D G.so. I implored V.V to see both Hart andVictor and to cross-examine them on any thingthat they had said. I felt sure that thiswas the only way to clear matters up. Wealso discussed questions of secrecy. He saithat he felt there were two very definiteschools of thought I said that I fullyrealised the danger but that I did thinkthat we ran a risk by not disclosing mateiafacts to people who could be trusted andwere actually doing the work. Through notknowing the full facts they might makemistakes which they would not otherwismake. I thought that there was roomforcompromise and that some osening up wasnecessary. He was very friendly and weagreed to have a further talk. He has undertaken to see Hart and Victor if necessary.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188September 29thGen Lakin called about 4 Dutchmen whom wehad released from the RPS to S.0.2 onthe understanding that they would only keepthem for a couple of hours before sendingthem on to the Dutch in accordance with theundertaking given about a week ago. S.0.2had kept these people for 24 hours and theDutch are raising hell. S.0.2 have writtenboth to the F.O. and Lord Swinton explainingthat no blame attaches to M.I.5. The menwere retained in order that they mightcommunicate as much information as possibleto to of their compatriots who were to bedropped the following day in Holland.I had lunch with Tangye, who told me that hewas communicating politic al information toSwinton which had little or no importancefrom an office point of view. Swinton did noask him any direct questions about the workofthe office but often gave him ratherobvious openings. He took the line thateverything was going smoothly. I explainedto Tangye that a good de 1 of ill-feelinghad been caused between ourselves andSection V. through people telling Swinton ofour difficulties. I thought that these dif-ficulties should be settled on our own leveland tt only if we re ched an impasse shouldwe ask Swinton to arbitrate,Blunt has been going into the TurkishMission. ISOS shows quite clearly that theGermans have planted somebody on them WeCatalogue have e Reference:KV/4/188 got the of the British officer$6in charge of the Mission. He seems intelli-gent and is going to keep his eyes open.We are alsontaking other precautions.Colonel Dudley Clarke who is the linkbeteen G.0.( C. Egypt and Maunsell came tosee Lennox, who brought him down to me.He has many XX schemes and controls bothrumours and purveyin of false informationthrough Maunsell's channels. Evidentlyhis operations have been very successful.HiHis rumours go through Istanbul and Lisbon.E said that if we had a really good liaisonand knew more about his schemes we couldprobably give him considerable help. Themain difficulty is communica tion. Wedecided that it would be necessary to havesome sort of code within a ypher in orderto ensure secrecy. Two of his schemesseem to have been particularly successful.The italia were allowed to believe thatan attack on British bomalil nd was imminent.The purpose of this was to keep theirreserves out of Abyssinia. In the end theItalians seen to have become SO positivethat an attack was impending that theywithdrew all their forces from BritishSomaliland almost without firing a shot.Another plan was devised to make the enemythink that we had very large reserves inCyprus W ereas we had hardly any troopsat all. The seheme was worked out on abig scale and in considerable detail, evendown to officers being made colonels andgenerals and dummy tank battallions beingmoved. What really stands out in contrastatalgaERRererence.v/4/8s is that the G.O.C.makes his plans and asks the local TwentyCommittee to support them, whereas we herereach a point where we have to put forwardto alternative policies which go no furtherthan the Ds of I. In other words in Egyptthe G.O.C. makes the running whereas inthis country it is left to us. Admittedlythe conditions are somewhat differentObut it rather Bears out what we told theDs of I. at the beginning, namely that theyhad a machine but they did not make properuse of it.September 30thI attended a meeting of the J.I.C. to discussthe case of GERLACH. The G.O.C. Iceland hadregistered a strong protest to the W.O.that a man with such intimate knowledge ofthe island and an S.S. man at that shouldon no account be released. We have of coursebeen saying this since July 1940 but withno effect. The discussion was soreewhatacademic as GERLACH left this country lastThursday. I told the meeting exactly whathad happened, and gave them the views bothof ourselves and S. I.S. Cavendish-Bentincksaid that the case had been discussed ona fairly high level and that in view of theimportance of effecting an exchange forOliphant it had been decided to proceed withthe negotiations. Being faced with a faitaccompli the meeting shrugged its shouldersand the incident was closed.There was a directors meeting at whichCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188liaison with S.0.1 and S.0.2 was discussed.CoI .Chambers was to be the principal llaisonwith S.0.1 as Gen.Lakin was with S.0.2.This is not however to preclude liaisonbeteen sections where this is thought tobe desirable. Theo asked for the positionto be regularised with both these departmentsin SO far as internment when necessary oftheir agents was concerned. It was thoughtdesirable that we should handle thesematters on the understand that both depart-ments and S.I.S. put all their cards on the ttable. If we allow them to deal direct withthe H.O. they are likely to spoil themarket, What has been happening however isthat 11 we have been asked to interveneand get a man interned, S.0.2. without refer-ence to us get him moved from one camp toanother or even released. The questionof the prosecution of new arrivals wasdiscussed. It was thought desirable thatbefore an agent is asked to give us hisactive cooperation the matter should bereferred to the D.G. since once thiscooperation is given a prosecution becomesimpossible. I said my usual piece aboutprosecutions generally. I thought thatwe should make a statement in the House tothe effect that we should in future forvery good reasons proceed on exactly thesame lines as the Germans. The House shouldnot think that because they were not toldabout the capture and execution of spiesthat nothing of the kind was going on. Thiswould leave us with our hands completelyfree to retain the majority of those whoCatalogue eeferencerkof4/t88 we can extract from89them further information in the light offacts disclosed by later arrivals. We havealready found this practice to be extremelyuseful From an intelligence point of viewit would be far more profitable to put mostof the spies on the shelf and pull them outwhen we wanted them. Execution should bethe exception rather than the rule.I mentioned at the meeting that officershad been asked to take the responsibilityof sending letters of a confidentialnature by air mail and that it was difficultfor them to take such responsibility if theydid not know more about the rout es, and theactual handling of diplomatic bags. I hadmysefl made enquiries about the route toGib. and found that there was a delay of atleast two days between here and the countrydue to the f ict that the letter had to beentered in a specil register, that theletter then went to the H.0. who put it inin a bag and gave to Airways headquartersin London. It was then in charge of hirwaysuntil it re ched Lisbon although it mightbe inspected by the S.C.0. at Bristol.Nobody knew what happened to it at Lisbon,whether it was delivered by hirNays to theEmbassy or whether it Was met at the aero-drome. I suggested that enquiry should bemade as tothe exact procedure adopted forthe despatch of air mail letters to all ourvarious links abroad.we have had a message from S.I.S. to say thatour old friend J.RUTLAND is arriving atFoynes en route for Lngland. it is saidCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1880that he has been asked to leave the U.S.A.in order to avoid an awkward prosecutionWe may have some difficulty in going to theAmericans about this case since some yearsago S.L.S. put in an agent on him and whenwe were anxious to tell the americans aboutRutland they prevented us in case their agentS hould be compromised. On presentinformation it is not possible to say whetherthe awkwa dness is due to a belief by theAmericans that we have been running Rutlandor to a fear that American negotiationswith Japan will be embarrassed. We proposeto give Rutland a normal search and then keephim under observation for a fortnightpending some further information from S.I.S.There is to be an exchange of woundedprisoners by ship from here to France. Wehave 1500 but there are only 500 Germans.It is therefore proposed to throw in about50 civilian internees, probably women.I had a discussion with J.C. and T.A.R.about POGO. It was decided that both MUNOZand POGO should be encouraged to goto Gib. and that as much of their storyshould be extracted from them as possible.We feel that we cannot very well bringPOGO over here and intern him withoutseriously jeopardising the position of G. W.We shall probably therefore send himback to Spain after we have heard his story.The question of MUNOZ will be for furtherconsideration.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/18840October lst.I lunched with Hopkinson and StewartMenzies. Hopkinson spoke about the attitudeof the Egyptians. I gather there is someimprovement. He thinks however that weshould cultivate the Wafd and if possiblebring them into the Govt. In oppositionthey were distinctly troublesome. We dis-cussed in general terms the extent to whichwe could probably assist Egypt in theirschemes of deception. Stewart was quitesure that this couldiand should be doneand that even New York should be brought in.The Frenchman OLLION has been arrested witha wirelessset in Syria. He was L gatheran employee of the French 2eme Bureau.Stewart is anxious as a gesture to theFrench to get him sent back to Vichy. Hethinks that this would be well worth whileas it would do him no good either toimprisonhim or execute him. He askedHopkinson to use hisinfluence in thisdirection.1 had a conference with T.A.R. and Adamabout the new seamen's section. T.A.R. hasagreed that his people in the provincesshould work in close touch with the SCOand should go to the SCO with the blessingof D. 4. When they wish to make contactthey will go on board with the usual FSPparty and will not in this way arouse anysuspicion. They will fix a rendezvous andsee their man subsequently outside the portCatalggue ReferengefkMt/1B&n that T.A.R. gets onathe lines of the D.4. reports will bepassed over. T.A.R. is h aving summariesmade of all information relating toforeign ports that has appeared in D.4.reports. This should prove to be a usefulbackground and will help in the interroga-tion of agents and in assessing their value.The main purpose however is/that theseagents should collect information fromforeign ports but that they shouldestablish a position with the Germans andact as XX.I had a talk with V.V. a out sending someoneto America. HI does not feel that eitherhe or Felix could go until the beginningor middle of November. He had howeversuggested that Montagu might be allowed to goin order to instruct the J.I.C. on thequestion of feeding information to Tricycle.I said that I was strongly opposed to thissince Montagu would go with introductionsto the F.B.I. from the D.N.I., and probablyto other people as well. He would makeall sorts of arrangements which might bevery embarrassing both to Stephensonand ourselves. 1 explained that we hadbrought the Services in on the XX Committeeand ".Board because we wanted their co-operation in our schemes. We felt that this couldonly be achieved by giving them a stake inthe organisation We did not however wishthem to take control of it. The question ofStepaanson's relations with the F.B.I. wasa matter which concerned S.I.S. and ourselvesOnly S.I.S. could give him the necessaryCatalogue orders fereheubra/tagrefore that the13general question of co-operation with theF.B.I. should be settled by a visit ofsomebody from our organisations at theearliest possible moment. V.V. agreed andasked me to put my views on paper.October 2ndI visited Blenheim to attend the openingof the conference of RSLOs on agents provacal-teur methods. I explained that we hadbeen rather shaken recently by certainrevelations and that we felt that the 5thcolumn field could only be properly investi-gated by the methods su ested. I explainedthe difficulties of acting now under theD.R.S on information was was purely theresult of provocation. On the other handif other facts emerged showing that sub-versive activities had been going onbefore the agent made contict we wereperfectly justified in taking action now.Baxter thought if our object was only tofind out whether a man was suitable forthe invasion list, agent provocateurmethods were hardly necessary. I said thatour ex erience had been that where thesemethods had been employed against oneperson contact had been established with a ggreat many others about whom nothing hadpreviously been heard. M. gave a very goodtalk, and Rothschild and Sneath are goingyo speak tomorrow.After lunch I went round the Registry withHorrocks. There is no doubt that mechanicalLy an immense amount has been done. ASCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188regards the look-up, this is now dividedintondivisions, that is to say, B.Branchhave their own look-up people. Withinb.Branch however they do not specialise onany particul r section. We went intothe Destruction Section, and Horrocks askedme to look through several files and givemy opinion. I said personally I felt thatthe two girls doing this work have anextremely difficult task. Moreover theyseem to think SO themselves. There was onefile which I think they all felt might bedestroyed but which to my mindcould notpossibly be destroyed. It refers to a mancalled A.b. LEIGH who had communistconnectionsand connections with the Moscow Narodny Bankand had evidently been used in 1932 for thepurpose of hanging notes from pounds todollars. Horrocks assured me that whereverthere was any doubt the file was alwaysreferred to the section concerned, put Iam a little inclined to think that if I hadnot been there at the time, the file forA. H. LEIGH might well have been consigned tothe flames or at best reduced to a C.I.card. card.1 said that in a case like that I shouldsend the file to Hollis, and that if Iwere Hollis I should make it my business tofind out exactly what he was doing sinceobviously he had in 1932 been fairly nearto the heart of things.I talked to Horrocks about Machell's newsection. He told me that the D. G. had comedown with fairly fixed ideas about the wholething, and he did not know where he had gotCatalogue them. Rference.k4nfas to agree with me thatSthe section would perform a useful purpose.I talked with Shillito about bis work. Hesaid that he latterly had no more to dothan he had before, but that Vesey had beengiven 3 extra regions since the dust-up.In spite of this ne still had practicallynothing to do. None of the others wasreally fully stretched. Even Jock didnot seem to have very much to do. Jock isof course a regular old soldier and knowsexactly wha to do when there is an inspectionparty. He pulls out his best piece of goodsand the unwary ane invariably taken in.October 3rdI discussed with Dick Felix's letter aboutshowing ISOS t members of Ham. There isvery little doubt that we have to someextent stretched the agreement. On theother hand I think Felix will have torealise that if we are to make any practicaluse of ISOS at all, quite a number of peoplewill have to know of its existence. In myView there is more danger in blanketingthe information than in giving the fullfacts.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT'UNDE SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958958Gpprl2000Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188alD.B.also told me that verydefinite steps are now being taken to getthe Lahti air line closed down. TheAmericans are being asked to bring pressureto bear on the Brazilians to let them run aservice which will go direct to BathurstThis will mean that further facilities willbe refused to the Italian company.I had another talk with Lennox DudleyClarke and T.A.R. Since Maunsell cannotpay us a visit we are going to fix upan arrangements with Dudley Clarke by whichwe shall be informed of art nls counter-plans and receive instructions from himas to exactly wh t he wants us to do. Iemphasised that it was very important thatwe should have as full knowledge as possibleof the measures he himself was t iking. Ialso told him that without running seriousrisks we could not embark upon a policyof downright lying. We could however putforward tentative half-truths.I saw the D.G. He was anxious that as soonas it can be arranged both I and Viv.should go to New York.As regards RPS the D.G. is quite preparedto consider the suggestion that Haylor shouldbe the Director and de Geyer the Comm ndant.He wants to go down there on Monday withDick.Neville Bland has registere a comp.iainttaloguetreterence:K/4/h88RPS This comes fromCIeffens, Certain Dutchmen wh were there97say that they only got bread and water. Itold Bland that this was all nonsense andthat the food as excellent. There had beencomplaints on other scores but no one hadever said anything about the accommodation.The Dutch also had the impression thatother allied countries were allowed tohave their represe ative at the RPS.Isaid that this was entirely wrong. Noforeigners were allowed at the RPS or accessto their nation ls until we had finishedwith them. We had been forced to make thisrule otherwise the place became a sort ofBabel and cases were not properly investi-gated. Bland thoroughly appreciated thisbut said that it would be extremely help-ful to him if he could possibly be allowedto take Cleffens down to the RPS in orderthat he could see for himself that theconditions were not as they had beendescribed. I said I would enquire andlet him know.Lennox tells me that the official view ofthe Air Ministry is that we now have paritywith the Germans in fighters but not yet inbombers. The present policy is to bombindustrial towns in the north of Italywith regularity in order to cause a furtherdecline in Italian morale, which from allaccounts is at the moment at a fairly lowlevel. The Germans are showing signs ofmoving round the coast towards Archangel.TThis is a fairly serious matter since it isthrough Archangel that we are supplying agood deal of the war material to Nussia.An attack on Moscow is expected with 10Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188adarmoured divisions which have been refittingon the Smolensk front. We have developeda new searchlight XI which produces aparticularly intense and widespread beamfor a period of 45 seconds. This search-light will be carried by a special planewhich will be in contact with two fighters.It will be directed towards hostile aircraftby RDF and will be switched on when thefighters are in position to attack.October 4thPlan Stench is in operation. Porton is beingasked to make a special gasmask which willcontain certain ingredients which willpuzzle the German scientists. They will thinkthat because we are introducing theseingredients we have some very special gasabout which they do not know.. The maskwill also have earpieces in order to givethe impression that we have some new gas whicaffects the ears. There have already beenrumours about such a gas. It has not yetbeen decided how this gas mask is to reachthe Germans. Dagonfly has receivedf1l,000, ostensibly in payment for theright to sell his cosmetics in certaincountries.The Hir Ministry report that Germany claimsto come within 10 miles of the shore andthen give the air force signal for the day.The suggestion is that they ascertain whatthese signals are from some communicationthat they have with the shore. The possibi-Catalogueeference:KN/4/P88ng considered.99gather that our own experiments with H.F.are fairly well advanced and it m y well bethat the enemy are using it already.Unfortunately there does not seem to be anyvery satisfactory counter-measure since un-less you are within about 300 yards of thespot you have very little chance ofpicking up the signal.S.I.S. reports indicate that the situationin Italy his considerably deterocrated.There is general war weariness and hatredof the Germans. It is anticipated thatthere may be oonsiderable trouble duringthe winter.A.D.N I. rang me up about the case ofWorthy Down. Someone purporting to beconnected with the aerodrome sent a planto a man named O'CONNOR in Dublin. A.D.N.I. A. I.had apparently told Wickham about thismatter and wanted him to use his nfluencexxxkelkx with the Garda to have the placeraided. It seems that something is alreaknown about the address. I told "I.D.N.I. I.that we were making exhaustive enquirieshere and that if the address in Dublin wereraided we should not stand much chance ofcatching the man who had actually writtenthe letter. If however it came to thepoint of identifying this man and raidinghim it would be well worth while arrangingfor a simultaneous raid in Dublin. It wasrather bad that N. N.I.D. should have communi-cated with Wickham about this matter as weare already instituting enguiries throughCatalogue Reterence:kV4psgines might have gotDVseriously crossed.I discussed with Gibbs the point raised byJock Whyte about letters sent to PosteRestante addresses. It seems that anybodycan collect letters at a Post Restanteaddress without giving any satisfactoryproof of identity. Inland letters are keptfor two weeks and foreign letters for 2 metmonths. The Post Office have no powerto demand an identity card. Jock Whyt hassuggested that anyone collecting lettersshould be asked to fill up a form givingfull particulars about himself. The P.O.do not welcome this suggestion as it willgive their counter staff, already over-burdened, additional work. Personally Ido not think that any measures of this kindare likely to be effective. Even if anidentity card could be demanded it mightwell be a fake one or a stolen one. Person-ally I think there is more to be g iined bytrying to turn this rather loose systemto our advantage. I have asked Gibbs toexplore the position and see whether we Ccannot get some snap check on all PosteRestante addresses. II we find we get any-thing out of this we could possibly getthe censorship to exercise their powers inhaving all Poste Restante letters submittedfor examination. This would certainly actas a deterrent. It is also possible thatthe Post Office might issue an instructionthat identity cards should be requested,even if they have not got the power todemand them. If the man refused to showataloguereferenceckvi4assigh be taken.1DILennox and I had a discussion with the D.G.about Room 055. He has asked us to draft anote on the whole question with a view tocle ring up the relations between the W.O.and the Security Service, and the W.O.and Director C. & D. This will be anextreely difficult matter since the wholeposition of D.C & D seems to me to betotally illogical. D.M.I. seems to regard hias the channel for all information whichaffects the Security Service whereas he isonly really the channel for informationaffecting the work of C. and D. Branches.Here again the position is illogical sincethe work of C.Branch affects all thefighting services and civilian departmentsand the security of factories is as mucha matter for the hir Ministry or Admiraltyas the War Office. TheSecurity of portsis perhaps one-fiftn military and four-fifth civilian or naval.October 6thI discussed with Dick and M. the InternationaDomestic Agency. We were all agreed that itwas essential that this agency should workin B.2. in conjunction with the other agency.We thought however that possibly Acworthhad been rather hardly treated and that onconsideration we might put the case to theD.G. and suggest that he should continue hispresent work in conjunction with van derWillik. M. Said that he thought that if hehad a talk with Acworth and had him under hiscontrol things might work quite well.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/18810?We had a discussion with Theo Turner,Kenneth, Curry, Renton, Dick, Robson-Scottand Sneath about the formation of aCentral European Section. We were allin agreement that such a section wasdesirable and that all informationregarding Germans, Austrians ind Czechsother thn spies should be pooled. Wethought further that this section shouldbe in E. Division and should act as abackground to Alien Control. Sneathis quite ready to leave r.Division anddo this work. He does not mind whetherhe remains an A.D. or not. This section wwillhav to work in close co-operationwith Denniston. Theo will prepare amemo and the matter will be submittedto the D.G.Major Avison called about radiolocition.I told him that we were proposping to getbold of an expert to advise us in thesematters. Avison seemed to think thatradioloca tion work in the army was highlysecret and that those who attended thecourse at Petersham were told everythirI rather doubt whether this is thecase but we shall see.The German wireless has been broadcastingevery 7 minutes in an attempt to get intouch with the British Govt. They saythey have important information to communi-cate with regar to the exchange of P/W.As far as I know no attempt is being madeto communicate on our part.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188103Grogan came to see me about the openingup of telephonic communication withSwitzerlandon ines similar to the existingarrangement with Portugal. I said thatI could see no objection in principlebut that if it involved communication bythe Protecting Power this might be a matterfor consideration. Grogan said he wouldfind out. I shall then have to put thematter to the D.G.Grogan also mentioned the minutes of ameeting held by DPR at which Harry waspresent. decision had been made toreduce censorship on mails of Italianprisoners of war which had prevlousrybeen on 100% basis. In future only15% of outgoing mails were to be censoredand 25% of incoming. The matter had beensubmitted to the Security Service fortheir comments. We both agreed that thearrangement was to say the least a ratherpeculiar one, since the Italian P/W hada certain measure of liberty and movedabout the country whereas the Germanprisoners were interned in a Camp. Furtherit seemed curious that censorship ofincoming mails should be higher than ofoutgoing mails.Dick visited the RPS with the D.G. andI think that we are perhaps one stepfurther. The D.G. thinks that possiblyHaylor might be suitable as commandantwith De Geyer as his AdministrativeCatalogye Catalogyenpeference:kVt4/188 Assistant is ggingto see de Geyer onouOctober 7thWe had a Director's Meeting. I mentionedtwo censorship problems, one concerning thecensorship of letters from Italian P/W andthe other the suggested opening of radiotelephony between this country and Switzer-land. D.G. seemed to approve of the lineadopted.The exchange of prisoners is off. Theritish Govt. did after all communicate withBerlin by wireless, which strikes me as be-ing a mistake. In fact the whole businesshas been a mist ke. I am sure tat from thebeginnng we should haverefused to considerthe question of civilians in conjunctionwith that of P/W. The exchange of prisonerswho have been wounded comes under theGeneva Convention and is on a category nota nominal basis. The exchange of civilianinternees is purely a matter for arrange-ment between the British and German Govts.through the Protecting Power. The Germansare evidently trying to pull a fast oneover on us, and to place the responsibilifor the break down of the negotiations onour shoulders.D.G. has agreed to Curry being removed fromF.Branch and placed on his personal stafffor the purpose of collating and writing ofreports on various aspects of the work ofthe whole office. For this purpose he willbe able to have access to the records ofall divisions. He will principally beCatalogue Reference:KV/4/18805concerned with the writing up of theGerman intelligence organisation abroad.Hollis is to take his place as D.D.F.We had an R.S.S. meeting. We are nowintercepting 216 stations and there hasbeen a steady rise in the decoded traffic.We considered the question of Germanaeroplanes coming in near the coast andgetting our aircraft signals for the day.Enquiries SO far seem to indicate thatthe information is obt ined verbally and nnot by VHF. Frost is very concerned aboutthe vans employed for this work. He saysthat they are no better than they werebefore R.S.S. took over. He complainsthat R.S.S. put all their energies intothe group traffic and that there is aserious gap between R.S.S. and Armysignals. Army Signals maintain thatthey are solely responsible for communica-tion between parachutists in uniform andGerman reconnaissance planes. R.S.S. statthat they are responsible for static agentNobody seems to be responsible for para-chutists who may be sent in the guise of5th columnists and move about in theback areas.The set in wire which is communicatingwith Nauen has again started to operate.The matter is being taken up throughMaffey.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/18806I spoke to the D.G. about Acworth and thepossibility of his remaining to run theI.U.A. under M. He seems to be open toargument about this.D.G has agreed to Medlam being asked toreturn here in order to discuss the MUNOZcase nd also the Gib.leakage case. Thepresent information rather points to Gib.being the source of leakage.Jenkins has sent in an extremely interestingreport on members of the Greek Governmentand Greek Army in Egypt. Most members ofthe Govt.seen to be self-seekers of theworst order. On the other hand the Armymaterial is extremely good and the moralein Greece appears to be first-class. Ihave suggested to the D.G. that the reportshould somehow reach the P.M.Dick had a discussion with the D.G. andWells about the RPS. The D.G. now thinksthat the head of the organisation shouldbe an administrator. I do not think thismatters SO much provided he realises thathat the one important thing at the Schoolsis to extract intelligence from guests.Personally I think Haylor would be verywell fitted for the job, as he would havethe right attitude.October 8thEgerton Johnson came to see me aboutLONY AY who appears to be head of the Britis!Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188107of the Free Hungarian Movement. He wantsto introduce LONY AY to S02. I warned himabout S02 and also about LONYAY, but hewas very confident that LONYAY was 100%pro-British. I said that I did not knowthat enough if about he was him wrong to express he wou.ld an be opinion wrong. butI told him to discuss the matter with veryCaulfeild.There has been what may be an interestingdevelopment in the Worthy Down case. Oneof the forms filled in and signed .RAYNERappears to resemble the handwriting of theletter to O'CONNOR which originallycaused the enquiry. For some administrativepurposes forms had to be filled in by allmembers of the staff of the aerodrome atWorthy Down and this enabled us to examinethe handwriting of some 1600. The curiousthing about this particular form is that thefilling in has been done ysomeone elseand the signature J. RAYNER is in ratherilliterate h indwriting. We now have tofind out who filled the form in. Person-ally I am not convinced about the hand-writing. Although its general characterseems to be the same there are discrepan-cies in certain lettersm particularlythe "r".Capt. Amies and Cat. Shorty of S.0.2 calledhere to enquire whether they could begiven any information about foreign policeforces. 1 told them that this was mainlythe function of S.I.S. but that I couldCatalogue give ReferenCe:KV74/1s them the general set-up in Germany04and in America although my information waspre-war. It seemed to me that what theyreally required to know was the presentsystem of passes etc. They then asked thewhether I could give them any informationabout the Italian OVRA and the Falangein this country. They apparently wantthis information for their instructors.They are also anxious to have informationabout the mistakes made by the variousspies who have landed here. Theseare also wanted for the instructors. Iimpressed upon them that these matterswere all of a highly secret nature, sincewe naturally did not wish to give theGermans any inkling as to where they hadslipped up. He assured me that thisinformation would not go beyond theirinstructors who were absolutely reliablefrom the Security point of view.Person lly I am not altogether happy aboutthis..RUTLAND is reported to be walkingabout in the uniform of a Sa./Ldr. Wenow gather from S.I.S. that he offeredhis services to them in America beforehis deportation. The offer was turneddown. I intend to give hima short runand if he does not make contact withanybody interesting wepropose tointerrogate him.There has been an interesting developmentin the Dorothy case. Her brother hasasked us to supply him with a smallAmerican wireless set. This is to beCatalogue Reference:KV/4/18864passed into the I.O.M.0 M. camp at the bottomof a tin of biscuits. If such a thingis possible it discloses considerablelaxity. It is also quite certainthat letters are going in and out uncen-sored, since Dorothy took out 3 for herbrother in the lining of her coat. Thereseems little purpose in discussing thedegree to which censorship should beOapplied in these camps if people can carryletters in and out as they wish.The Germann drive on Moscow appears tobe making a certain amount of progress.19 armoured divisions are said to beinvolved.There has been a magnificent action offthe Canaries. ain armed trawler attackeda submarine which had torpedoed anothership. The trawler opened fire, sank thesubmarine, took up 44 of its crew, andthen towed the damaged ship into Gib.The P.M. has sent a special wire to theCaptain of the trawler.October 9thI gather from Lennox that the skeletonsof 7 American divisions are expectedhere shortly.I lunched today with Arnold and G/Capt.Elliott. We discussed the question ofradiolocation personnel. Elliott entirelyagreed that it would be much moreCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188profitable if we concentrated on positivevetting of certain categories. He wouldthink out the whole procedure and let mehave his considered views. He said thematter was a highly complex one sinceit was inevitable that an increasingnumber of people would have to get toknow about certain developments. Therewere also limitations on the productionside. Private firms could not producemore than 200 sets and once a set gotinto mass production the surface of leakagwas enormous. Elliott was very confidentabout our night-fighting development,particularly our searchlights. It isestimated that in any big attack weought to be able to deal with 20% of aninvading force.Victor's friend, to whom I spoke theother day, was not SO confident about thesearchlights, but this may be a bit outof his line. I gather that we now havesome device by which it is possibleto release a bomb which will fall withinan area of 200 sg. yds. the devicebeing operated from this country. theprocess is automatic and not in any waycontrolled by the pilot.The effectio the closing down of theJap Consulates in India appears to havebeen considerable. They find that theycannot operate except on perfectly legallines.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188ThisORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTICu|II(3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORUUACT 1958 Mou 000I discussed with J.C. and Harmer theMutt sabotage scheme. A site has beendiscovered on a food dump and theproposal is that nobody should be warned.Normally there are two fire-watchers onduty y.tPersonally I feel' somewhatapprehensive about the whole scheme.Ihave suggested that as a preliminaryHARMER should carry out an examinationof the site both in the daylight andat night, since I think we must besatisfied that nobody would really bewandering about. Even then there wouldbe likely to be a risk that one of thetwo firewatchers might take it into hishead to stroll round the buildings.There is also the possibility that themachine might not go off. This wouldnecessitate everybody being warned andthe site being roped off until some expe:could dismantle the machine. Publicitywould be bound to result. Lastly thereis the question of getting some suitablenotification in the press. How exactlyis this to be done and what will be theresult. Will a horde of press represen-tatives arrive on the site and makeenquiries? All these matters will haveto be carefully explored. I think theprinciple is rient that we should ifpossible satisfy the enemy that somethinis being done. Similar measures weretaken in the last War with success.October lOthCatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/188daughterof Harriman of the American Mission isacting as a representative of the HearstPress and sending her stuff out throughthe bag. I have suggested that we shouldascertain from press circles thatshe isa representative of the Hearst Press andthat we should estab ish through censor-ship that she sends no telegrams or lettersto her paper. We can then suezest to theAmerican Embissy Emb that they might lookinto the question.A man called Johnson using the n ame HobertADAIR has deserted from his ship andhas been arrested by the Police.He hasconfessed that he was sent here by someHearst paper on the instigation of SenatorNye, the Isolationist. He has to collectas much data as he Can about the state ofour armaments etc. for publication inthe Isolationist press.Swinton rang up to say that he had learnedfrom Herbert that the Americans have knownabout the DOT for some considerable time.Herbert had given Swinton to understandthat this information had been sent OVby Stevenson but had never reached us.I said that I could not believe that thiswas possible We had known that Stevensonwas inclined to say that he had sentmaterial and when he made enguiries foundthat he had not. It was however quiteclear that the FBI were being extremelycagey about the information they obtined.They hshould have kept us informed abouttheir big SOV case and should certainlyCatalogue Reference:KV/47188113have consulted us before taking action.I rang up VV. and told him what Swintonhad said. He thought that there mightquite well be an misunderstandingbetween the discovery of the DOT and thediscovery of Microphotography. We haveall known about Microphotography forsome considerable time but the first weheard of the DOT was from Rainbow.On looking through Balloon's traffic Ifound that he had reported on an ammuni-tion dump situated on Swinton's estate.This had apparently escaped notice bothby the Air Ministry and the Home DefenceExecutive. Balloon was communicating insecret ink but had not sent the letteroff. The necessary amendments have peenmade.Frost spoke to me about the B.B.C.broadcasts by allied Governments. Hesays that all sorts of unauthorisedpeople go in and get messages inserted.He would get a list of these and isgoing to find out from V.V. exactly howS.i.S. regard the whole situation.I saw Maxwell with Pilcher on the SamSTEWART case. He seemed to think thatif we gave a tr inseript of our interro-gation and some account of our originalreports, the information ould be suffi-cient for the committee, although we allagreed that they would probably recommendSTEWART'S release. It would then be forCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1881uthe Home Secretary to tell John Morristhat he had satisfied himself from dis-cussions with the M.I.5. officer concern-ed that STENART should remain in intern-ment and that the allegation that he hadbeen regarded as a reliable person bythe Germans was well founded.October llbhI saw Burt and Davies about theFLEGERMANN case. They have establishedthat this man was introduced through anIndian named GHOSE to a Greek steamshipcompany to whom he paid the sum of EloOfor a passage to America. On the strengthof his booking he obtained his americanvisa. The ship went to Canada and theCanadian authorities refused him leaveto land. On his return another passagehad been arranged. The captain undertookto sign him on as a member of the crew.The job would be that of optician. Thecaptain explained that he was not allowedto take passengers and that this wasthe ondy way in which he could obtainthe passage. There seems to have beensome contravention here of the B.O.T.regulations. Burt is looking into thematter. I said I did not think we couldallow FLEGERMANN to go otherwise we werevirtually condoning an offence. He agreed.I had a long discussion with Orr andLennox about room 055. Much confusionhas arisen in the minds of everybodyregarding the exact position end functionCatalogue aloguefReferehce!kvi4n18ga capacity asD.( &c C and D.D.M.JI I. (Security) War OfficeThe trouble begins when the War OfficeWar Book para.5 states that para.54represents the Defence Security dutiesto be undertaken in war on behalf ofthe W.0. by the Director of the SecurityService who will arrange for mobilisa-tion and supervision of a section MI5in accordance with the stablishmentlaid down. It is further stated thatcertain of these duties cover therequirements of the 3 services and thatthe civil security duties undertakenby the Director of the Security Serviceon behalf of civil ovt.depts.are not included. There follows a listof the duties, some of which are notbeing performed by D.C c D., some ofwhich are in no sense military dutiesand almost all of which are no moremilitary and in some instances consider-ably less military than many of theduties being carried out by the SecuritySerivce. A Constant references toMI5 in paras. 53 and 54 coud under theduties of the D.M.O. & I.) rathernaturally lead to the belief that thesection or sections of the SecuritySerivce carry ing out these duties arein some way a branch of M.I. I. under theD.M.I. This is of course not the case.The miseonception is further emphasisedin people's minds by the dual capacityof Harry. Whether it is either possibleor advisable to straighten out what tosay the least is a completely illogicalCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188i1bsituation may be open to argument inthis stage in the war, but there is nodoubt that it has caused considerableconfusion in the minds of many pepleand is still doing SO. My own view isthat Orr in his capacity as officer incharge of Room 055 should be represen-tative of the whole of the SecurityService and should be responsible throughDespatch for distributing any paperscoming from the W.O. or to Room 055from outside sources, to whatever sectionof this office may be concerned. Orrshould also be responsible for seeing thatthe W.O. receive replies to their queriesat the earliest possible moment. Anumber of enquiries that come from theW.O. and affect B.E. and F Divisions canbe dealt with by Orr himself and in thisway much unnecessary correspondence canbe avoided. I gather also that sectionsof the W.O. find it convenient to havesomeone on the spot who can deal withtheir queries. The distribution ofmaterial by D.C & D. is not satisfactorysince he is not a.s well acquaintedwith the exact duties being performedby the various branches of the SecurityService as is Despatch who are passingpapers to the appropriate branches allday and every day. I have asked Orrto amend his memo in certain respectswhere it was inaccurate and in otherplaces where is was somewhat personalCatalogue Reference:KV/4/18817Jim Hale has spoken to me about the caseof Leslie J. HARRISON, an employee of afirm carrying out Govt. contracts. HARRISONhas approached CORNELIUS, the Swedish nirAttache Offering to give him information.He has in fact shown him a plan of somemachine which is not being manufacturedfor H.M.G. CORNELIUS very correctlyreported the matter to the nir Ministry.Jim Hale is very anxious that we shouldtake some step which will indicate quiteclearly to CORNELIUS that we have notattempted to plant HARRISON on him. I thinthat the best method will be to askCORNELIUS whether he would be prepared togive evidence. He can of course pleaadprivilege but it is also open to himto ask permission to do SO from hisGovernment. We can explain to him thatwe should prefer this direct method butthat if he is unwilling or unable toappear in the case we will do what we canto introduce an intermediary.October 12thThere appears to have been some mistakeabout RUTLAND wearing uniform. Thewatchers evidently mistook somebody elsefor him. RUTLAND has been to a friendin the Air Ministry and also to somebodyin M.A.P. and has offered, to act as aXX agent against the Japanese. So farhe does not appear to have made any contactwith Japs here. It seems unlikely thathe will, but I should like to be quitesure on this point before making a directCatalogueReferenceIn the meantime118I am proposing to find out if possiblesomething more from S.I.S. in america.John Maude appe irs to have and some handin RUTLAND'S departure from America.Apart from this and the very meagrepress survey already received, we arelargely in the dark. I should like toask the Americ ins for further particularsbut before doing SO I want to be surethat their agent who several yearsago was in touch with RUTLAND will notbe compromised.A P/W report shows that theEnglishrecognition signals are sent by W/T.As soon as a German airman sees whatrecognition signals the English are firinghe transmits the information back totheir own W/T. This seems to be theexplanation of the report about a pla lanecoming down to within a few miles ofthe coast, turning back and giving ourrecognition signal in cypher to nisown H. Q.Frost has been investigating this onthe possible assumption that the signalwas either being communicated by lampor by V.H.F.We have at last had a list of the Germansarrested in Iran. Some of them have somequite interesting connections.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188119October 13thI saw Grogran this morning on questions ofCensorship. He explained that there were anumber of censorship points throughout theEmpire where there WS not very much up todate knowledge regarding secret inks. Hethought we ought to consider how far thesestations should be put into the picture. Isaid I thought they ought to be given allavailable information and possibly acertain amount of direction. It wasdifficult however to give any advice ifwe did not know exactly what mails theywere intercepting. Grogan undertook tofind out. In SO far as the inks areconcerned .AR. is quite re idy to allowthese stations to have any informationavailable.We also considered the question of extend-ing our information about the DOT. It wasthought that no very useful fulpurpose wouldbe served by passing this information tothe SCOs but that it might be valuable forthe RPS torbe in the picture. There wouldhave to be somebody in the RPS responsiblefor examining all papers from the DOTpoint of view.100% bi-weekly tests on all mails going tocertain districts in Spainy nd Portugalare still going on. We are now ryingcertain towns where we know there arecovering addresses. The following week we aare going to take all traffc going theCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188other way. So far we have otainedno results from these tests. It isperhaps not altogether surprisingsince we are only taking 2/7ths of themail of a particular district. The onlyreally satisfactory test would be tohave a continuous test for a month an a100% basis. This would probably meanincreasing the testing staff by ten-fold, namely to the figure of 200.I gather that this problem presentsconsiderable difficulties. 1 am ratherastonished to find that we only get avery small proportion of the Bermudamails. The ship comes in with half-a-dozen bags from Brazil to Italy , of whichperhaps we take two, four bags fromChile to Germany, of which one is taken,and five b ags from New York to Lisbon,of which 3 are taken. These bags aretested against the security list but arenot tested 100%. If we assume thereforethat of all the mails probably somethinglike .05 contain secret ink, are chancesof picking up a letter may very well be .00.001 or even less. The only answerto this seems to be a large increase of stastaff, and possibly some sort of mechan-isation. Here again there is a difficulty.I believe that if each letter was daubedwith a brush when passing by on a conveyorbelt, we should not achieve any realresults. Collins says that treatment ofeach letter is an extremelydelicate matterand it would not be possible to do it inthis way. I have asked Grogan to explorethe position and also to write up theCatalogue cReferenGe:KV//1&&in.niOrr came over to discuss his revised memoabout Room 055. It contains some illumin-ating facts but is in some ways toopersonal.Hollis talked to me about the formationof a Middle East Section and suggests thatKellar should be transferred to this work.I told him that I would try and tacklethis problem as soon as possible but itwas no use my attempting to do too manythings at once.I have recommended that Dick should bemade D.D.B. and T.AR. A.D.B.l.October 14thD.G.meeting. The question of specialfacilities for allied seamen was discussedThe Dutch Govt. are pressing for arelaxation of the present restrictions bywhich their seamen have to be grantedleave to land by the I.0. evey time theyarrive. They think that if a man hasbeen serving loyally for a year heshould be treated is a British seaman.The matter is to be discussed by theExecutive. We feel that if adequatesafeguards can be provided by a man beingforced to register with the police, it willbe difficult to resist the request of theDutch Govt. It is realised however thatsimilar facilities will be dem nded forall other allied nationals.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188127The writer of the letter from WorthyDown to 'CONNOR has been identified asa certain CARRICK. Further enquiries arebeing made about CARRICK in order toascertain whether he has any interestingcontacts.I had a talk with Charles about Room 055.He read Orr's memo and approves of itsterms. I said that as Orr was underthe D.G. I thought he should put it inand that the D.G. should refer it back tothe appropriate sections for theircomments. The memo is somewhat personalbut otherwise presents a fairly accuratepicture.October 17thThe man Leslie J. HARRISON who was intouch with CORNELIUS the Swede has beenpulled in. He had taken some plans ofthe Beaufighter which he had shownCORNELIUS. Representatives of S.B. werein the next room taking notes. HARRISONwas arrested after he had left thebuilding. He will be prosecuted underthe Official Secrets Act.Cecil has returned from his visit toN.Ireland. Wickham nad written a verystuffy letter about our refusing to lethim pass on certain information relatingto GOERTZ and the fact that he was thewriter of Plan Kathleen to his contactin the Garda. Wickhan had evidentlyCatalogue esHeferentervi4yisghe position. HeTHIS IS A COPYIN ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED3 DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS23ACT 1958. Deuodoes not realise that Arcner and Brianhave always been at great pains to con-ceal that they obtain anyinformation from US, and that ourposition is therefore an extremelydelicate one. The fact is that N.Ireland is SO concerned about the I.R.A.and obtaining information from the Souththat they are not inclined to give muchconsideration to other matters.ISOS discloses that the Germans haveto agents in our Embassy in Ankara andthat they have had access to our diplomatic bag.Medlam, our officer at Gib. called into discuss the case of MUNOZ and POGO.From what he said I am not SO inclinedto think that MUNOZ is double-crossingus as I was before. MUNOZ has now giveninformation about a plot to blow uptwo ammunition ships in the harbour.These ships lie within 150 yrds. of theSpanish shore. MUNOZ, whose real nameis DOMINGUEZ, is to go out with a partyand lay 3 mine on wh ch the ships willdrift with the changing tide. We shallknow more about DOMINGUEZ if thisoperation really takes place.October lothLennox has seen Oliver Stanley who inaddition to running FOrS is to give usCatalogue eRelgrene:kV/i4r8 scale. There aredirection in regard to misleading thevarious methods in the wind, but theychange SO constantly that the cover planis likely to become the real one overnight.October 20thGrogan and I had another discussion aboutsecret inks. It may I think be possibleto narrow down the problem considerabThere are roughly 14,000 letters a weekgoing to Soain and Portugal. 6,000of these are surface borne and might Ithink be eliminated. Of the remaining9,000 it is possible to eliminate about2,500 bona fide business letters, leaving6,500 of which 2,500 are doubtful businessletters and 1,000 definitelysuspecThis leaves a further 5,000 private mail.The private mail, the suspect thousandand doubtful 2,500 can be submitted toa damping test. After they have beendamped they should certainly be submittedto the major test for ink. If they havenot been damped they should undergo theminor test. This may mean a certainincrease of staff out not nearly SO marlymen would be required as we originally{thought. Possibly 30 or 40 might meetthe case. We should then be able to testevery day for a month with a real pros-pect of getting results.Grogan also spoke to me about opening upa radio telephone service with StockholmI said that our itural incliniationwas to oppose all these facilities, sinceCatalogtleoagtereacedvt4d1ssecific objectionwe realised that if supervision got slack(25such a service was only an additionaldanger of leakage. If however otherdepartments could put forward a reallygood case we would not oppose thescheme.I saw Oliver Stanley and explained tohim exactly what machinery we had formisleading the enemy. It was difficultto see exactly wha Stanley's positionwould be visa vis the XX Committeeand the W.Board. I said that L could notgive any definite answer to this questionwithout a good deal of thought. Stanleyfelt that it might be possibly betterfor him to be in direct touch with theXX Committee and to have nothing to dowith the W.Board. He had already spokento D.N.I. about his becoming a member ofthe W.Beard but had not met with muchresponse. There is a certain divisionof functions between Stanley and theN.Board in that the N.Board deals morewith security intelligence and Stanleywith Operations. Their functions arehowever bound to clash sooner or laterand Stanley, by birtue of his positionvis a vis the Chiefs of Staff, wouldhave the whip h and. We do not wish tobe placed in a position of calling inStanley to over-rule the Ds of I.October 2lstyI discussed the MUNOZ case. We decidedthat we should allow the present arrange-ment to take its course and th t if itCatalogue ReferenCe:KV/4/188petered out we should try and give MUNOZsome direction with a view to hiscommitting some further act of sabotagewhich would be under our control. Wethought that in such an eventuality itwould be worth while sending an officerto Gib. in order to make personal contactWith MUNOZ and absorb a certain amount oflocal colour. While we had formerlybeen sceptical about MUNOZ'S bona fidewe non thought that there was a asonablechance that he might be genuinely workingfor us.We lunched afterwards with Medlam andput our suggestions to him. He agreed butsaid that if we were sending anyone toGib. it was essential thit he shouldspeak fluent Spanish. The only peeplewe could send would be either Brooman-White or Harris. Brooman-hite would Ithink be preferable as ne has moreexperience.We have prepared a list of possibletargets for raids on the French. Dutchand Belgian coasts. S.I.S. ie alsomaking a contribution.We had an abhortive meeting with Adam,Dick,T.A and Jones about the placingof agents on ships. Adam insists thatthe work should be under the S.C.0..Our view is that the SCO has neither thetime nor the facilities for doing thatkind of work. We intend to recruit agentsCatalogue alogueRelerencelKV#4/188s tance will obtaint 27general information about localities andconditions in foreign ports, and informa-tion about the activities of any membersof the crew who appears to be behaving ina peculiar manner while in a foreign port.If these agents prove satisfactory it isintended to recruit a certain number forXX work. It is true that SCOs alreadycollect a certain amount of casualinformation of the kind described, butwe do not feel that this work is on a verysystematic basis. There is moreover thedifficulty of maintaining contact with aman who is constantly in and out of port.It is obviously preferably to havesomeone whom he knows to m et him and thework 6656t on the XX side must becentrally controlled. A cumbersome systemof passing everything through D.4 wouldI think therefore never work satisfac-torily. The fact is that we are now inthe 3rd year of the war and that from thepoint of view of having agents on shipsthe situation is far from satisfactory.I had a discussion with Turner, r,Dick,Rentor Dick, RentonDenniston,Mitche and Milmo about thepossible exchange of internees. If weare to prevent information of value leak-ing back to the enemy through interneesreturning to Germany the task of sortingout the various categories will beextremely difficult and complex. As apreliminary step it was decided that allinternee cases should be carefully gonethrough and they should be placed inCatalogue various Reference:KVi4/188. Reference: confirmed Nazis,technicians who had valuable knowledgeabout our industry etc. It was estimatedthat not more than 350 internees woulddesire to return to Germany.October 22ndI went with Cecil to see V.V. and Janeabout the suggestion that we shouldtry and establish a liaison with Collin-son and the new American attache who wasto take the place of the M.A. in Dublin.Both Cecil and I feel very strongly thatthere should be no liaison in Ireland.The fact would undoubtedly come to theears of the Irish authorities sooner orlater with disastrous results. V.V.agreed to my approaching Herschel Johnsonwith a suggestion that as it was obviouslydifficult for us to get information fromIreland he should give us the benefit ofanything obtained by his attache in DublinWe, also discussed the possibility ofwarning the Eire Govt. about the Germanagent on the "City of Antwerp". V.V.thought that we could not go furtherthan suggest to the Eire Govt. that theyshould keep a very close watch on allpassengers and crew of boats sailingbetween Vigo and Eire..Cecil and I lunched with'Maltby, when wediscussed the possibility of sending some-one over to Eire to locate the Germanstation communicating with Nauen. TheCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188129Eire Govt. have agreed to Dan Bryan comingover here for a consultation. He willwe hope be accompanied by a technician.We shall then be able to ascertain exact-ly what Joe Walsh meant when he said somemonths ago that the matter had beenliquidated. Maltby will meet bothBryan and the technician and make arrange-ments for the necessary personnel andequipment taugo over to Lire. We explainedto Maltby exactly what our relations werewith the Ministry of Defence and whatthe liaison was between North and bouth,in case he should at any time be questionedon these matters.In the afternoon Dick and I went down tosee Collins who has just established him-self in new quarters in the city. He hasa very fine laboratory and all the necess-ary apparatus for dealing with secret ink.We told him more or less what our planwas for the future and he seemed thoroughlypleased that we should be taking aninterest in his work and attempting toget him the necessary staff to carry it outHe said that he thought he would want atleast 3 or 4 qualified chemists and anything upto 50 people to apply the necessarytests to suspect correspondence. He gaveus a number of demonstrations, particularlywith regard to his dampingytes It isquite possible by applying a solution ofag.sulph. to see that the paper has beendamped. When the brush containing thesolution is applied the liquid is notCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188120usually absorbed but forms into blobs.A secondary test is the application ofiodine which when blotted leaves only avery faint mark. There are howevercertain papers which even though they maynot have been damped will react to thesetests as if they had been treated. Theidea in sorting out letters by the damp-ing test to subsequently submit theundamped letters to the minor test andthe damped or doubtful letters to themajor test. The Germans are now usingA.V. in a .001 solution, and this involvesthe use of a re-agent which cannot beexpunged. If therefore we are to submitall damped correspondence to the majortest every day we shall not only run therisk of getting our own agents who areusing these inks blown, but will probablyforce the Germans to use some ne ink forwhich we may not have the re-agent. Itis therefore desirable if possible to findsome re-agent to deal with the .001 solu-tion which can be satisfactorily expunged.The letter can then be sent on afterbeing read without running any undue risk.risk. Collins is very excited aboutthe new ink which is based on Vitamen B.October 23rdThe D.G. discussed with me, Turner andHarker the case of Acworth. He seemsrather reluctant to go back on his formerdecision to get rid of Acworth. He hasnow given the whole correspondence toCatalogue logueRelerence:KV/4/188 toagain and after3getting Theo's views he proposes to seeAcworth and get the matter finallysettled. In the meantime we have hadapplications from the Brazilian Ambassadorthe Emperor of byssinia and severalpeople connected with the Chilean Lega-tion. In the absence of Acworth theseapplications are not being dealt with.We had the R.S.S. meeting. After trans-acting the ordinary business we discussedthe question of phoney roadcasts fromGermany. These are monitored by the B.B.Cand the results are passed on to us. Itseems almost impossible to work out codemessages sent by this means unless one hasan intimate knowledge of the context.An occasional pre-arranged code messagesent over the radio is impossible todeal with. We therefore decided to acton receiving these messages and to filethem in date order in the hope that possiblin certain instances we may sooner orlater obtain supplementary information fromother sources which will help us to workout the code. In the rnna WOLKOFF caseit was established that the message transmi-mitted to HawHaw contained 3 referencesto the word "Carlisle". these 3 referenceswere actually monitored and formed animportant part of the evidence in the case.I lunched with Borum who had just returnedfrom America. He is to be relieved of allhisstaff duties and will now be head ofthe protocol. He will continue to handleCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188our work but will have much more timethan he had before. He told me that RayAtherton is now head of the European Dept.in Washington. Borum was evidently oonscious of the production decrease butdid not say very much except that thingsseemed to be going ahead and that thewhole place is looking rather like anArsenal. He told me that HerschelJohnson had been made Minister Plenipot-entiary in Sweden and would be leavingshortly. He did not know yet who wastaking his place.I saw M. and asked nim whether he wouldlike to have Egerton-Johnson whose con-tacts I thought might bevery valuableto his organisation. He seemed pleasedat the idea. He is also anxious to gethold of Duncan, and had a conversationabout him with Theo Turner. He thinkshe may make something of Duncan, as heregards him as a willing learner. Iasked M. about KURTZ. He told me thatthe latter had written to Maxwell, whicought to forestall any approaches tothe Home Secretary by Oswald HICKSON.KURTZ had been lured into making a ratherfoolish statement to Hickson aboutBen Greene. Ben's brother Edward had gotinto touch with Kurtz and, had got him todeny a certain allegation alleged to haveIbeen made against Ben Greene; and hisbrother Edward then manoeuvred Kurtz intoHickson's office with a view to his makingCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1ig8 subject. Hickson(33asked Kurtz whether he was a Governmentagent. Kurta replied "No". Hickson thenasked him a number of questions. connectedwith the evidence that Kurtz had givenbefore the Advisory Committee, and involvedKurtz in a denial of all the statementshe had given in evidence. These denialsfollowed naturally on his first statementto the effect that ne was not a Governmentagent. The whole matter was obviouslytatrick byy Hickson aided and abetted byEdyard Greane. I suggested to M. that itmight be a wise move to ensure that noquestion was put down on the Order Paperabout Kurtz since once thiswas done ananswer would have to be given, and Kurtz'sname would have been exposed. We subse-quently arranged this with Abbott.I saw Beaumont-Nesbitt for a few minutes.He is on his way to the Middle East,Singapore and Washington. I arrangedfor him to attend a meeting of the XXCommittee in order that they could puthim thoroughly in the picture withregard to feeding information to TricycleThe XX Committee have raised the questionof communication with the Middle East onplans to mislead the enemy. Arrangementshave been fixed upwith Dudley Clarke, butthe latter has now got himself into diffi-culties in Sapin. He has been imprisonedby the Spanish Authorities, presumably onhis way to Switzerland. I am afraid thatafter his stay in Lisbon as a bogusjournalist he has got rather over-confidenCatalogue ReferendeKv4/18s an S.S. agent. Itwould be much better if these peopleconfined themselves to their proper job.There is I gather to be a meeting of theW.Board in order to consider OliverStanley's position and the questiorthat he should become a member of theBoard. I gather from Montague thatboth the DNI and DMI are opposed to thissu gestion. This is not unnaturalsince as far as I can see Oliver Stanleyshould to a large extent replace theW.Board which is redundant in the presentscheme of things. If the Board vereabolished the activities of the XXCommittee would be raised to the higherplane of the Chiefs of Staff. On theother hand I think it is important thatwe should not offend the D.S of I. whohave done their best to feed us withinformation in the past. Latterly howeverthey have been arrogating to themselvescertain functions which are strictlyspeaking the prerogative of ourselvesand S.I.S. It is our business to runagents but we do of course requirecertain information ofna confidentialkind to keep us in position. This hasin the past been quite generously given.On the other hand there has been no tleptto give us direction or to make use ofour machine for misleading the enemy on afairly big scale. iSuche direction mustIthink come from the Chiefs of Staff.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188135News from Russia seems to be slightlybetter. There has been considerableresistence in front of Moscow and it isreported that the town of Kalinin hasbeen retaken. The roads are now beoomingalmost impassable owing to the wetweather. In the extreme south things arenot SO good, the Germans having madeconsiderable progress towards Rostov.Timoshenko has now been transferredto that area and it may be that thingswill improve. Voroshilov and Budennyhave obviously been sacked. They oughtto be engaged in the formation of newunits.October 24thTangye came to see me about Americanjournalists. He says that many of themreturn from the continent with a greatdeal of information but that for obviousreasons they are reluctant to talk. Hewondered whether I could get the americanEmbassy to induce them to open up. I saidthat I would speak to Herschel Johnsonabout this.I have arranged for Beresford to betransferred to Craufurd for a month onprobation. He does not appear to get onNithpeople very well at R.SyS. Victor,Frost, Craufurd and myself had a discussionabout RDF. We all agreed that it wasimportant to have some section in theoffice covering the whole field of RDF.CataloguesReference:Kv/4/1881 at it might be a good(3bthing to get an RDF expert into the officeDoth Victor and I felt that anybody withreally first-class qualifications would berequired elsewhere and that if he had notgot such qualifications he would be uselesto this office. It seemed better thereforto have a first-class consultant outsidethe office. Victor suggested Prof.Cock-croft of the Min. of supply or his No. 2Dr.F.A.Vick. Victor is putting up anote on the whole subject which we shallhave to submit to the D. G.J.C.,T.A.R.,Dick Dick and myself had a discuss icabout the attitude we should adopt at theN.Board meeting on the position of Col.Stanley. We were inclined to think thatheshould at least attend the meetings ofthe W.Board but we did not feel it wasdesirablp to disturb the existing machineryof the XX Committee. We felt XXRXEXthat it was essential that we should makeour own position quite clear. In otherwords we should be the final judges onthe question of whether information couldbe put across and how it could be putacross. WNe saw no objection to Cal Stanieyhaving access to the XX Committee throughLennox but we agreed that there was nopoint in his being acquainted with detailsof our machine.October 25thFish came in to tell me that DanCORRIGANhad started a new racket. He poses asCatalogue being Referencekkvfar1ssopl able people out of occupied