The National Archives(c) crown copyrightCatalogue Reference:k :KV/4/194Image Reference:6711Garbo received a message on the l6th statingthat it was of the utmost importance thathe should give information about the effectsof the bombardment. The Germans werEOYnterestein partial details but wished him to indicateresults as follows: "Take as your basis a planof London by the publishers Pharus which Isuppose you have in your possession, andindicate how many targets or missiles havef llen in determined squares on the plan,defining them by the ordinates and CO-ordinates and the approximate hour. For exampleduring bombardment from 3 to 4, six shellsfell in the east end in sg.K.10. No furtherdetails re necessary. The foregoing is onlyintended for your guidance, knowing that itwill be almost impossible for you to get thesedetails but it is intended you should knowthe form in which these reports should betransmitted. Your primary object is not toendanger take risks with the rest of theservice which continues to be of primaryimportance.I have ascertained that the FSP did deliverGOEDHART into the bosom of Gerbrandiyesterday. We have no information howeverabout GOEDHART'S subsequent disposal.I spoke to the DMI about Douglas Robertsbeing brought into OATS. Both e. and heare in agreement. A telegram, has thereforebeen despatched to Maunsell to the effectthat he should go aheadafter getting Paget'sapproval.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/194lisFreak's control station has not been heardsince 10th June. Tricycle's letter explainingwhy radio transmissions have been suspendedhas now been despatched. There is still noconclusive evidence of the extent of theGermans knowledge of the true position ofTricycle and Artist. Such evidence as existsis consistent with the view tha at the fullfacts have not been extracted from Artist.Treasure operated her transmitter herselffor the last time last Friday. We have nowtaken over and are imitating her and she nolonger has any connection with the case.As a further illustration of the German desireto maintain confidence in their agents in theface of contrary evidence, it is of interestto note that information has recently beenreceived on ISOS which shows that the Germansare still debating whether or not they shouldsend a further questionnaire to Lipstick, alth-ough the last letter written by this man wasdated .3.44. The Germans appear to attributethis failure to correspond to the fact thatthe air mail service has been suspended.June 19thTAR came to see me this morning to dalkabout his section. He thinks that he shouldmove down to the country Wild and FleetwoodHesketh would move down as ell. The mainreason is that his 3 wireless operators areindispensible. They are in fact the cases,since they are doing the transmitting. Apartfrom this they could not be repeaced asCatalogue Reference:KV/4/194wireless operators. I mentioned this to theD.G-, who is quite agreeable to the move.I also suggested that there might be othersections who had surplus people and might beglad to get them away. He thoughtthis mightalso be considered.Crossbow reports from 6 a.m. yesterday to6 a.m. today show that during the day yes-terday 48 started, 38 crossed the coastand 20 landed in the London area. Duringthe night 110 started, 86 crossed the coast25 reached London. The total casualtiesduring the period were 162 killed, ,265 in-jured, another 80 injured So far unclassfied.There were 35 killed in the Guards Chapelbut there may be others. The east wall andthe alter were not apparently damaged, and theclergy man taking the service, reported to bethe Bishop of Rochester, was unhurt.On the first day the gener 1 trend of Cross-bow was to the left of the target, on thesecond day to the right and on the third daymore or less on the centre. this seems toindicate that the Germans have some systemof plotting their bursts. Out of 35 pilotressaircraft with which the RAF made contactyesterday they show down 17. One incidentwas actually witnessed by Marcus Hey ward,who was in a train crossing Charing Cross Brid-ge. He saw a pilotless aircraft coming inwith two Spitfires about 50 yards behind it.The pilotless aircraft fell suddenly whileover the Thames.Catalogue It is Reference:kV/4/194 reported that tee are two types,Moa heavy and a light and that one type can reaca height of 8,000 ft. The normal flight issomewhere between 1-3,000 ft. The P.M. istaking a personal interest in Crossbow andis holding a meeting at 5 today to discussplans. He is to be kept inforned daily bfall developments A. A. operating on the southcoast claim 38% hits. The barrage has beenvery much intensified during the last 24hours and a suggesteon is likely to be adoptedfor flying kites beteen the balloon barrages.I had a long discussion with Dick and richardButler about Arnold Foster's visit to thecountry over the weekend. He was apparentlyvery impressed by the Registry andthoroughly enjoyed his time. He also got onwell with the D.G. All this seems to be tothe godd. On the other hand he is stillharping on his theory that SIS should takeover .Division. I said that I could nothelp feeling that Arnold Foster, wantingto find some say out of the general muddlein SIS and being convinced that some sortof amagamation was necessary,got C's agreementto his looking into the affairs of MI5 withour concurrence. Having obtained all theinformation that he wants he will presumablypresent his case for taking over B.Divisionto the Foreign Office commit tee which issitting onthe future. of SIS. L am ratherconfirmed in this view because when talkingto Peter Loxley the other night atthe ClubI said "I understan Arnold Foster feels thatSIS should take over D.Division" Loxley Icould see was rather embarrassed and evidentlyCatalogue Reference:KVI4/194knew something about it. It seems to me thatif Arnold Foster is to be allowed to presenta case from his point of view after gettingall the dope out us, that he wants we oughtte have an opportunity of presenting our caseand the sooner the better. We did not wishthe committee's minds to be prejudiced byan ex partei statement from someone who cannotbe in a position to know as much aboutthe facts as we do ourselves. Dick'Sview,and I think on the whole he is right,is that there should be two services, oneoffensive and one defensive and that the de-fensive service should be controlled from here.Dick i think feels as I do thatthe ACEproject is not really feasible on the groundsthat it would merely create another bodydealing with confidential material whichshould reallybe available to all the caseworkers in its virgin form. Dick envisagesthe offensive and defensive service bothworking to Cadogan and the H.O. with theoreign Secretary as the co-ordinatingminister. We could still remain responsibleto the H.O. for everything that we did forthem and in fact for any other governmentdepartment such as the C.0. and D.0. Thereally crucial difficulty is connected withthe penetration of the enemy' service.Dick thinks that we ought to conduct theseoperations on foreign territory. This isL think going to cause considerable diffi-culty. I think that we should use D.A.Sfrom this country and perhaps carry out thevery simplest form of B.6 enquiry, but thatnything more should be carried out by theoffensive side of SIS with th which there wouldCatalogue Reference.KVT4/194129a link on foreign territory.Nevile Bland has been rather concerned aboutto eX-S0E agents,UBBINK UBBINK and DOUERLYNE, ofLutch origin, whom we have locked up pendingthe Uverlord period. On consideration oftheir case we have thought they can now bereleased. The Dutch have been fussingabout them, particularly Col.de Bruyne who wasmainly interested because quite improperlyhe gave the se agents a mission in additionto the one that they had from SOE. NevileDland seems quite satisfied with the actionwe have taken in this case and is verygrateful for the concession that we aremaking.Stichling messages should now be coming intooperation. H message to this effect wassent to Madrid on 16.6.44. 44. It will beinteresting to see whether any messages thatGarbo sends about Crossbow receive theS.prefix. Such messages should go directto Arras, the headquarters ofCrossbow,without re-cyphering.-he diplomatic ban has again come up fordiscussion. Noble of the J.I.S. rang up toask our views. He said th t he understoodfrom what Cavendish-Bentinck had heard from meyesterday at the J.I.C. thatwe were indiffer-ent.I said that the point I had made at themeeting was that if the pilotless aircrafthad a wireless apparatus which showed theircourse and point of landing, there seemedto me to be no point in maintaining thediplomatic ban. Grierson of the Air MinistryCatafogue Reference:KVI4/1941AShad expressed this view although he did notseem very positive on the geestion. Isuggested therefore to Noble that he shouldget into direct touch with Grierson. Mean-while I have been told that there is aprpposal by the Minister of Home Securitythat the ban is to be postponed for 5 daysand that this is to be discussed attheCabinet meeting this evening. Stewarttells me that the F.0. are in a real jamas they have telegraphed to all theirrepresentatives abroad telling them to informthe local governments at 6 pm. this eveningthat the ban will be removed. They have hadto send chaser telegr ms telling them tohold their hands but whether the chaserswill arrive in time is a matter for somespeculation. It seemed quite definitethat telegrams will not be released today asit would not now be possible to put themachinery into action. There will thereforein any case be a postponement of 24 hours.June 20thI spoke to TAR about the move of hissection. I said that although on paperit might appear that thiswork was self-contained, there were many points on whichthe rest of B.Division had to keep in closetouch with B.lA, and the physical separationmightvell be detrimental to the work iftherewas not someone from B. 1A on the spot.It might be for consideration whether oneofficer should not remain in London. Asregards the rest of B.Division itwas agreedCatalogue Reference:KV/4/194that B. 3a could quite easily go to thecountry. They are to go next Monday.I had a meeting with Dick, Buster and Herberton the subject of Curry's book.Weagreedthathat with a few minor amendments the bookcould be circulated to all the recipients ofthe first volume. We felt however that itwas necessary to put in a preface which wouldemphasise that the picture was of necessitynotdrawn to scale and that the importance ofthe subjects or cases discussed should notbe judged by the amount of space allotted tothem. We should then point out that thefact of the document being out of date wouldnot have mattered if the developments in theAbwehr and S.D. had proceeded at the normaltempo. Since November 1943 however changesof exceptional importance had t aken placewhich would render the document mistea leadingifthey were not borne in mind. These were(1) that on June lst 1944 the increasingcontrol by the Sipo and the S.CD. on Abwherpreserves had led to the Abwehr now beinga sub-dept. of the R.S.H.A. known as theMilitarisches Amt of the RSHA, directlyresponsible to Kaltenbrunner and through himto Hitmer; (2) that Admiral Canaris wasdismissed at the end of Febenary or thebeginning of March and that for the 3 monthsfollowing his dismissal while the situatiorstatus of the Abwehr remained uncertain,temporary control was invested in his deputyHansen; (3) that by May 1944 the Abwehr inthe west had changed consequent on theestablishment of Army Groups from static toCatalogue mobile OREferesat iidesiened organisatian as part of theGerman preparations for operations in the westAll Asts and Nests in France and the LowCountries were dissolved save for centralLeitstelle on Paris and were replaced partlyby Abwehrkommandos and subsidiary Truppesand partly by static reporting centres, Mel-dekopfe. Concurrently with this change3 fixed stations in Germany, Stuttgart,iesgaden and Cologne, were strengthened bythe addition of a number of high-rankingofficers and administr tive officials formerlyworking in the various Asts in France andthe LO countries, and that these stationsmight be regarded as the rear echelon underthe new conditions of the Abwehr in the west.In them is vested the control of themany agents whom it is intended to operatebehind our lines//It is now confirmedthat the first Stiching message was sentby Berlin to Madrid on l6. 6. 44. it referredto reporte it was hoped to receive fromGarbo about "London being shelled with long-range artillery' ".The diplomatic ban was removed at midnightyesterday after a Cabinet meeting. DickButler,Grogan and I weat through theCensorship restrictions imposed for Overlord.In most cases we agreed to return to pre-Overlord conditions.I had a long talk with Roger about his meetingwith Arnold-Foster. noger seems to have madeit fairly clear that in his view it was awaste of time to try and build up to organisations,O one to deal with foreign aspects ofCatalogue Reference:KV/4/194126communism and one to deal with the home aspectItwas particularly desirable to have one setof records and equally desirable to havethe personnel working together. ArnoldFoster's ideas seem to be veering owardseither control by SIS or dual control bySIS and the Security Service. hoger pointedout to him that it did happen that fromtime to time our dept.l was drawn into theopen and that this might be an embarrassmenttoSIS.Arnold Foster was L think muchimpressed by our records which Sho at any ratein their present state could not hope toemulate.Some 12 flying bombs have been reported duringthe period of 12 hours ending 6 pm today.6of them flew over land;of these 2 reachedthe London area.June 2lstAt the weekly meeting Hart mentioned thecase of ZIGZAG and the request to Lisbonto provide 2 W/T sets foran operation inEngland. It is thought that these sets wererequired for ZIGZAG and another agent knownas LEHAR who is to be sent to bring moneyto Brutus.Sclater mentioned that the Mersey HarbourBoard were using a large number of AT setsin connection With ships and that similarmeasures were contemplated in other ports.This was the first that we had heard ofthis scheme which has been working for 3Catalogue Reference:KV/4/194months. Clearly there is a risk to security.L told Selater that as soon as ne hadobtained the necessary data he should reportthe f icts to the ReidComittee.I lunched with Stephenson at clariages. Itold him that for personal reasons wasrather anxious to visit America but that Lcould not very well do SO unless there wesan office reason. L thought myself thatit would be good thing for someone fromhere to visit Aerica and Canada. In fact thewhen I was last there 1 had recommended thatvisits should be as frequent as once everythree months. I said however that didnot wish to go if it was going to causeany upheav l. Stephenson Said that the holeof that question was dead nnd that in his viewnothing but good could result. He wouldbe quite ready to sponsor such a visit ifthe proposal Nere made.I attended a meeting at Norfolk House todiscuss the relaxation of Overlord restric-tions with particular reference to the coverplan. I suggested this meeting in orderthat we might to some extent clear theground before tomorrow's vast meeting ofover 50 people. The main question for dis-cussion was the visitor's ban, and how farits abolition was likely to affet the coverplan. SH-EF were somewhat weakly in favourof the retention. i said that from the pointof view of catching spies we thought it hadoutlived its usefulness but that experiencehad shown that even if a pointer had been giveCatalogue Reference:KVI4/1942%by the removal of the ban it would be betternot to emphasise further the deduction whichmight have been made that the bridgehead wasthe one and only operation. So far the coverplan had held although there were indications indic tionsthat it was beginning to weaken. It wasagreed that SLiAEF would put forward aspecial paper on this question which wouldbe forwarded by indlater Stewart theCabinet.I saw Niall MacDermott who has been over tothe beachhead. e gave me an account of thede Gaulle visit. De Gaulle took over withhim on the "Combattante" a number of otherFrench officials who were supposedly to goto Bayeux in order to organise a claque.De Gaulle made a speech in the market square.He had previously declined to lunch withMonty, but was redeived by him on landing.After making a speech at Bayeux he went onto Issigny instead of returning to the boatwhich was scheduled to leave at about 4 pm.When he got back from Issigny at about 8 pm.certain members of his party were missing.They had in fact remained behind and in con-junction with the local resistance partyremoved certain collaborators from office andinstalled his own representatives. CivilAffairs had already started to work with thecollabor tors and were extremely annoyedThe de facto position was however eventuallyaccepted both by our military and by theAmericans. In other words de Gaulle haspresented the British and American Govts.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/19417with a fait accompli, which has been recog-nised de facto by both the British andAmerican Armies. Having done this de Gaulledoes not very much care about whether hisCommittee IS recognised or not. This per-formance is of course typical of de Gaulle'smentality, and outlo k on the whole situationand will undoubtedly cause considerableindignation in Washington and London. Onthe other hand it may foree the issue ofrecognition which would undoubtedly be agood thing for everyonHarry Allan's Overlord Security panel hada meeting to compare notes in relation tovarious meetings held about the relaxation ofrestri tions on Overlord. He said that theW.0. were taking a strong line about thevisitors! ban which they wanted to maintain.I pointed out that this had not been theattitude of SHAEF. It seemed a pity thatSHlAEF and the W.O. did not march in step.Harry sand that the W.0. were putting their viviews to the Chiefs ofStaff. I said that if tthey did not make a strong case the issuewould go by default since the P.M. hadminuted the file that this obnoxious res-triction must be removed at the earliestpossible moment. It seemed to me that therewere two reasons for maintaining it, oneto maintain the cover plan and the otherto provide whatever securityy was necessaryfor other operations. I doubted howeverwhether the ban would in fact provide muchsecurity and I thought that we should probablybe forced back on to restricted areas. FromCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1943othe point of view of the cover plan it seemedto me desirable that the ban should be main-tained in the easth and south -east.Lennox mentioned that it was curious thatimmediately the diplomatic ban was removedthe first German panzer division started tomove down to the beach-hea area.I met Murphy of OSS With Bill Ste hensonat Claridges in the evening. Murphy wasextremely appreciative of Il the assistancethat had been given by us to representativesof his org isation. He alsoexptessed hisadmiration of the way we ran our affairsand recorded our information, as comparedwith Section V. I mentioned the matterofCeylon. He told me that he had already beenhauled over the coals by Felix Cowgill. Hesaid that in fact there were no X2 personnelof OSS in Ceylon and the activities of whichAiry was complaining must therefore be thoseof the S. I. sections of OSS. S.I. sectioncorresponds to the P.Sections of SIS, $.0section to SOE and X2 section to Section V.of SIS. Murphy said that he had come to theconclusion that as far as work was concernedthere was far more to be gained from us thanfrom Section V. He realised that there wasvery little that Section V did that was notalready covered by our dept. and that therewere many thinks which we covered which werenot covered by Section V.at all. Murphy'sremarks on the subject of the functions ofourselves and Section V were not solicited byme but made quite spontaneously.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/194(3(I dined with Vickery who gave me an interest-ing account of the latest developments in theSILVER case. It appears that the Russianshave been playing rather a dirty game.Originally the case had had a oonsiderablebearing on their affairs since plans werebeing devised against Russia as well as again-st India. Since this factor had been elim-inated, largely through the removal ofWITZEL, SILVER'S controller on the Germanside, the Russians evidently felt they werenot getting very much out of the case. Theytherefore arranged a meeting with RASMUS, theFrist Secretary of the German Legation, toldhim that they knew his code to SILVER andthat unless he was.prepared to work for themthey would expose him. This of course hadled to considerable suspicion by the Germansof SILVER. the Russians then pressed forSILVER'S return to Kabul. India felt anxiousfor SILVER'S safety and as an excuse saidthat he could not very well go back to Kabulunless the suggestion came from the Germans.Eventually however they agreed to his goingback. He was cross-questioned about the Cr 'ebut apparently put up a good story and SOfar seems to have got away with it. RASMUSof course refused to work for the Russi nS.SILVER notionally controls a large subver-sive organisation in India which suppliesinformation regularly to the Germins and alsoto the Japanese. The latest development isthat 14EL, with a wireless set and party,was to be landed somewhere on the north-westfrontier. He is to establish touch withCatalogue Reference:KV/4/19432SILVER though the precise purpose of hismission is not yet known. the wholematter could not be taken up with the Russiansas the information about the meeting betweenthe Russi ns and RASMUS was obtained from aGerman B.J. the matter however is furthercomplicated by the fact that Hill, theSOE representative in Moscow, who is intouch with the NKVD, does not know about thispiece of Russian duplicity and merely thinksthat the Govt. of India are being sticky.84 flying bombs have been plotted duringlast 12 hours up to 6 am today. Of these65 came overland, 33 of them reachingGreater London. Two others got as far asLuton in Beds. and one to Overton nearAndover in Hants. The remainder were eithershot down or landed in the . E. counties. Lon-don casualties SO far reported are 19 killed,94 seriously injured, 112 slightly injuredand 30 unclassified. 18 flying bombs arereports to have been shot down, two in Kentand 16 in Sussex. The total number killedby the bomb which fell in the uards Chapelis now given as 111. A bomb fell onLonstitution Hill 50 yds from Hyde ParkCorner, destroyed a 100 yas of BuckinghamPalace wall. Blast damaged extended fromSt. Georges Hospital to the In andout Club.The flying bomb which came down in a fieldmade a crater 24 ft in diameter and 15 ftdeep. The crater on onstitution Hill issmall and shallow.Catalogue ReferenCe:KV/4/19433On 17.6.44 Madrid sent the following recom-mendation to the successor of Guillermo (Can-aris) about Garbo: "Immediate aware of IronCross II to Spanish national V-man 319Alaric, Leiter Arabal, who has renderedservices of great importanee in the war forthe last two years as the Leiter uolfplatz(England) network, at the constant risk ofhis life. We consider immediate awardnecessary to maintain his morale, becauseunder present conditions he is furtherendangered by our own fire. In this con-nection we draw your attention to the specialmark of recognition recently converred on Rex.In our view V-man is in the same capacity asthe volunteers of the Blue Division who re-ceived the same decoration"June 22ndI attended a meeting of some 50 people atNorfolk House to consider the relaxation ofrestrictions imposed by Overlord. The twoprinciple matters where we wished restrictionsmaintained were firstly the continuation ofthe ban on A.B.Transport, and secondly therestrictions on Irish trawlers. Our grounasfor the first were that it provided anuncontrolled channel for rapid communicationbetween this country and Sweden, which meantalmost direct with Berlin, and for the secondthat fishing trawlers could report matters ofimportance and could carry messages to Eire.They h d orders not to put into Eire ports butthis could not be effective firstly becausethe necessary evidence ouuld not be obtainedCatalogue Reference:KV/4/19484and secondly because it could always bepleaded that the call at the trish port wasnecessary owing to weather conditions. Wewere asked to put forward a case on boththese matters. There appeared to be nodifficulty about retaining the control overthe irish ships which formerly went to theIberian peninsula. The Irish in fact derivedconsiderable benefits from the new arrange-ment which gives them gr ater tonnage. Theymight however at a later stage have objec-tions raised by the shipping companies. IfSO the question would have to be reconsidered.The D.G. has written a memo for Anthony Edenon the work of the office since the beginningof the war. Dick and I feel that on the wholeit is fairly good al'though it is not quitewhat we should have written ourselves. Wehave suggested a few additions which theD.G G has accepted.Niall MacDermott told me yesterday that thewhole of the I.B.machinery was workingextremely weIl, that the FSP were acting withgreat intelligence and that their reportswere coming through in well-ordered fashion.There is no doubt that all the trouble takenby Dick and others in planning,instructingand lecturng, has borne fruit.The casualties for Crossbow from June 12thuntil today were 731 killed, 2,548 seriouslyinjured,.2. slightly injured and 816unclassfied. 939 aircraft have been launched,677 crossed the coast and 243 reached London,Catalogue Reference:KV/4/194approximately 26%, or the 12 hours ending1356 pm yesterday, 25 flies were plotted, 23came overland,J of them reaching GreaterLondon. the casualties were 21 killed, 122seriously injured, 176 slightly injured. 6were reported as h aving been shot down.The flying bomb which came down at Ickleshamexploded 16 minutes after landing. For the12 hour period ending 6 this monring, 34flies were plotted, of which 26 came over-land and 14 reached Greater Londonl Thetotal casualties for London were l1 killed,16 seriously injured,31 slightly injured,7 unclassified, mission.June June23 23rdOn the 19th the Jap in Berlin was told thatthere were 23 divisions in this country underGen.Patton ready to carry out an invasion.For thisreason the Germans had refrained frompouring their armies into Normandy. It hadbeen thought that our original plan was tooccupy Cherbourg and Le Havre with about 17divisions and then advance south-east down theSeine. Simultaneously Patton's army wouldhave carried out landing operationsbetweenDieppe and the country lying to theeast of that port. It was thought howeverthat Monty's plan had gone wrong. At thesame time the Germans still considered thatthere was a great likelihood of Patton'sarmy group landing between Dieppe andBoulogne, and were prepared for this.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/19436The new secret weapon was at present beingused against London but it was being triedfor the first time and was therefore directedagainst an area offering a wide target.As experience was gained it would be usedona still more extensive scale ag instthe ports and south of England. At presentthere was SO much smoke that recce planeswere unable to say for certain what theresults had been though it was believed thatthey came up to expectations. Since there isno smoke over London and no recce pl ne has ddared to put in an appearance, this reportappears to be wishful thinking.L had a meeting at 10. which lasted till1.30 at Norfolk House. We dise ssed thevisitors ban and service leave at. some length.The present suggestion of SHF is that itshould be retained from Southampton to theWash. There appears to be some doubt aboutthe Scottish area. SHAEF were under theimpression that the ban should be removed,but Wild who is dealing with deception atSHAEF, took a contrary view. Nild was not infavour even of a partial removal of the banbut he told me afterwards that he had merelyobjected because he thought a partial removalwould only be the thin end of the wedge. Isaid that although it wes not within myprovince I felt that the partial removalmight considerably assist the cover plan sinceit would emphasise that something might beexpected from the e st and south-east. Itseemed to me that there was some advantagein putting this into operation immediatelycatafogueiferercekiaarpgyuandWild told137the meeting what the cover plan was and saidthat it was holding both as regards the Pasde Calais and the threat to Norway. Therewas little opposition from either the H.O. orthe Mi istry of Home Security.We then discussed the question of Serviceleave. The 3 Services, particularly the Army,are being pressed very hard for some relax-ation. L said that leave was a questionto which the Germans attacked very specialsignificance. They were always asking whetherle ive had been stopped prior to Overlord.If there was any relaxation now it wouldinevitably get back to them through neutralEmbassies. It would not be possible toexplain to them that there was only partialrelaxation of leave or to get it across in aconvincing way. Wild very much endorsed thisview.The question was raised as to whether the riskto the cover plan would be any less if theban was parti partially lly abolished or wholly abol-ished. L said that L did not think it wouldmake very much difference. I am bound tosay that L felt the arguments in favour ofgranting leave were rather poor when a matterof such importance is at stake. Sueely thetroops could wait another month, having waitedso long. There were many troops from theMid East who had not had leave for 3 years,and we thought nothing in the last war ofgoing 6 or 8 months.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/194138Murphy of 0.S.S. came to see me. He wants toget us to train 2 or 3 interrogators for FUSAGowing to a request that he has had fromGen.Seibert of G.2 for officers of this type.I said that I would discuss the matter withDick and let him know what the best was thatwe could do.I had a meeting with Janson, Dobson of theinistry of Agriculture and Fisheries and 3 othother Naval fficers including Commander"Velby of the Ops. Section of the Admiralty.e discussed the question of trawlersfishing in southern Irish waters. Dobson saidthat from a purely administrative point ofview he Nould prefer the present arrangementto continue since itwas extremely difficultfor him to control these fishermen. Therewas rarely sufficient evidence to warrantany form of sanctions. On the other handhis dept. had been pressed very hard by theMinistry of Food to allow fishing to continuein Irish waters since the arrangementsimposed since Overlord had raised about 10%reduction in the supply. Uomnander Welbysaid that it was vital from an operationalpoint of view that the present arrangementsshould contnue. German submarines wereconcentrating in southern Irish waters forthe purpose of contacting our transportsgoing across to the beach-head. They werebeing dealt with by Coastal Command usingradar. For this reason it was essential tokeep fisning trawlers out f the area, sincethere was no means of distinguishing at nightbetween a trawler and a submarine. For opera-Catalogue tional Reference.kVI4/194 the whole area was regarded as9a "bomb at sight" area. Our operitions werebeing highly successful and it might be thatin due course the Germans would abandon thestruggle but until that moment was reachedit was of paramount importance to keepthe area clear. This seemed to be anover-whelming argument. On the secur tyside I said that these trawlers provideduncontrolled channel and Janson felt thatthey might take a certain amount of infor-mation across which related to convoys etc.We neither of us felt however that thesecurity grounds were very strong. I said thatI would report the facts to Sir indlaterStewart.Lennox tells me that Jumbo Wilson is preparedto mount Anvil with 3 divisions in a monthor two.Our balloon barrage yesterday got 23 ddodle-bugs, and 23 were shot down by the Air Force.The percentage reached the London areahowever for the last 36 hours is roughly50% 4 or 5 sites have been knocked outby bombing and 20 odd have been damaged.A propos of the sirens the P.M. has declared"Let this something banshee sound only oncea night". He has also ordered the removalof the London area of his private ballooncalled Lord Inskip. He is sick of seeing itbobbing up and down.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/194THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION903 (4) OF THE PUBLIG RELORISOur operations An Ialy appear to be goingextremely well and it is hoped to attack thehimini Pisa line before long with 14 divisionskeeping 6 in reserve. The Germans are extremelyshort of reserves and do not appear-to-be appear totransferring any others to the Italian theatre.Ooeratins in the beach-head are consideredsatisfactory with the ones exception of the mulries which have not come up to expectationsin withstanding rough weather. 50% of themare said to be damaged. This makes the captureof Cherbourg all the more important.June 24thI attended a meeting of the ISSB to discussthe suggested re-opening of the Swedish airline. I put the pros and cons as fairly asT could ouldandsaid that while it mustbeaccepted that as long as the line was openthere were facilities for rapid communicationbetween this country and Berlin which couldnot possible be 100% controlled, there werecompensating advantages,Thepoints for opening the line were (a) that theFO would like to do SO for diplomatic reasons,(b) that BOAC line- could not carry-allthemai carry mailand this mean that some of it would have to govia Lisbon and be subject to German censor-ship,(d) that balh beabings could. be carried, (e) tthat the line was fairly well covered intataloguesReferensestviaeigpening were theulfollowing points: (a) fast route was providedto Begin (b) Florman, the head of the line,yas considered dered-unreliable-and-had-a-son-1 unreliable-and-h inLondon. - SIS had reported recently that thehead of Einzluft had been Stockholm and hadhad-al appointment with Florman; (c)-searchingof crews is impossible (d) the Germanswere interested, in the re-opening of the lineand had given a safe conduct; (e) Swedishdiplomats--could travel el-by-that-line-at at a mo.moment'snotice S and would have priority.( (f)it was possible that the re-opening wouldaffect the cover plan to a slight degreeand-might-be-dangerous if operations-froScotdand were contemplated at a future date.Lastly, it seemed that it would be difficulto-close-the-ine-onceit had-beenre-openedThe meeting, akingall these points into con-sideration, thought it would be better to re-move the ban and take whatever risk there was.On the 15th June the Jap in Vienna informedhis Govt. that the German production of fighterat the last year was somewhere-between12-15,000 per month. Owing to our bombingproduction has fallen to about 600. TheGermans had in consegeence suspected pro-ductionof the rocket in March and increasedthe weekly hours of aircraft workers to 72.They had hoped in this way to bring thefigure of fighter production up-to a thousandin July, but despite these efforts that hadnot been able to bring it higher than 600.It was alleged that the instalatior of some400 catapults on the defensive-walls-on-theCataloguecReterence:koipoplete and the142Germans were engaged in producing rocketshells with a range of 350 kms. but theyfelt that as long as it was not possible tostrike a decisive blow at the London area ata single stroke,t by means of this weapon,there was a risk that it might aggravate theBritish rather than otherwise. an increasein fighter production seemed to be more urgentand the production of rocket shells hadtherefore been discontinued. There may besome confusion in the mind of the Jap beteenthe doodlebug and the rocket. The generalimpression in Vienna was that the Germanshad been making preparations for our invasionwhich they thought would take place in Julyand that the reeenb landing occurred rathertoo early to suit them.The total number of doodlebugs launched up toSaturday was l, 200, 889 (75/) had crossedthe coast, 359(30%) had reached the Londonarea. A. claim 138 (16%),R.A.F. 204 (23%).The present balloon barrage consists of 450balloons and is to be increased to a thousandJune 25thI saw Tommy today. He said that when hevisited the bridgehead with the King, theyproceeded to Monty's H.Q. Q. where an investi-ture took place in the presence of some 50press representatives. The Kind had beenaccompanied by one Louis WOLF, an ASS. Presscorrespondent attached to Reuters. WOLFhad subsequently written up the visit, givingthe names of all the villages through whichCatalogue Reference:KV/4/194the King had passed on his way to Monty's Hu.This had been published after Censorship bySiEF. De Guingand,Monty's Chief of Staff,had subsequently written a letter to Tommypointing out the undesirability of thispublication. lommy had spoken to WOLF whosaid that he had given these details inorder to give local colour to his story.He had never thought they would be passed bySHAEF but had put them in as he felt thatsomeone else might and that if theirs gotthrough he would lose the scoop. This isof course typical of the actions of all journ-alists. They never consider whether it iswise or unwise to publish information butregard the whole thing as a kind of game, inwhich it is their job by hook or crook toget something passed the censorship unnoticed.Tommy informed de Guingand about his enquiryand received a letter from Monty which heshowed me. Monty said that had he known thathis Chief of Staff was going to write aboutthis he wouldhhave would have prevented it. He did nottherefore wish that any thing he said in hisletter should be brought to the notice of HisMajesty. He stated however that shortlyafter the King's visit a nearby farm was bomvedand subsequently his on headquarters had beenshelled. He h had been forced to move elsewhere.The reason was that great care had away s tebe exercised when dealing with such a formid-able opponent as the German. yHe himself hasspent many hours trying to think out what wasin the German mind. this letter was extremelyfriendly and cordial. This is one more instaneof the inefficiency of SHAEF censorship. ICatafogue-Reterercerv/aye but have made itvery clear that no use can be made of theinformation, except to keep in the back of ourminds that WOLF is a man to keep an eye on.I seem to recall some conversation of FreddieKUH'S which indicated his interest in WOLFand his movements. rresumably the whole ofthe Press know that he is speci lly employedto report on the King's visits. Any movementby WOLF therefore has a certain significancein Fleet St.I gather that Alexander has advised the P.Mthat in his opinion he will have the Germanson the Alps by August. He then thinks thathe should turn right and strike at Viennavia Trieste rather than enter France fromthe South.The information that Lennox gave me aboutthe inefficiency of Mulberries appears to besomewhat exaggerated. The P.M.sent themulberry expert down to the beachhead andhad a report from him on Saturday to the effectthat the mulberrieswould be in working orderdespite minor deficiencies, ithin the nexttwo or three days and that each one of themwould be able to land 2,000 tons a day,which was as much as could be done by the wholepart of Cherbourg.June 26thThe Key Points Intelligence Directorate reportfor 1943 indicates that air activity againstthis country during the past year has continuedto decline. In the first quarter about 790catasglgrisefereneedkvi4y1g4e second 728, in thethird 380 and in the fourth 422, a total of2,320 tons, somewhat less than the approximateload dropped by the RAF in a single attack.The total we dropped on Germany in 1943 was136,000 tons. May was the month in which thegreatest weight was dropped by the enemy butthat month's total was less than that droppedon London in the heaviest attack of the war.Although the potential threatto key pointswas appreciable, the results have been ofsmall account and in general the effect of theyear S air attacks in So far as the essentialwar effort is concerned has been negligible.The total number of enemy action fires defeatedby the NFS during the year was 1,568, comparedwith over 50,000 non-enemy action fires. Themaximum in any one night was 136 in Grimsby inJune, a figure that is little more than one-twentieth of that for London in April 1941.The largest number of overland sorties flownagainst land targets in any one day in 1943was 60 on the 20th Jan. and in any one night74 on the 17-loth Jan.Courtenay has produced an amusing report ofthe reactions of the various Eibassiesto Crossbow. the Turkish ambassador isapparently rather disturbed, and one member ofhis staff fainted when the bomb exploded. TheSwiss Air and Military Attache feels thatwith the arrival of Crossbow he is now actuallyin the war. He spends most of, his afternoonsand evenings running into the streets, andit is rqorted that one of his cables in codeto his home govt. regarding Crossbow wasCatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/194lub"Goodbye but not with tears". He like theSwedish wir Attache is also certain that theinvasion of France is the best answer toCrossbow. The Feruvian M.A. who has justarrived is definitely frightened. The GreekM.A. describes Crossbow as the gesture ofa drowning man who tries to save himself byclutching at his own hair. The Spanish M. A.hinks that the doodlebug has not come upto expectations and states that the life ofLondon continues with complete normality.The Swedish Attache CERVELL states that theGermans tested out the doodlebug from anisland and aimed them at Sweden. This trialbomb carried no explosive and the Germansknew that if they shot them off one at a timethe could check on results by the automaticprotest the Swedish Minister in Berlin wouldmake naming the spot in Sweden where they fell.This also had the advantage of the Swedeshaving several doodlebugs intact. CERVELL thinthat the dive is controlled by a time clockhich works the elevators.Heguessesthatthese attacks will continue for about abpeeweeks and then peter out.Milmo is rather worried about the case ofBRODERSEN. Apparently defending counsel wishedto call witnesses from Ham. There is to be aconErence with the A.G. and By one at which ihope Cussen will represent us.y It may bethat it would be wise to find a pretext towithdraw the case rather than establish theprecedent of calling 20 witnesses. We mayalso have to consider whether the cases whereCatalogue Reference:KV/4/194man incriminating statement cannot be obtainedbefore removal to 020 it is in fact desirableto prosecute at all.Bonnefous has replied favourable to oursuggestions about letting the French interrogatrefigees. Hewould however like to have copiesof our reports and also advance lists of thosewho arrive. This will be considered.DenhamEde,I Dick and I discussed the questionof interrogations at Trinidad. Denhamthought Henderson needed some rather positivedirective from a senior officer here.Denham is leaving us at the end of this week.Kenneth Strong has asked Harry to povide himwith a good senior counter-intelligence officerfor SHAEF. the possible candidates are JackBarrow, Spens and Bertram Ede. Strongmentioned Ede and although he iis not verymuch in the picture he might not be a badcandidate.June 27thI had a t Ik with Charles this morning aboutsalaries. I said that L thought that thoseof many officers serving under me were low byany showing, firstly by comparison with thosepeople holding similar posts in other servicesand secondly by reason of theyrise in the costof living and the expense of living in Londonas compared with the country. L feltthat wewere erylucky to have held the services of SOmany good people for SO long. I pointed outCatalogue Reference:KV/4/194that we had lost the services of Billy Robert-son purely on a question of pay. He wasonly getting E50-l00 more than he got hereCharles said he would let me have a list, whenwe Nould discuss the matter further.I also suggested to him that I should putforward a list of people for decorationsin order of priority. This would be anextremely difficult thing to do but L feltthat if we left it till the end of the warthe chances were that we should only get veryfew. He agreed. He did not think that theoffice would ever get more than one C.one 0 andone M or two O's and one M. in each listand there were of course the other divisionstube considered.We then went to see the D.G. about Stopford'sorganisation. The D.G. seemed satisfied. Wetalked about Hooper's pay. He seemed to thinkthat he was well paid at 1600 and the factthat he was extravagant did not constitutevery good grounds for an increase. t saidIthought Hooper made out a good case on hisbudget but L was very anxious not to encour-age him to get over his difficulties byadding to his incidental expenses. D.G. saidhe would consider the case.L had a NOrd with Archie Boyle about thesuggested integration of SOE with the F'rench.T'hey were already integrated with the Americansand the new triangular problem may consider-ably affect the work of Geoffrey wethered.Archie said that at the moment the suggestionCatalogue very much inand that he could not149really say very much. He would ring me uphowever in the course of 2 or 3 days and wouldarrange a meeting beteen myself,himself andMockler-Ferry man. He was not at all clearas to how this new French arrangement wasgoing to work.It is possible that we may be re-occupying theChannel Islands before long. the presentarrangement is that in addition to the1.B. officer,Stopford and d'Egville should goout and be attached to theForce Commander.Once things had got going and authroity washanded back to the civil power, Stopford wouldgo away and leave d'Egville in the capacityoi an RSLO, the necessary arrangements beingmade with the H.O. D'Egville was formerlya port security officer in the Ch annel Isl ndsprior to the German Occupation. it may nottherefore be necessary to get 1.O. authorityfor his return as an RSLO although they shouldprobably be notified that he is there.A telegram has been received from the DMI indiasuggesting the establishment of a SindBritishcum American ntelligence Bureau with athinaman at its he ad. The proposal has comefrom the Chinese. DMI rightly remarks thatit might be as well to get ourselves integratedbefore we go into such a party and that theAmericans might well do the same as they atappear to be squabbling There is a suggestionthat there should be a complete interchangeof information including "Y" sources. DMIremarks that he doubts whether "e" will wantto join. I must say thata combination ofCatalogue SIS SOE Reference:kVt4/194 OSS in aspects, plus a ChineseTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIG RECORDSsoACT 1958 esoSIS and SOE, wit ith a Chinaman at the head, seemsto say the least to be a somewhat ambitiousscheme, particularly when it involves aninterchange of most secret sources. Thequestion rises as to whether we ought tojoin the party. Our only possible candidateis Courtenay. DMI perhaps rightly remarksthat if we do not accede to the Chineserequest in some form or another variousIntelligence Services will probably findit impossible to york in China on their own.I suppose that in due course the Russianswill want to join. The general view seemsto be that it-would-be wise- to start in amodest way with a Sino-British organisationFor the 12 hours ending- this morning, 87flying-bombshave been plotted, or which 6lcame overland. Of these 43 reached the Londonarea.Cherbourg was reported to have fallen on the8 o'clock news this morning. It was not thoughthat it will take very long to get the portinto. working.order.Poles arestarting an Intelligence organisation inconjunction With the Swedes. T eir head-quarters ill be in Stockholm with branches inLulea and Malmo. It is hoped ltimatelyto have an interchange of information withthe Swedes from London. The Poles evidentlywant to have a good liaison with the Snedesfor pest war purposes. I think this line mayCataloguetReference:KVI4/1945June 28thI dined with Peter Reid last night, when weexchanged notes about the deception forOverlord. He told me that he was getting hispart of the story carefully written up, andI explained to -him-that we ere-doing thesame; particularlycir connection with thehighly interesting map which had beenpicked up in Italy. This map was dated15th May-194 and- purported to show disposi-tions of all our units in this country.. Itwas almost identical with Plan Fortitude.The-mapwas issued-b Section I'c of theAbwehr contact.point for Gruppewest, Rundstedtsgroup and was compiled from all informationreceived Fremdeheere. Nearly all thenotional-divisions-were-sho shown, giving.t thenotional build-up in Scotland for the threatto Norway and the notional army in the southand east which the Germans were led to believewould attack.. .through the Pas-de-Calais.ofspecial interest were 2 divisions shown to havemoved down from north to south by red arrows.We in fact reported on the-movement of thedivisions slightly prior to the 15th May..Peter told me that itewes not until 5 am on D dday that the Germans. were aware that any thingin the nature of a serious attack was likelyto take. place on the western front. They wereevidently not-clear as towhereer it wassince a general alert was given all down thecoast stretching from Holland to Brest. ByCatadegseoreference'kthad194e possible to givea general- blurred picture and to avoid the-12Germans getting any idea of various convoysconcentraing on one particular point.ZIGZAG arrived last night at a placed calledWest Retting near Newmarket. He was droppedfrom a height of 12,000 but came in at about30 ft, turned north up the coast and thenrose to a height of 12,000. hie sid thatanother aeroplane started with him but thathe had no idea who was in it. He thoughtthat possibly it was sent solely for thepurpose of cover. He had been told that araid on London would be staged to come offsimulataneously with his arrival. this wasof course purely for the purposes of binginghin up. Although heereported himself to thepolice, he found they were inclined to dis-believe his story, he therefore told themto ring up the police station at the placewhere he had dropped before. This they did.The police communicated at once with Haghes.ZIGZAG brought with him 26,000, 14,000 ofwhich is almost undoubtedly for Brutus. Hehas no sabotage mission but a 5-fold espionagemission (1) to obtain information about nightfighters, (2) to obtain information aboutAsdic types, (3) to ascertain what jammingdevices we have against radio-eontrolledaircraft, (4) to report on the doodlebug and(5) to find out whether we had any plan bywhich aircraft starting from certain placesare directed on certain targets in Germany.they have a theory that if aircraft leave acertain aerodrome they always attack Hamburg.If the air Force are prepared to play thisshould provide an excellent opportunity ofCatalogue Reference:KV/4/194getting the Luftwaffe, in the air.s?At the Wednesday meeting today Herbert saidthat Berlin had received within a period of 4days a verbatim extract from Alba's despatchabout the doodlebug. The report was anobjective one and stressed that life inLondon continued normally. The populationwere described as placidly observing theprojectiles as soon as the alert was given.Grogan raised the question of neutralisingprocess for the Analine rencil. As there wasno evidence that the pencil was in use I saidthat I did not think that it was worth raisingthe question with Censorship at the moment.I agreed with Grogar however that it would bea good thing to raise with Censorship thequestior of intermediary mails. If we eanget them stopped it would certainly be toour advantage. There is no doubt that theGermans knew about the system and the pretenceof having letters postedin Lisbon could notpossibly hold water.Our casualties up to 28.6.44 in Normandy,boBritish, Canadian and American, are as follows:Killed 5,694, wounded 27,298, missing 11, 48,total 44,475. the total number of doodlebugsdespatched up to date is 1,599. 1,213 havecrossed the coast and 519 have reached theLondon area. A. A. claim 147, R.A.F. 311, andthe balloon barrage 26. The percentage ofkilled per bomb is 1.8.lunched with Lde. He wanted to discussvarious aspects of 0.C. I said that IwasCatalogue Reference:KV/4/194isyquite convinced that certain of our stationssuch as Singapore, Trinidad,Gibraltar, Maita,Egypt and Palestine, should continue andthat it was highly important that they shouldbe a lot more live than they had been in thepre-war period. This would necessitateconstant visits by the D.S.0.S to thiscountry and by representatives of head officeto the various colonies. I also thought thatit was necessary to have some officer herewho was au fait with the situation and offairly high standing, who could talk toGovernors and also receive Colonial officials,police commissioners etc. from places where wehad no D.S.0. but only a link. As regardswork we S ould do in the colonies, I thoughtthere was a case of keeping ourselves wellup to date regarding movements which hadeither an internationa significance orconstituted a vehicle for foreign intrigue.As reg rds the purely indigenous movements itmight be that we should act as a clearinghouse, but the responsibility must lie withthe local Governor and the local police. Ipointed out to Ede that in the past I hadalways had the impression that the adminis-crative tail was wagging the intelligence dog,and that had been a fundamental mistake. Exp-erience during the war had been that officerswho had visited the various stations onintelligence matters had been the best peopleto see this or that in the way of staff orequipment was necessary in order that theintelligence or could be done properly. Edeseemed to think that there would have beenconsiderable advantage if an administrativCatalogre REfePENCE:KV14/194 these stations fairlyregularly. The necessary staff and equipmentmight then have been provided instead ofwaiting until a crisis arose. He thoughtthat the status of 0.C. should be somethingbetween R.C. which allowed direct access toRSLOs but knew nothing about their work, andD.4 who allowed no directmaccess to SCOs butwas well informed as to all the duties thatthey performed. This he thought could bemet by having an officer who was thoroughlyau fait with the work of D. .Division and alsowith the administrative problems in thecolonies. I said that i thought this wouldbe difficult unless one was going to duplicatethe work of at least 4 or 5 sections inB.Division. Ede had been looking for anotherjob but apparently the negotiations hadbroken down. He is therefore reconsideringwhether in fact there is not something to bemade out of 0.0. since it now has somethingof a charter fron the C.0. and the D.G. sinceDenham's visit is more amenable. I said thatI would like to read Denham's report and alsothe charter, as up to now Ihad seen neither.There is I think something in what Ede says.At the same time I rather doubt whetherthere isa case for an Overseas Division, whicnis what he seeme to have in mind. He com-plains bitterly of having to deal throughHarker, who never takes the trouble to masterthe subject and either obstructs or mismanagesany problem which is put up to him. In thishe is of course merely reiterating the exper-ience of all other officers in the department.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/194Dick, TAR, Roger and I had a long meetingabout post-war office organisation. We came tothe conclusions: (I) that we should aim attotal amalgamation with S. .I.S. (2) failingthat, an ffensive organisation under C. anda defensive one under ourselve, the latterto control counter-intelligence activitiesabroad as well as at home. If the objectionwere raised that you could not have twoServices operating abroad, we should suggestsomething in the nature of an SCI unit wherethe direction would come from here. aActionon foreign territory wd. still be subject toveto by C. if he could show good cause.(3) we thought that we should be responsible toeach ministry independently for the work thatwe did for their departments, and thatpreferably SIS should be in the same position.Ne should however have. the backing of theCommittee of Imperial Defence in the person afBridges, With access to the P.M. if we wereattacked by any particular ministry or iftwo ministries were in dispute about theresponsibility for the work which we did.(4) we agreed that passport control shouldbecome a C.I. responsiblity and carry with itliaison with foreign police and 2eme bureaux.(5) we agreed that subversive movementsans security should hang together firstly be-cause the experience in technique and investi-gation was the same, secondly because espionageand subversion were both part of the techniqueof modern warfare. Even if it' were hot possiblto get control over the whole movements, theyhad at least provided an efficient reeruitingground for spies of one kind or another. Forexample at the moment ny rate RussianCatalogue Reference:KV14/194(57espionage could not possibly be carried outexcept in the background of the CPGB.Two panzer divisions which have been broughtback from the eastern front are moving uptowards the bridge-head and a 3rd is beingbrought down from Norway. On the 23rd Junethe Japs in Berlin had information receivedfrom official sources that a further landingof our main attacking party would takeplace. Similar views are expressed in Germanofficial communiques. It would seem thereforethat the cover plan is still holding. So farthere has been no movement of troops fromthe Pas de Calais area, er indeed from furtherup the coast.The question of raiding Axis consulatesin Italy or elsewhere has been raised by JumboWilson and is being discussed by the JIC.The Services' view is that we stand to gainnothing by sticking to the letter of interna-tional procedure. The Germans violated ourconsulate in Copenhager and the Japs have doneso elsewhere. The F.0. take the view thatevidence shows that when there was apossibility of Axis legations or consulatescoming under our control,all papers have beendestroyed and that therefore there would belittle advantage to be gained from raids. Theythink therefore that we should keep our handsclean, and not argue on the lines th it twowrongs make a right. Person lly I do notthink there is much to be said for this argu-ment. Pe is quite certain that any of theAxis powers would raid any of our consulatesCatalogue Reference:KVI4/194THIS IS A COPY THIS COPYNDERAEMENT's8314 OFTHE PUBLJO RELERESACT 1958 wr 20aoif they could ge their hands Om them, and thatthere re-is-no real advant ge in being on theside of; the angels.Sune 29thI discussed with Dick, Tar and Buster thequestion of the exchange. of My ERIKSSEN orFRESENIUS for Andree de JONGH, the Belgian>woman who-is-under-sentence-of-death-forhaving assisted over 100 British airmen toget out of occupied territory. We havedecided thatMy can be exchanged provided SOEsaw no objection Lon..andlikewise-FRESENIUS and nd-likewise FRESENIUScould go provided there was no 020 bjectionand provided that the Americans; whoseprisonerhe was, weresinagreementfon1aI went with J.C. to talk towho hadexpressed wish to seeme. Hewasvery distresabout hisposition. He-thoughtuthathewasnot altogether trusted: 1 I assuredhim thatthis IWIS! not the case: His real difficultyhowever-is-that-he-feelsthtift remains:here he will never be able to go back to hisown country. Germans of all political vieeven though they were bitterly anti-Nazi, wou.not understandsa German who-deserted-his-country and went over to the enemy. They wouldhowever all understand his running away fromthe-Nazis If therefore he oouldgetibacktopain or S. America, the way for his returnto his native country after the war would stilbe open. I said there were very gravedifficulties-which Ircould-not explain-tohimCataldguotRefereheelkvartginly reconsiderthe wholeposition. I discussed the case aftorwanaa wit:J..C. While I can see that it is probablyimpossible to send- him backto Spainwhere hemight well be kidnapped and under deriduressgive duress giveaway information about Artist, i could notsee any real objection to his employment intheArgentine.I e.I-feel-pretty--confident- tha feel-pretty-cor fidenttha thathe would play straight and that he would no*disclose any information unless he were kacnapped and tortured. If SIS do not wish toemploy him in eArgentine possibly-tFBI would: be ready to do SO. I propose totake the matter up with Kim.Ihad-atalkwith Ihad-a Lk with DonnieReed about ZIGZAG.No track has been found for the other plane:There isno doubt however that it came invith-IGZAG'S-plane-fron-Utrechtsince-of our own aircraft were shot down over theirbases when returning from a raid. There is 7apparently a row going on about this. Presumably4the-plane-cane-in-about.3o.ft-as.7-LZAdid and SO was not recorded by radar'herAir Force did now however that two planes:FeftUtrechtandin lew-ofpreviousaetiorby planes from that quarter should have takensome sort of action.M3pideaeZIGZAG IGZAG-whois-being ing-interrogated-byfofficersat 020 has mentioned 2 or 3 of the Icelanderswho came here some weeks ago He gave a a1oidescription of some me-and-gotthe- of someof the others fairly accurately.l He has alsogot a list of the frequencies and times usedby the Oslo station. His code is similar tocataloguefRe Reference with-certainmodificaationsy From Lisbon he was sent tolboBarcelona, and eventually to Paris and Berlin.He refused to be interrogated at any lengthexcept by his former master GROMANN. He wastold that GROMANN was in disgrace and had beensent to Oslo. ZIGZAG himself was sent to Oslowhere he was subjected to fairly searchinginterrogations. He was given 10,000 marksfor putting the piece of explosive coalon the ship which took him to Lisbon, and latergot 100,00 marks for his exploits in thiscountry. He is not quite sure whether theGermans accepted his story about the sabotageat de Havilland's factory, since they had noevidence against which to check the story.He rather got the impression that they thoughthe was trying to build himself up, althoughthey did not appear to question his loyaltto Germany. He says that he made two trips toBerlin from Oslo where he was questionedabout the possibilities of sabotage in factoriein this country He expressed the view thatthis would be extremely difficult. He hadvery little to do in Norway andspent most ofhis time amusing himself. He got a yacht andcruised up and down the fjords. He also did alot of winter sport. He brought twowirelesssets, one is for a notional sub-agent, afriend in the crook world who is to report fromthe Cambridge area on the departure of ouraircraft on bombing raids. The other is for hshis own use. Of the f6 000 he brought E1,000is for another agent. The impression is giventhat this agent was to arrive'here shortly.On the other hand as he was told that themoney was to be delivered at an hotel, we areinclined to think that it must be intendedCatalogue for Brutus. he Reference.KVI4/194 He cegeive instructions aboutthis money when he gets into wireless communi-cation. ZIGZAG had two courses with the AirForce and also with the Lavy as he said thif he was to fulfil his assignments he mustknow precisely what they wanted him to discoverin regard to night-fighter devices and Asdics.He told them that he was not a wireless expertand would not be able to retain all theinformation that he required, and tht it wastherefore necessary for him to get some ofit over the radio once he established communi-cation. It was thought at first that hisstory did not quite tally with that of the Ice-landic agents, an impression having been givenby them that ZIGZAG had acted as their instruc-tor. On further examination of the repatsof the Icelandic agents it seems however thatthey never said more than that they met himat the headquarters of the Abwher in Oslo.I saw Ronnie Sinclair for a moment. He isgoing to take up a post in the Britishvonsulate in New York where he will becollaborating with the Americans on Indianaffairs.Our technical knowledge of one of the flyingbombs is now virtually complete and our know-ledge of the layout and construction of thelaunching sites should be complete within afew days. Suspicions that the ma.in supplydepots were located in the area north ofParis have been confirmed. There are two typesof flying bombs, SO far identified. One hasa wing span of 17 ft 6 ins and one of 16 ft.It is probable that the former, since it hasCatalsgae Referecar/41g4 longer nose, carries a(62heavier charge. bombs have been observed atheights of between 1-4,00 ft and flying atspeeds which have been variously reported asbetween 250-400 mph. They appear tobesufficiently reliable in operation andaccurate in flight for about 80% of themto hit a target of the size of Greater London.Defensive measures however have reduced thenumber that do actually reach the targetto40% of the total launched. The bomb has ablast effect equivalent to the detonation ofan H.E. bomb of about 1,000 kms. There isnothing remarkable about the filling, which isin fact of a comparatively poor quality. Thebbombs are vulnerable to A.4., machine gun andcannon-fire and appear to become out of con-trol if they are disturbed by such thingsas impact with balloon barrages or forciblediversion by their wings being tilted by anaircraft flyindalongside. It is now almostcertain that the bombs are launched by meansof a rocket propelled trolly which is jetti-soned on leaving the launching rails. Thelaunching rocket seems to work on the bi-fuelsystem amking use of concentrated hydrogen-peroxide and potassium permanganate. Smallcraters,made presumably by the launching trollyhave been observed at distances of between150 and 200yds ahead of the launching points.These craters area useful indic tion as towhich sites arein use. These marks suggestthat a certain number of projectiles fail tofly and fall short as soon as they are launchedNo craters or blast marks have been seen inthe vicinity of ski sites and it seems probabletherefore that these are old sites and not inoperation. These old sites were 120 ft longCatalogue Reference:KVI4/194163whereas the modified sites are 170 ft. Aphotograph shows that at Peenemunde some of theold 120 ft. launching platforms are beingdismantled. A number of supply depots havebeen identified in underground workings inthe neighbourhood of Paris and one south ofRheims. Supplies of bombs and other equipmentare delivered by rail to these depots andre-transmitted by road to the launching sites.The headquarters of parts of the organisa-tion have been located in five chateaux, andit seems almost certain that important tele-phone lines pass through the citedel ofDoullens. Incidentally, ZIGZAG has stated thatthe headquarters of Crossbow is in Amiens.50 modified sites have n W been discovered inthe Pas de Calais north of the River Somme,and two in an area between the Somme and theSeine. Of these 34 including the latter twoappear to be complete and 21 have beenidentified as being in use. 7 of those whichhave been in operation have suffered Cat.Adamage, as have a further 5 which have notreached completion. From radar plots it isevident that there are a number of other sitesin operation between the Somme and theSeineand effortsarebeing made to fix theirposition.Information on continued preparations forthe launching of an attack with the largerocket continues to be received from varioussources. P/W reports, which are generallysubject to exaggeration, estimate its weightas being between 15 and 20 tons. Agentsreports refer to the transporting of rocketsCatalogue towards Reference:kv4794 the de and to the large149site at Watten itself. Photographs of a recentattack by 12,000 lb bombs on the structureat Watten show that a direct hit failed topenetrate the concrete roof of the main struc-ture. Considered in relation to the fact thatthe majority of the A.defences at Wattenhave been removed, this fact appears signifi-cant. It may be that the Germans now con-sider that the essential parts of the siteare sufficiently well protected by pponcreteto render the provision of H. A. defencesunnecessary. From all the information avail-able there seems to be no reason to supposethat an attack with a big rocket will nottake place in the comparatively near futureunless sufficient damage was done to theinstallations to prevent it.The conclusions on this report, which isdated 26th June, are that it seems probablethat the present scale of attack on Londonby flying bombs will continue for some daysand may even increasewithin the next Ewoweeks is likely or SO. that After given this reason/weather period however conditions itthe combination of improved information andincreasing counter-measures will graduallyreduce the scale. As regards the large rocketon the evidence available it seems likelythat the enemy is making every preparation tolaunch an attack with this as soon as possible,and that the large sites are intended forthis purpose. Unless these sites are des-troyed or seriously damaged there seems to beno reason why the enemy should not be ableto launch his attack in due course. 21 proposof the rocket, TAR told me the other day that tlCatalogue Reference:KV/4/194Lsthe large site on the Cherbourg Peninsulahas considerably mystified the experts, sinceit appears to be pointing in the directionof Newfoundland.June 30thI attended a meeting at Norfolk House to dis-cuss the Cabinet ruling which was givenyesterday on the uggested relaxation ofsecurity restrictions. Findlater explainedthat the Cabinet had now decided that thecover plan, having been so successful, shouldbe supported at all costs. It was thereforeessential that no relaxation should take placewhich necessitated either a public announce-ment or overt action which would come to theknowledge of the enemy. The Home Secretaryhad apparently tried to point out that thisvirtually meant that most of the restrictionswould have to remain in force, but he was notable to get his point across, bey ound asuggestion which was adopted that indlater'scommittee should re-examine the 43 restric-tions in the light of the Cabinet ruling.We dealt first with the visitor's ban.Itwas quite clear that the modificationssuggested could not be carried out if a publicannouncement to the effect that the areaswest of Southampton would in future be opento visitors were made. The same appeared tobe the case with travel to Eire. While theremight be certain relaxations within the frame-work of the regulations for people whowishedto proceed on compassionate grounds,it wouldnot be possible to make relaxations withCatalogue Reference:KVI4/194L6regard to the business people without itscoming to the knowledge of the rress and theHouse of Commons. If it did there would bea complaint that many who would have likedto have taken advantage of the relaxation hadnot done SO because no announcement had beenmade. The opening of the Swedish Air Lineand Air Lingus could clearly not take placewithout the fact becoming known to the enemy.Telephone censorship to Eire would have tomarch in time with travel. The EFM servicecould not be opened without publicity and thesame applied to the air mail service to Lis-bon, the increase in P/W mail and to thenormal flow of service mails to Gib. Herbertraised the point of the abolition of the con-trol of communications order except forparcels etc. for N. Ireland. Under thepresent regulations a permit had to be obtainedFindlater said that if his Minister was pre-pared to face the Cabinet he cauld at hisdiscretkon cancel the order. In the lightof this discussion itwas decided th t Findlatershould make an approach to SHAEF and ask themin each case whether they felt that de-restric-tion would affect the cover plan. He thoughtthat it aslarguable that a modification ofthe visitor's ban SO far from being detri-mental to the cover plan might in fact rein-force it. I entirely agree with this view, andsaid SO at the earlier meeting. Wild and SHAEFhowever felt th t any sort of relaxation inregard to the fisitors ban would be detri-mental to the cover plan. SHAEF will also be aasked aboutthe other points,; whether theythink the opening of the Swedish hir Line islikelyCatalogue Reference:kV14/194taaffect them L said that I thought16a distinction should be made between de-restric-tions which would ultimately come to theknowledge of the enemy, and public announce-ments. It was our experience that the enemydid not asrule piece togehter a number of rat-her nebulous faets and pass a conclusion onthem. If on the other hand a public announce-ment were made about any restriction beingrelaxed they were quite capable of drawing awrong conclusion and saying that there wasa general let-up of restrictions and thattherefore a major attack had been launched andthat nothing else of importance would follow.I had lunch with Chares, and told him aboutour discussion relating to the future of theoffice. He seemed to be in general agreement.Harry had his security meeting. We told thosepresent about the Findlater Stewart meeting andalso that Lambert of the W.0. had S id thatthe proposals to the Cabinet by the FindlaterStewart committee were already in the possess-ion of certain newspaper interests, awaitingpublication. He told Harry privately thatthe leak had been on a ministerial levelthrough Beaverbrook. This may account forthe statements in the Beaverbrook press abouta possible relaxation of the travel to Eire.Buster and L saw Maxwell this afternoon aboutBRODERSEN. I explained to Maxwell that KnutBRODERSEN, a Norwegian, had come to ournotice through most secret sources as beingprepared for a visit to this country on behalfof the German I.S. He had duly arrived viaCatalogue Reference:KV/4/194168Gib. whence he had come by ship to Leith.Special instructions had been given to Leiththat they were to explain to BRODERSEN thatit was at that point that he should discloseverything that he had to say. This hadbeen done but BRODERSEN had stuck to thecover story that had been given him by theGermans, namely that he was coming here tojoin the Norwegian forces as a refugee. Ihen explained to Maxwell the normal procedurefor the preparation of evidence. We alwayendeavoured to get a statement under cautionbefore a man was sent to 20. In a fewinstances however that had not been possibleand prosecutions had been launched on statementmade on arrival at Y20. We had always realisedthat we might be challenged in such easesby defending council and asked to producedocuments and witnesses from 020, butuntil the case of BRODERSEN arose this hadnever occurred. BRODERSEN had been sentdirect from the port to 920 where he had beensubjected to the usual rigorous search andthen left for 24 hours to think things aer.This move had the effect of convincing a manthat we had evidence to show that he was aspy. He was then interrogated, told thathe was in a secret service prison, that hisposition could not po sibly be worse and thatalthough no promises could be made to him hemightbe able to help himself by telling thetruth. It was only in this way that we couldget the full ntelligence value out of a spy,and we had adopted it as we attached moreimportance to intelligence than to the deathpenalty. BROLERSEN had on being confronted wit.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/194this situation made complete confession,16aand a statement under caution had been takenimmediately. It was on this that the prose-cution had been based. BRODERSEN'S defencewas that hee always intended to tell the fullstory but that he would not do So untilhe knew positively that he was talking to theright people, and his council thought thatin this connection both documents and witness-es of 020 would assist the case. He was notpleading that his story had been extractedfrom his by threats or promises. This meantthat the whole procedure at 20 would becomeknown to defending counsel and in fact mightbecome public property. All sorts of thingswould come out such as the recording by micro-phone of interviews, conversations etc. Itseemed therefore desirable that prosecutionin this case should be dropped. n conferencehad been held between the A.G., By one, Cookie anand Cussen at which the A.G. had agreed toa plea of nolli prosequi and the whole casehad been called off. Maxwell thoroughlyunderstood the position and thought thattheaction had been correct throughout. He didhowever wander how the Home Secretary would beable to defend himself if he were asked whyhe had been unable to prosecute in a casewhere only by accident a man had been interro-gated at one place rather than another. Onreflection he thought that he could say thatthe man had not been prosecuted because hehad given valuable information or that prose-cutions were instituted in all cases wherethe appropriate legal authorities consideredthat the evidence would justify such prosecutioCatalogue left with Reference.KV/4/194 Maxwel letter apply in for a 12(!120'(5)a order. Later Cookie informed me thatthe wheels were moving rather fast and thatthe Central Criminal Court would probably givean order to the Governor of Brixton to releaseBRODERSEN. I spoke to Maxwell who thought thatwe were covered by the refusal of leave toland. Meanwhile however Cookie had promisedthe Governor the necessary powers under thearrival from enemy territory order. This wouldhold the position until the 12(5)a orderhad been issued.Doodlebugs are now shutting off at an earlierstage and gliding to their targets sometimesin a straight line, sometimes in a curve.At the discussion at the H.0. yesterday itwas decided that all German repatriateswho were not interned on the I.O.M. shouldnot be allowed to go back to Germany.I spoke to the D.G. about my going to America.I explained to him my personal reasons andthen said that L did not wish to go if osehe thought my presence was required here,arunless he thought there were intelligencereasons which would justify a visit. Hesaid that on general grounds he thought therewere and that on articular grounds he thoughtit desirable for somebody to discuss communismwith the F.B.I. There had been a suggestionthat a representative from the FBI should comeover here. This however had been vetoed bythe State Dept. who said that they did notwish any official visit on this subject totakeplace. I presume they are suffering fromtheir old trouble, namely the belief that ifCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1947policemen and soldiers came together theymight run the State Deptl into an awkeardsituation. In this case they probably imaginethat a leak would seriously embarrass theirrelations with Russia. This is of coursean entirely mist ken notion.Freak has returned from his journey with theKing He did not meet anyone who could givehim news. of Dreadnaught. the Yugoslav Govtwished to send Tricycle for a short visitto the USA for their own purposes and it isproposed that Freak should send a shortmessage on his radio explaining that hisown and Tricycle's tavel will prevent themfrom continuing to report.July lstP/W mail shows that an Lrish camp has beenformed at Luchenwalde near Berlin for thepurpose of forming a Free irish Movementwhich will fight against the North. Oneletter received on thissubject which hasapparently come out through German censorshipsays quite frankly "How do the Germans imaginethat they are going to get us to join amovement of this sort when they have beenfeeding us on pig swill for months". Thislooks like another typical psyehological blun-der by some German who thinks that ne isgoing to get southern lrish soldiers fightingin the British Army to join a movement forattacking N.Ireland, because they are Catholicand anti-Bolshevik, and should therefore beopposed to the Britisn Empire which is inassociation vith Russia. the only possibleCatalogue Reference:KVI4/19472valueof such a movement from the German point ofview would be to publicise it as an anti-British Empire movement which was beingjoined by thousands of P/Ws.otalcasualties in Normandy up to June 29thwere 7174 killed, 35,390 wounded,10,50missing, total 53,074. this includes ourselvesthe Canadians and the Americans. The totalnumber of prisoners taken is 41,000. the ttotal number of men landed up to June 29thwas 69,770. During this period 126,427vehicles and 358,17 tons of stores were solanded. This seems to be a terrific achievesment when it is considered that Ne startedmerely by running small craft on to the beachss.Mulberries are now more or less a going con-cern.Monty has apparently changed his plans. Heintends to keep the enemy forces on his rightflank occupied by reinforcing the resistancemovements in the Brest Peninsula. Meanwhilehe will drive hard in the direetion of Paris.78 flying bombs were reported throughout theperiod 12 hours ending 6 am today. 65 of theseflew overland and 37 reached the London area.26 of them were destroyedRomney House was hit at about 6.30 this eveningThere is apparently no structura damage to ourpart of the building, only blast effect, whichhas blown the windows out etc. Our NDO therehappened to be in the basement and was unnurt.Our documents were all locked up and theCatalogue logueReerence:kv14/1g4e had been evacuat175July 3rdI attended a meeting t Norfolk House todayto discuss the minutes of the last meeting,and to get SHAEF'S approval for various sugges-tions made. SHAEF had now agreed that theremoval of the visitors ban west of Southamptonwill in f act assist the cover plan. They didnot mind about EFM messages. They did nothowever vish for any let-up on Irish travelexcept on compassionate grounds. They didnot wish either AB Transport or Air Lingusto be opened. It has been suggested thatthe position should be reviewed at the endof this month. T'he attitude of SHAEF hasconsiderably stiffened since they discoveredthat the Cabinet was on their side.After lunch I attended another meeting atNorfolk House to discuss whether diplomaticban should be re-imposed, if Big Ben startedto operate. The gener l view was that asnear a total ban as possible should be imposedfor 48 hours, when the position should bere-considered. It was not thougnt that anysuch ban could serve any useful purposeafter a period of about 10 days. The AirMinistry representative,Wing- nder Lamb,said that very little was known about therocket of a positive kind. It Nas thoughtthat it would be far more inaccurate thanthe flying bomb. The only possible counter-measures would be bombing of the sites and jam-ming the German radar which would be engagedin plotting the point of impaet. We areapparently using radar to pick up the rocketand if this is successful it may be possibleCatalogue ReferenCe:KV14/194174to give a few minutes warning.I suggested that we might get American co-opera-tion in advance as regards the banning oftheir telegrams. It was generally agreed th tthe Russians should be included in the ban.I felt however that it would be better notto say any thing to them in advance but merelyto stop their telegramns. It was generally feltthat a delay of 48 hours should be justifiedon grounds of general security confusion.After 48 hours it might be able to be relaxedwith belligerent allies and perhaps moreprecisely with the French. It was felt howeverthat onpresent information no decision on thispoint could be made.On the 27th June Steengracht told the Japthat in the opinion of the German SupremeCommand Patton's army remain concentratedsouth and south-east of Southampton. Morethan 350 large and small vessels had beengot ready and landing operations would beattempted in the ne future. Nothingdefinite can be said about the place but itwas considered that it was extremely likelyto be in the area in the east of and contigu-ous to the existing bridgehead and embracingLe Havre. This seems to indicate that thecover plan is still operating.Lennox tells me that we have put somethingbetween 420-450 German tanks out ofactionand that 167 of these nave beentotally des-troyed. The total number of tanks that theGerm ns are believed to have left is given ascatalogte Reference:KVI4/194 70015I saw "o" about my going to America. I toldhim that wanted to go for personal reasonsbut that E had told the D.G. that unless hefelt that I could be spared and that my goinghad some definite intelligence advantage, Iwould prefer to remain here. I thoughtpersonally there was considerable advantagefrom an intelligence point of view sincenobody had been to America from head officefor 18 months. Apart from this, the FBIrepresentative who was coming here had beenprevented from doing SO by the State Dept.who for some reason best known to themselvesdid not want what they described as anofficial visit. I suppose they thought thatany get-together on the subject of communismmight come o-the ears of the Russians andcause them trouble. This is of course purenonsense. I told "o". also that I had spokento Bill Stephenson who gaw no objection to mygoing. "C" said that he had no objection atall particularly since Stephenson was agreeableI said that E told Stephenson quite franklythat if he thought my presence there wasgoing to start another barney, I shouldcertainly not go. He had assured methat all that was a thing of the past and thatmy visit would be welcome."C" seemed very pleased about the battle.Hesaid there was no doubt that German moralewas right down and that things in Normandywere going well, mainly on account of ourremendous preponderance of artillery andaireraft. I asked him about "Big Bea". Hesaid that Paine had recently paid a visit toatapogue Reference eferenceVe4/94na had been shown certainphotographs of the rocket sites. Theseindicated that very considerable damage hadbeen caused. He did not understand whythis information had not been made availablebefore since theAir Ministry were evidentlyin ignorance about these photographs. Healso told me that the rocket was radio-con-trolled. Stepsh have been taken to pick it upby radar should it start firing. It wasthought that probably several minutes warningcould be given. He did not think howeverthat it was likely to operate for severalmonths. The indications were the it wasvery much in the experimental stage. It waspossible however that Germans might try andexperiment on this country, even though theymight not have much idearasnto where therocket would land up.I mentioned to him thi it seemed likely froma Jap BJ that the Germans were not contemplatinthe use of gas. He said he thought this wasmost unlikely, neither did he think they wouldstart bacteriological warfare. The generaltalk aboutgas was probably due to a Germanbelief that we should retaliate for thedoodlebug with gas or some other we pon.He persona lly was in favour of retaliationthough not with gas or microbes. He thoughtwe should bomb pen towns and villages, and thathis might even be forced upon the Govt. bypublic opinion. He was very scathing aboutAir Force intelligence. He had reportedvarious places where the doodlebug was eingmade and also the depotat Creuil near arisbut these targets had never reached Bombercatalogue eference:RV/4/94s given these targets177by SIS said that he would be delighted tobomb them.Anvil is now definitely on again. Thissisprobably due to American pressure of apolitical kind. The matter was debated bythe joint Chiefs of staff at Washington anda decision was reached yesterday. This willmean a certain depletion of Alexander's forces,and is of course contrary to Alexander.srecommendation that he should turn rightinstead of left on reaching the north of Italy.July 4thSome 400 Russians working with the Todtorganisation in Normandy habe been broughtover to this country. The question has arisenas to whether they are to be treated ascivilians or as P/W. ve should prefer to seethem kept as P/W at any rate until theyhave been identified and accepted by theRussians. So far they have been passingthroug! the LRC.I lunched with Walter Bell,Arnold-Fosterand Alexander Halpern. The latter is aWhite Russian Jew who left Soviet hussia afterthe revolution and has established himselfin business here. tor the last few yearshe has been working in DSC New York andmaking a special study of European minorities.He has a very wide knowledge Yof affairs inAmerica and seems extremely able. Arnold-Foster mentioned his visitto Blenneim, LRC, and C020 and seemed very pleased with the attentionthat had been given to him.I asked him whenCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1947%he was going to visit SJ. He said that theball was with us. He thought it would be agood thing if he came fairly soon "as thingswere moving rather fast". I do not quiteknow to what he was referring but a rumourhas reached us from Diplock that Eden hasmore or less given his blessing to the ideaof SIS taking over B and Divisions. uiteclearly we shall have to get our house inorder for battle. When Arnold-oster comesto have his t lk with me I sh shll ask him quitefrankly the purpose for which he is collectinginformation about this office and what heintends to do with it. Is it his idea topresent a finished memo with proposals tothe oreign Office committee which is con-sidering the future of SIS. E shall thenproceed to tell him in a spirit of thegreatest friendliness that we do not altogetheragree with his suggestions. In fact that wethink they are fundamentally unsound. I shallalso say that I think it wrong that any exparte statement should go to the ForeignOffice committee. Dick thinks that we shallbe making a mistake to table a memo at thisstage. He thinks it better to wait forthe attack and break it up, if we think itunsound. We could then tableou suggestions,which to a considerable extent have thebacking of Section V.The Russi ns are streaking ahead beyoynd Minskat the rate of 15-20 miles a day and are nowonly about 150 miles from the East Prussianborder. At the height of their advance theGermans never averaged more th 10 miles adayCatalogue Reference:KVI4/194174Apparently the question of Anvil is notfinally decided. 10 divisions would berequired and these would have to be takenlargely from Alexander's forces. the P.M.is opposed to this and is saying so to thePresidentThe total number of doodlebugs launched upto date is 2,331. Of these 1769 crossed thecoast and 939 reached London. 303 havebeen brought down by day and 150 by night.Aircraft have brought down 214 plus 76 whichare being investigated and balloons 41 plus18. The remainder presumably have beenbrought down by A.A. A. Total casualties are2,358 killed, 6,930 seriously injured,7. .836slightly injured, 204 unelassfied. theproduction of doodlebugs is estimated at about1, 200 per month. The question of retaliationis under discussion. It is being opposedby Boner Command Who say that they are areadyusing up 40% of their bomber forces in counter-doodlebug activities.Total casualties for ourselves, Americans andCanadians to date in Normandy are 56,716.Total number of prisoners 0,972. The figuresfor the build-up in Normandy are reallyastonishing. Up to July 2nd we had landed911,52 men, 171,5: vehicles and 566, 648tons of stores. The mulberries at Arromanchelanded 4,500 tonds of stores on July lst. Plutowhich is in operation, discharged on the lstJuly 1100 tons of oil at Porte en Bassin.We shall have 6 more armoured divisions inthe line by the beginning of September. thiscataloguesreference:kvr4/1g4r French division.1&0Fleetwood-Hesketh has done a note on deeeptionin support of Overlord before and after D-dayThe object was to contain German forces in thethe Pas de Calais (Plan rortitude) and te alesser extent in the Bordeaux area (PlanIronside).The latter was not put into opera-tion until the second half of May. It threat-ends an assault from the west of England witha shore to shore build up from the UnitedStates. For a variety of reasons it was notpossible to pitch this threat very high. Theagents Bronx, Garbo and Tate were employed inits execution. Before D-dy the implementationof Fortitude, the main deception plan, wasconfined to building up an order of battleand location of forces notionally engaged.Care was taken to avoid the specific mentionof the ortituserarea. The ortitude forcesin the south and south-east were to balancethe Neptune forces in the west and south-west,thus leaving the enemy in doubt as to ourintentions. From .day onwards, the Neptunearea being known to the Germans, it has beenthe policy specifically to threaten the Pasde Calais with the highest degree of intensitypossible, to exaggerate the st te of pre:paredness of FUSAG which is to control thenotional operation, and to encourage by everymeans the belief that 21st Army Group andFUOru are being employed in independent roles.The agents employed under Fortitude at thepresent stage are Garbo, Brutus and Tate, allthree communicating by wirele'ss. hey aresupporting the plan in the following ways: (a)Garbo through his position at the M.O.I.has interpreted notional PWE directives inCatalogue Reference:KVI4/194ITreverse. leexplains away the removal of thediplomatic ban by referring to a Cabinet dis-pute on the subject. He has continued toreceive detailed observation reports fromhis network of subagents which confirm thelocation of the FUDAG formations. These reporthe summarises and a full appreciation trans-mitteed on the th June in which the Pas deCalais was given as the target area for thesecond assault. He has also sent theCabinet document which indirectly disclosestransport difficulties in eastern and south-east England, caused by impending operations(b) Brutus was appointed to an allied missioattached to FUSAG on the 27th May. From thisposition he has been able to give a compre-hensive FUSAG (Fortitude) order of battlewith ocations of formations under command.(c) Tate, through his connection with a railwayclerk at Ashford has seena shedule of troopmovements which with other information alreadyin the possession of the Germans indicatedthe move of FUSAG formations from concentra-tion to embarkation, without giving actualdates. The continuation of the present threatagainst the Pas de Calais is limited bytwo fact rs:(a) the appearance of FUSAGformations in the Neptune area, (b) the with-drawal of wireless equipment. or the protec-tion of our agents it was decided thereforeto put over shortly after the 20th June thestory to the effect that the Neptune assaulthad failed to draw sufficient reserves fromthe Pas de Calais and that it had consequentlybeen decided to reinforce the present opera-tion with formations of the First CanadianArmy. rom now onwards the story will beCatalogue Reference:kV/4/194r6apassed that Neptune has succeeded bey ond ex-pectation and that Monty has therefore askedthat the assault against the Pas de Calaisbe postponed, and FUSAG be used to exploithis success. n.Patton, notionally commendingFUSAG, will notionally object strongly. TheSupreme Commande will notionally decide infavour of Monty and therefore en.ratton willbe relieved of his command and will assumecommand of the third U.S.Army, Gen.Bradleyassuming command 6f FUSAG. Meanwhile theSecond U.S.Army Group will be built up inthe U.K. whereby the threat to the Fas deCalais and to other ports of the north-westEuropean coast C n be maintained,after FUSAGhas been committed. It was clearly demonstrateby Most Secret sources th that up to June llthat any rate Pl in Fortitude was firmly in theminds of the German High command. T'he firstPanzer Division which on D.day was at Turnhoutwas estimated to be ikely to move into thetarget area between D plus 3 and D plus7.On D plus 6 it was at Ghent. The SecondPanzer Division which on D-day was at Amienswas instructed to move into the target areabetween D plus 3 and D plus 8 and was actuallyengaged on D plus 8. It was probat delayedas a resut of the bombing of the Seine bridges.The ll6th Panzer Division which was atPontoise and was expecting to be in the targetarea on D plus 1 did not move south of theSomme until D plus 5. The 84th InfantryDivision which was north east of houen and expe-pected to be in the target area between D plus3 and L plus 7, was on 18. 18.6.44 44 still in itsold location. The same applies to the 331stInfantry Division at Hazebrouck.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/194In the Bordeaux area the Second S.S.PanzerDivision which was at Iculouse on D day, hadonly reached Tours by D plus 10. It wasoriginally calculated that it would be inthe target area not later thin D plus7. The-llth Panzer division estimated to be in thetarget area about the same time still hadits headquarters at Bordeaux on D plus 10.It was then dealing with French resistancegroups. T'he 17th S.S.Panzer Grenadierswhich were at Thouars and expected to comeinto action on D plus 2, did not enter thefield until D plus 4.July 5thThe German I.S. in Lisbon has recently beenmaking arrangements to send certain agents tothe U.K. who are referred to by numbers. Theyhave a strong Swiss flavour and it is possiblethat they may be connected with the Swisscourier Pedro, the agent with which Einzheerrepresentative Brandes claims to have workingfor him in the U.K. One of them is expected toleave Switzerland between 17th and 20th Julyand would arrived in England at the end ofJuly after staying in Lisbon. Discussionscould therefore take place either in Switzerlanbefore the 17th or in Lisbon after the 20th.It was thought that Lisbon would be preferablesince German subjects were liable to beshadowed by frontier police in Switzerland.Another one was said to have successfullytrained in secret writing at Lisoon andwas due to fly to England on the 27th June.Only 2 non-British subjects travelled by airfrom isbon on that ate. One was Dutch,Catalogue Reference:KV/4/194184named MAAS-GESTERANUS, who until recently washead of the Dutch I.S. in Lisbon. Up tillnow there has been no question of his loyalty,but he has recently been sent home either forinefficiency or indiscretion. We are makingfurther enquiries about this. The seoondnon-British tr veller was the Swiss courierRudolf HAFTER. This man has been goingregularly for the last year or 18 monthstravelling on an average once a week. Orangeconsiders him to be reliable, and if hetravels SO frequently it would not be necessafor him to have undergone a training insecret writing as he could carry his informatioin his head. It is quite possible that wemay once more be dealing with one of Brandes'notional set-ups.Dick, Curry,Hollis Hollis and I had a talk aboutthe future of Curry's section in SIS. Currysaid t at the tendency was to put it backwith Section V. I said that 1 did not thinkthat this, from a purely SIS point of view,was illogical, since any Section V. agentsabroad,if properly instructed and the rightsort of people, should be able to coverboth subversive movements and .E. On theother hand discussions were going on withArnold-Foster and his view seemed to bethat in some way or another both Section Vand ourselves should be amalgamated. It wasan open question whether we should go to SISor Sis come to us.I had a long talk with Arnold-oster. It wasfairly clear L think that he had been givingCatalogue Reference:kV/4/194considerablethe future of his5office and ours and how the obvious difficul-ties of the present organisation could beremedied. When therefore the offer was madeto him to come and visit our dept. he acceptedit with pleasure. He thought that if betweenourselves we could agree on how the twodepts. could come together it would be difficulfor any outside body to oppose our solution.He quite realised however that we might differ.He did not intend to submit any report to theFO Committee or in fact to anyone withoutshowing it to us. The cardinal plank inhis platform is that it is absolutely essentialthat the investigating body responsible forkeeping British territory cle n of enemy agentsand So on should have the fullest possibleinformation available from foreign sources.He does not see how it is possible for us toget this information unless we are actuallya part of SIS. I see. the force of this argu-ment in practice,but when I put the point tothe D.G. later, all he said was "Why not?".The real answer is that psychologicallysecret service depts. are disinclined to dis-close detailed information about their infor-mants and about how they obtain a piece ofinformation to anyone outside their dept.Arnold-Foster seemed to think that some sortof rump should be left which would constituteMI5, but L could get no cle r view Brom himas to what this should consist of. His ideawas that it should act as a kind of bufferbetween SIS and outside depts. I told himthat I did not see how an ematiated MI5 ofthis sort could really serve any useful pur-pose and I also warned himagainst shuttinghimself up in a box and refusing to communi-Catalogue cate Reference:KV14/194 to selected people186in govt.depts. In the long run these depts.could absolutely stymie one's activities.It was necessary on occasion totell thema great deal in order to get their co-opera-tion. I also told him that if he were con-sidering the transfer of B and P Divisionshe would have to include O.C. and probablyR. C. and M. S He thought this would probably benecessary and expressed the view that afterthe war defence security would probablybe to a large extent decentralised, thedominions and possibly the colonies being maderesponsible for their armaments. This wouldmean that places like Australia would have tohave their own secret service directed againstthe Japs. I said that this would necessitateclose liaison and at the same time sometingin the nature of an Empire clearing-house.It was rather on these lines that we had beenreviewing our dominion and colonial organisa-tion.We then discussed the ministerial question.Isaid that we both served most govt. depts.and were in fact responsible to those depts.for the work which we did on their behalf.tIt seemed therefore illogical that ve shouldhave a minister other than either the Ministerof Defence or the PM. Arnold-Foster thoughtthat the Minister of Defence might throw theemphasis too much on the military side but didnot quarrel with the idea of the PM. I saidthat our Permanent Under-Secretary could bethe Secretary of the War Cabinet or in peacetime the Secretary of the C.1.D. E had alwaysCatalogue ReferEnCe:KVI4/19418wondered precisely how it was that SIS hadthe Foreign Sevretary as their representative.Presumably the idea was that as they functionabroad they must be under the Foreign Minister.I did not however think that this argumenthad been a good one. I explained to him thatas we were at present constituted we shouldnormally havemore say in the direction ofcounter-espionage activities abroad. Thereason was that the D.G. was ultimatelyresponsible for keeping the country clearof enemy agents. C.D. and counter-subversivemovements began abroad but we had no controlover these activities. If it were found thatthere were 10 enemy agents in 10 govt.depts.in this country who had been working here for4 years, it would be idle for the D.G. to saythat C. had not told him about their prepara-tion and arrival. He would be told th t hewas responsible and should have succeded inlocating them, although the best means fordoing So normally, attacking the problemabroad, were not at nis disposalI then spoke about liakson with our oppositenumbers in foreign countries and said thatif you did not have a separte offensive ancedefensive organisation but lumped them bothinto one integrated organisation, this wasalways likely to be regarded with some suspicidThis was particularly evident in the USAThey did not like SIS because they found thatthey had been making enquiries in theircountry, about matters which they did notthink were our concern. SIS had moreoverbeen running agents i the USA. When dealingwith us they felt they were in touch with aCatalogue Reference:KVI4/19418tdept. which was purely a defensive one withno offensiv intentions.+ This made liaisonmuch smoother and more effective. Heagreed that this was a point for seriousconsideration. L said that if the combinationbetween defensive and offensive were made, itwould be necessary for the defensive organisatito have some sort of footing in Sis ratheron the analogy of the fotting of the FightingServices. On this he went back to hisold theme that unless we were absorved by SIShe did not think we should have get realsatisfaction. He asked me to keep an open mindon this question. L said tht th L would certain-ly do SO but that I thought that totalamalgamation was an arguable proposition, butL doubted whether the transfer of eertainsections of the office and the leaving behindof an emaciated M. M.I.5 would be really peasible.I then passed Arnold-Foster on to Dick whowent over Nith him fairly carefully theground covered by B.Division. He is coming tosee TAR'S outfit tomorrow.July 6thattended a meeting at Norfolk House todiscuss security measures connected with BigBen. H.O. had pointed out that unless a totalstoppage of all travel were imposed in additionto the censorship measures, it would not bepossible to reconsider an extension of the banafter 48 hours Dt was gener'ally agreed bythe meeting that there were two propositions,one to prevent the information eaching theenemy for 48 hours and the other to preventCatalogue ReferenCe:KV/4/194aany information leaving this country for 46hours. Under (1) the measures previouslysuggested would probably be quite adequatesince for example any information carried bya traveller to Eire would not be likely toreach the Germans for about 6 days. The AirMinistry and the Ops Branch of the N.O. werevery insistant that all information shouldbe prevented from leaving this country for48 hours, and that the position shouldthen be reconsidered. They pointed outthat if the enemy only fired one or two rangingshots every 24 hours to begin with, itwould be very important to prevent him fromknowing just here they had la ded until someeounter-measure could be put into operation.These counter-measures would consist in bomb-ing the sites, and in jamming any RDF whichwas locating the point of impact. There were3 ways in which the vermans could obtain theinform tion (a) by reede(b) by RDF and (c)by leakage. The Air Ministry did not thinkthat it would be possible to hold Va) and (b)indefinitely and this Nould be a limitingfactor on the period for which the ban couldusefully be maint ined. it was decided toput forward to the Cabinet the two proposi-tions outlined above and to point out to themthat the first one was easy and would meanno drastic modification of the existing regula-tions other than the imposition of the diplo-matic on, and that the seocond would causeconsiderable dislocation for a period of 48hours and that any further extension would bea serious meance to the efficiency of ourwhole war machine. Findlater Stewart said hecould not get this matter before the CabinetCatalogue Reference:KV/4/194tomorrow and he thought that should anythinghappen in the meantime some machinery shouldbe laid on for holding every thing for amatter of 6-12 hours until the Cabinet hadmade up their minds. Individual ministerswould have to take the responsibility forthis at the suggestion of their depts.Cussen has told me about the worst Overlordleakage case that has so far come to light.App rently in March last M.O.I. sent a mapof the target area to the British vice-consulin the Faroes, who is a Norwegian, instructinghim to withhold it from the press until w.day.Precisely what the covering letter was we donot yet know. The map was opened by anintelligent secretary ho,seeing the implcationlocked it up in the safe and said nothingabout it to her Chief. the question arises asto how the M.O.I. knew anything about thetarget area bt all, what led them to send themap to the vice-consul in the Faroes, andwhether they did in fact send these maps toother consular officials. My own view is thatwe should get a mandate to investigate thismatter. If it is left to the M.O.I. we shallever get at the true facts. the first thingis to obtain the covering letter and the envel-ope in which the map was despatched throughthe open post. Findlater came over to see themap this evening. He thinks the case is areally bad one and should be investigatec bythe Security Serivce on Bridges' authority.If the case is, as it appears prima facie, itis enough to blow the whole M.O.I. sky high.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/194I showed Findlater and the D.G. a copy ofAlva's despatch obt ined by Duck in whichit was stated that he had jdined withJohn Anderson who had disclosed to himinformation about mulberries. This wasapparently done on the oth June. Boththought that this constituted a bad leakbut there is L think a certain reluctanceto bring it to the notice of John Anderson.July 7tZIGZAG has started to transmit. At the momentit is intended that he should be stationedin London in order to earry out deception inconnection with flying bombs.A discussion took place at Norfolk House onJuly 4th at which TAR was present in orderto discuss deception in connection withCrossbo. Up to the present 80% or more ofthe bonbs have fallen south of the river andthe greatest concentration apart fromparticular areas like Wandsworth and Croydonis towards the east. In view of this the-Air Ministry are of opinion that we shouldbase our deception on what appears to bean error in the enemy's present calculationsand protect Whitehall and central London byleading him to suppose that his bombs areover-shooting and falling towards the northand west. He may thus be led to shorten hisrange so that the main concentration is shiftedstill further towards the east and south. TheMinistry of War Pruduetion raise no objeetionto this policy. Theirfactories are fairlycatalogue Reference:kv/4/fg4g the London areaand there is as much in the centre as on thefringe. The approval of the Ministry ofHome security,whio is affected in much thesame way, has also been obtained. Ourmethod for doing this will be that when abomb falls south of the river, the time whenit explodes will be given for the explosion ofa bomb which has fallen to the north, andvice versa. Dombs which fall in the centreof London will be report accurately sincethey may be mentioned by diplomats in theirtelegrams. Similar misleading informationis passed over by adding or tracting 25%of the wind-force and one-tenth of the cloudco er. This plan may work up to a pointbut it has to be borne in mind that a cross-section of all the bombs that f all in bondonis probably being applied by the Germans bymeans of certain of these flying-bombs whichemit wireless signals. These ptottings mayshow a concentration on Mandsworth,Croydonor Kensington, and theGermans may rely on theseto adjust their fire so that they Will fallin Piccadilly Cireus quite irrespeetive ofthing that we report. However since thesecalculations wouldnon be a cross-sectionthere would be a considerable margin of error.Our misleading information might thereforeconfuse the picture still more. They mustbe making use of our recordings since they areso insistant on getting them.Civil Affairs reports from No'rm ndy are to theeffect th t the civil administrator generallyis satisfactory but that in some cases theCatalogue Reference:KV/4/194French are rather cool in their attitudetowards civil affairs detachments. Two actorsconplicate the feeling of the local popula-tion (1) war destruction which in some casesis considered to exceed the necessity of-the military itution and (2) that largeelements of the population are making consider-able profits under German administration. Thesupply situation is being helped by the useof captured German stores and horses.The supply of labour is at present adequatebut there may be a shortage in a few weeks.ACAction is being t ken by the French authoritiesto segregate French civilian Todt workersand provide for their reorganisatior as Frenchpioneer battallions. Refugees are beingdispersed as they arrive but the camps arewell organised for possible emergencies. AllFrench ewspapers have been suspended pendingenquiries.I spoke to Stopford about the future of hisorganisation, when he goes to the Channel Is.and also in the event of his going later toGermany. He said that he was quite hard-pressed. I suggested tnat Michael Rydemight be put completely in his picture as hewas going to work in B. la for the time being.I had the idea that this would help to co-ordin-ate the activities of .IL and B. B.1A. It mighttoo be possible for Ryde to look after theaccounts, which re too much for Elton, who isalready overburdened. Stopford told me aboutthe case of JOSEPH, who is being worked inconjunction ith the FBI. Joseph is based onLiverpool or Glasgow. He has a notion 1 agentCatalogue efereACe:RVi4/19Ain San Diego on14the Pacific coast, whom it is hoped mayget into direct touch with the Japs by wire-less. There is.also a scheme for the recruitingof a notional wireless operator who isproceeding to Kandy. This man will be fedwith information by Peter Feming.I talked to Curry about Miss Sherer joininghis section. Ne agreed that in view ofrecent developments it would be unwise forher to engage in any work which constitutedduplication of effort. If on the other handthere was work for her to do which would beof value after the amalgamation she would bevery keen to do it. Curry sid he would havea talk with her. His second book on theAbwehr and S.D. is now completed and will goto the printers shortly.Charles,Dick,Butler and I had I meeting onpost-war planning. We put Charles fully inthe picture. We all agreed that it would benecessary to go rather further than the D.G.Smemo although we thought that as far as theywent his views were sound. His thesis is thatSIS should merely be a collecting bodyand that alt the recording,dir andaction should be centralised in this office.He is also hotly in favour of the G C & C Sbeing separated from SIS and run as anindependent body with a committee consistingof members of the users depts:Anvil is now definitely on but we do not knowwhat the number of divisions is to be.Alexanderis at present in this country. There hasCatalogue Rererehce:KV14/194or Anvil by a navaloffider who has told some woman that he isgoing to the Mediterranean to take part inanother invasion.July 8thI dined with Findlater last night. One had along discussion about the future of MI5/6.I told him everything that was going on andin particular what Arnold-Foster was doing.Findlater thought that the proposal that SISshould take over B and F divisions did notmake any sense at all.Quiteapartfromquestions affecting the efficiency of SIS asas organisation, the capability of its direct-ing heads to manage even what they had gotlet along something more was doubtful. Hethought in fact that G C. &c C S should beseparated from SIS and agreed that it shouldbe runnby a committee of all the user depts.He did not think that total amglgamation wasa feasible proposition. He thought that itwould be opposed on political grounds,andthat such an organisation vould be too unweildyHe much preferred our idea of an offensiveand defensive service involving theabolition of the 3 mile limit. As regardsministerial direction he felt that both depts.should be under the same ministerial head andthat the only suitable person would be eitherthe minister of Defence or the PM. On theUnder-Secretary of State level they would workto the chief of the War Cabinet or in peace timthe he d of the CID. He thought it essentialbb have some person in authority such asBridges and ultimately the PM to knock theCatalogue Reference:RV4/192 tions together if96this proved necessary. I put forward to himmy pet scheme for a permanent. civil branchin each Service Intelligence Directorate withpossibilities of promotion throughout theseorganisations also SIS and ourselves. Heseemed from taken with this idea. He sadthat the war had shown him the need for it andindeed had shown in general that permanentcivil staffs who had the right sort ofexperience and could give eontinuity be thework were essential thoughout all branchesof the Services. Endless dislocations hadresulted from the constant comings and goingsof the Servoce personnel in a whole varietyof branches. He regarded the MilitaryIntelligence Directorate as a somewhat uselessbody. They initiated very little,i anything,themselves, in SO far as the collection ofinformation was concerned and were much moreinclined to collect intelligence for the sakeof collecting it and not to turn it toproper use. I said that I felt the principalfault had been that military intelligencethought much more of collecting reports fromall possible sources than of studying theproblems of the soldiers in the field andseeing how far they could be of assistanceto them. I told Findlater that I thoughtArnold-Foster was honestly try ing to find asolution to a very difficult problem andthat he had some hopes of getting an agreedproposition. It might be that after he hadtaken a look at the whole of f'our organisationhe would considerably modify or radicallyalter his present proposals, which so fardiffered widely from our own. I was inclinedtataiogirekreference:kvi4/1g4er would in the endbe a very wide gap between us and that itwould be necessary for some impartial authorityto arbitrate. I wondered therefore whetherhe would be prepared to take on such a jobas I could think of no one who would inspiregreater confidence. He said that he was quiteconvinced that a detailed investigation intothe activities of all the Intelligence Serviceswould be essential and that it was a job thathe would have great pleasure in under-taking. I said that if any such suggestionwere made it could nd very well come from us.He said that when the appropriate moment camehe thought that probably it would be best forhim to put the idea to Sir John Anderson orto Bridges or possibly to both. He would thinkhowever very carefully over what I had saidbut would do nothing until I let him knowwhat conclusions Arnold-Foster had finallyreached. He had met Arnold-Foster an oneoccasion when he dined with him and Rookerof the Cabinet Offices. The occasion wassome kind of dispute between SIS and SOE. Hegot the impression that Arnold-Foster was farfrom satisfied with his own organisation.I t lked with TAR this morning and told himthe sug estion that Michael Ryde should lookafter BALL in Stopford's absence. He seemedto think that this would provide a satisfac-tory solution. He told me that Garbo hasbeen notionally arrested for poking his nosetoo deeply into buildings damaged by fly -bombs.This was reported by his deputy to the Germanswho are in a terrible state. Garbo will bereleased in a week's time. The main purposecafalogue RefereHeevt4/ig4provide an excuseTHISIS ACOPY THISORIGINAL DOCINDEPARTMENT UNEH3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSlsACT 1958.Mar leodfor liguidating some of Garbo's 27 sub-agents.He-will plead that-this-is necessary i viewof the possible vigilence of the authorities.The anoeuvre will have a subsidiary purposein reliving Garbo to some extent of thenecessity to report fly-bomb damage.Charles Cholmondeley showed me some MSS todayichindiates that on the 30th June Rundstedstill believed in an attack in the-second haof July on the Pas de Calais by Patton's Army..This idea of Patton's Army has been entirelyput t-across-by Garba: across Garba: The fact is of coursethat there is no such army. Patton's-Armyis a phrase that is also used by the Germanswhen discussing the military Situation withthe -J.aps. Units-which-notionallyforn-partof Patton's Army are now appearing in thefield and deception is going on which willprovideraplausible excus providera plausible excuse. The total numberof German tanks in Franceat hemomentisestimated at 630.Italked-to:today-. todayHe-saidthat e-saidthathe situation in Italy. is very unSatisfactoryfrom the C. point of view. All members ofthe SCI unit wereup in nome. There appearedto be no coverage inthe south of Italyatallfrom an IB point of view. Hill-Dillon isobviously trying to cash in on the number ofspies andsaboteurs -that-have+been-caught. T:fact is that a number of them gave themselvesup and that the remainder were caught as aresult of the activities of D.I.M., the italiarorganisation. wanted-to-initiate-someCatatogueikieferencetkw/4/guar services but wasrevented fron doing SO by Hill-Dillon whoiaawished to use the SCI units for the purpose ofinterrogation: They-are-ofcourse not qualified in to carry out interrogations.Jarvis who is by way of controlling things froN.Africa was a nice chap but hopelessly woollyVictor has at last got permission to go toRome. Meanwhile i see from the Times thatthe dump of. bombs faunduinnthet German Emtsyhaveabeen-thrown-into-th have been into the e-Tiber. letterfrom Victor indicates that allied armies inItaly were mainly responsible for not lettinghim in earlier although they might havedonethis-at_theinstigation.ofh-D. this-att the instigationof H-D. There is nodoubt that the situation in Italy from the IBpoint of vlew 1S eminently unsatisfacboryand-doubtless-nobody-responsible-elcones-thepresence of an intelligent observer: theposition has been complicated by: the proposedmove of AFHQ, to Italy. This elephantinebody-consists-of-4,00-office and O.RliidasThe Yanks have got their way and Anvilisto-consist of some-0-divisions-drawn-fAlexander's forces.Barry and Burley came to see me about theemployment-ofRussian Todt workers and Germanand Austrian P/Ws on pioneer duties, in thiscountry. I said L sawno objection from thesecurity pointof view. Itseemed-howeverthat the FO should be consulted about theRussian Todt workers.L attendeda meeting at -Norfolk House toatafogifeerelefencer4/194 decision about thevisitor's ban. It seems that the H.O. inanticipation of a favourable answer from theCabinet had already told the police thatthey were to turn a blind eye to people whohad entered the protected area in order to getaway from fly-bombs. This has got round andthere is now a question in the House onthe relaxation of restrictions. it was pro-posed that an announcement should be madestating that the priveleged categoriesie.mothewith children of school age, pregnant mothers,aged and infirm, and invalid and blind, andgrounds of children, should be allowed to goto protected areas under the Govt. evacuationscheme. It is to be made clear that they willreside in these areas. Visitors ban is not tobe modified for 10 days in order to allow thebombed-out people to get accommodation beforevisitors and holiday makers can go to thearea. The H.0. have in fact rather bouncedthe committee, alth they were doubtless ina difficult position. All the other relaxa-tions have been accepted and it has beenagreed that travel abroad and toEire shouldbe held until the lst August. The openingof the Swedish and Irish air lines is alsoto be considered on the Ist August.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/194oJuly 9thCaptain Hartogg, 3. b. W.O. Extension 220,rang me up today to say that he had to givea reply to the Chiefs of Staff in 10 minutestime on the question of security in Mid Eastand particularly in Turkey. What he reallywanted to know was whether, if the Turkscame into the war and we had to concert planswith them, what would be the chances of theseplans coming to the notice of the enemy.I said that in SO far as Mid East was concernedthis was really a question for SIME to answer,and that if Turkey in particular was inquestion SIS should give an opinion. From mygeneral knowledge I should say that thechances of leakage in Turkey were extremelyhigh, and that the SIME area was to say theleast difficult to control. It might bethought that with the addition of certainmeasures they could hold the position fairlywell at least for a time. The chances howeverof a leak in Turkey would have to be envisagedat an early stage. I spoke to Arnold Fosterwho agreed with this estimate of the position.We have received a paper from FindlaterStewart setting out the various restrictionsthat it would be necessary to impose if it Nereconsidered desirable to prevent any informationregarding Big Ben leaving the country for 48hours. It was agreed at the meeting that pend-ing a decision by the Cabinet, individualdepts. should take the responsibility for layingon these measures. They comprise a completehold-up of all communications, diplomatic orotherwise, and a cessation of travel exceptCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1942pdon compassionate grounds. I communicated withNoble,D.4. and andgave gave him allthe restridtiioswhich would apply to SCOS. Ialso-arrangedwitTjaden b6 HDE that we should be informed byMinistry of Home Security immediately Big Benstarted. NDO DO-has has instructions-to-inform meand also NDO Blenheim for Noble.0:udley-Clarke has drawn up a report on theeffect ofhis-deception-policy-in-the-MidEast. The Allied Armies in Italy haveecently captured a large number of enemyintelligence documents relating.tor our orderof battle. Since mos.t of theseemanate fromthe German N.0. it has been possible from ananalysis to assess the German High Lommand'v.iew. ofourstrength-inth Mediterraneantheatre including PAIC up to a's recently asthe 28th May 1944. 0O The figures of competedivisions are as follows: There were 38 completdivisions,wh which udley-Clarke-built up-to-64,The Germans estimate was 71 thas showing anexaggeration of about 85% of our strength. By.including-unallotted-units-and-fornationbelow. divisional strength, the relative figuresamount to a total equivalent in dividions to51, as per Dudley-Clarke deception plan 70,ndiasper nd as the Germans:.7 Thisshowsagrossexaggeration of about 50% of our strength:These figures indicate that deception in the:Mediterraneanare has been-as successfulour own.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/194THISIS A COPY303RIGINAL DOCUMENT RETATNEDNDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION8(4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSKuly l0th1958 Mot 200ooLas.t week Dan notified usthat-REILLY one-ofthe Irish parachutist spies dropped in Eire,had escaped. He rather stupidly went home,and-his father, who is an-ex-RIC man, gave himup to the Garda but has refused the rewardfor his capture.Acharacter named- who-has-been-well-known to us for some time as an agent vorkingin the German I.S., has been captured inNormandy. He is to be brought backes to thiscountry and may subsequentlybe DA.emgrafKenneth Younger was the only British officerprivilegedato be presentat trialtoftwo twoFrenchmen at Cherbourg who confessed to beingGerman spies. These two youths peaded thatthey were given the alternative of: joining theGerman Germanserviceor lan service-or being-sentato-work-irGermany They. chose the former but protestedthat they had never had any intention ofdoing doing-anyzthing. They-were- anything. They TheyWere given life sentences.Kenneth has written a long letter in whichhe points out various difficulties arising inFrance due etothe to the fact actthat-there-is-nooivi that there-is-no eivilaffairs organisation at Army Group.e There areapparently Civil. aff irs officers With armiesouttheiractivities-are notberywell co-ordin-ated and theyare_not erypopular with, theFrench authorities. The Americans are a bitwild and have enlisted a whole host of civiliansmanyofwhom-ere-bona -fide-refugees.and-handed-themove to the French authorities forPataloguelReferenceskw4a194. Monsieur Coulethas given instructions that no one is to be204taken unto custody by the gendarmerie unlessit is thought there are substanti 1 grounds forSo doing. This is of course in a sense aninfringement of the agreement by which in thezone of the armies the army writ is the onlyone which runs. On the other hand M. Coulet'scomplaints against the Americ ns appea to befully justified.Apart from these difficulties,and Kenneth'susual moan that he has got nothing to do, thingsseem to be working out quite satisfactorilyaccording to the C. instructions which weredra wn up here. Niall MacDermott appears to bea little too impetuous and has on one or twooccasions come rather nea to getting acrossboth the French and the hmericans. Kennethhowever appears to be a steadying influence,and steady reasoning has got Niall to agreeto his point of view. It may possibly benecessary for Diek to go out.I had a talk with Teresa Clay about the MaritaCase. Jack is rather beginning to get intodifficulties. A stage of the war has beenreached where he has got to express somerather definite views about the future. Thereis a tendency amongst the 5th column to attri-bute Germany's defeat to treachery by theGenerals. This is a question of course onwhich Jack in his role of Gestapo agent, shouldbe informed. We decided that he should quotethe instance of Rundstedt's departure, explainthat of course the generals are not party men anthat although loyal to their country they havenot got the same fanaticism as party members.Catalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/194It is for this reason that Himmler is graduallyextending his control. He is further to saythat defeat, although not yet a fait accompli,must be regarded as a possibility, and that itis therefore important that his followers shouldtake no overt action which would spoil theirchances of reforming and playing their partin the preparation for the next war.Roger Hollis dined with me He has justread Whitson's report on the communist movementin USA which he says is extremely interesting.The Russians apparently have a clandestinewireless set in New York and another in SanFrancisco. These are in touch with each otherand also with Moscow. The trouble is thatwe are in duty bound not to pass this informatioto SIS, as it has been given to us under thestrictest bond of secrecy. It may be that ifwe had the monitoring of these services or thetimes and frequencies that we could break themessages.July lthI have today gone into the question of payfor officers in B.Division. There are alarge number of anomalies, due to some peoplereceiving their salaries taxed,s some untaxed,and also due to RSLOs and DSOs being paid farhigher rates than officers in control ofsections. I have suggested that RSLOS andDSOs should have a basic rate plus allowancesand that it should be made clear to them thatas soon as they relinquish their jobs theywill go back to their basic rate withouteataogueseference.kV/4/194 think consideringwewith Horrocks some form of grading for officerspay. Personally I am a little doubtful aboutthis as a rigid sy stem is extremely difficultto operate in an organisation like this. Thegrading system for the female staff whilehaving certain advantages, has many disadvan-tages. A further difficulty in the matter ofofficer's pay is that when they get a highsalary for doing a specific job they arenaturally reluctant to accept and reductionand may very well walk out in consequence.There is nothing to prevent an officer fromleaving the dept. at ny time, except the factthat he may incur the displeasure of the D.G.TSEUAOREANTHISISACOPYRETAINEDORIGINAL IN 3 DEPOF THE PUBLIC RECORDS DEPARTMENT PUBLIC RECORDSSECTIONACT (4) OF 1958. THE0The case of STYLES has gone forward to the JAG.It is a huge dossier containing about 100 state-ments and it may be possible to stage a pro-secution under the Treachery Act even beforea number of witnesses return to this country:.Burt thiks that STYLES is mental.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/19427Joe Lynch has just telephoned to say that Hooverwants me to go to America: On the other handit seems that Whitson is eventually to be sentto this country.Three French and three American divisions arebeing used for Anvil, Alexander to receivetwo new American divisions in exchange. Heapparently feels that he will be able tobring his campaggn in Italy to a success-ful conclusion in spite of this.The port of Cherbourg is gradually beingcleared. It is now said thit all. theGerman armour in France is engaged. There isstill however a reluctance to Withdraw anyof the other divisions from the coast 1 belton the continent.There is a rumour that doodlebugs are now beingfired from Belgium and coming up the ThamesEstuary. We have during the last 24 hoursbeen pretty successful in shooting them down.Only 33% reach the London area;July 12thAt the weekly meeting Noakes said that threeFrench agents who have been trained by the 8thBrandenburg division have arrived at -20.They have given the names of a number ofpeople who trained with them.Miall MacDermott is back from France. Hebrought with him a letter from Kenneth Yaungerto Speight of the F.O. suggesting that, hemight have some job for him as he fet that inCatalogue Reference:KV/4/194Loshis present position he was not really pullinghis weight. According to Niall he is doingextremely well and the French and Americansboth like him. He will have plenty to do whenthe 2lst Army Group headquarters istestablishedin toto on the continent. I have told Dickto tell him that it is of the highest importancethat he should remain where he is both fromthe point of view of the prestige of the officeand the work that he is doing. Dick has toldNiall that he should do everything he can toretain Kenneth as he thinks that as a pair theyact as check on each other's fults. Niall isa little too impetuous and-Kenneth a little toocautious.Russian Tedt workers are in future to be treatedas P/Ws. Any other Russians not in uniformwillfgothrough the LRC and be held until theRussian Govt. claims them.Cheney came to tell me that there were a certainnumber of Americans, J.S.citizens and P. Americanarriving with a party of British epatriatesfrom Germany. I ascertained from Joe Lynchthat Clay ton had been in touch With Warnerof the American Embassy. It had beendecided that these Americans should be keptin Liverpool pending their shipment to theUSA. They will be examined by a repatriationcommittee in Lisbon. S. Americans will go tothe LRC.I saw Curry today. apparently Viv. is ratherconcerned that the FBI do not appear to begiving much exchange information to Ev ans ofCatalogue Reference:kV4/194He rather wished meto throw out some sort of hint of this toHoover- I dod not say much but I have nointention of doing nything of the kind. Thefact is that as long as B.ill Stephenson isthere the FBI never will give any informationto BSC which is of any value and by takingup the cudgels on behalf of SIS I can onlyjeopardise our good relations which have beencarefully fostered by Cyril Mills. thelatter has just obtained an extremelyinteresting document on the American Pitwhich unfortunately we are prevented fromshowing to SIS.Gen.Pile gave an off the record talk to thepress on the flying bomb. He told them thatabout 8 months ago he was summoned by the PMto discuss the possibilities of a Germanrocket attack on Britain. That was about allour Intelligence people could say at the time.They did not know the speed, numbers, bomb-loador ceiling of the flying bombs.On the basis ofthis very sparse information Pile was asked todevise A. .A.defences. At the same time the PMtold him to devise a 2nd plan to cover ourinvasion ports and communication lines.Plan 1 was put into operation immediately, butas months passed and the attack did not developPile was told to move his guns down to thecoast to cover our invasion forces. When theattack came therefore the guns,wer all thewnong place. A few days after D.day he wastold that 6 flying bombs were on their wayfrom the coast of France and heading inland.Later another 36 were launched. He thereforeCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1942loordered that Plan 1 should come into operationimmediately. There were difficulties and delaysdue to the fact that the guns were dispersedalong the coast. He had great difficultyin bring them across the second front lines ofsupply,but succeeded in doing SO within aperiod of 24 hours. Under Plan 1 batterieswere ranged on the high ground along the NorthDowns. Having got them there, the PM toldPile that it had been decided to use theNorth Downs for a balloon barrage. Whilemore than 2,000 balloons were being broughtup to the area, Pile's men vere franticallysearching for new sites. A number werechosen but later found to be unsuitable. theywere either too near factories, too near fighterzones or well off the bomb lanes. Others wereswamped by heavy rain-storms. Much time waswasted and all complained that they had spentmore time on the roads than on the sites. Therocket guns were found to be useless. The onlyanswer was precision firing and speed. Threenew forms of equipment are needed for this,the new American radar set, a number 11 fuse,and some appliance which would stabilise thembbile guns. All were eventually obtainedncluding a special mattress for the purposeof stabilising the guns. It is hoped to get90% of the raiders down before reaching Londonby uns,fighters and palloons. According toPile the fighters got altogehther 450 in thefirst fortnight while the guns destroye ed 240.On good day s fighters have got 80% of theraiders. This I think is somewhat of anexaggeration. On bad days more than 40% brokethrough to the London area. There is a goodatalogueireference.kV4/192 atalogue London guns. Onlya little over 10% of the machines are beingdestroyed by guns in the air. Pile thinksit would pay us to open fire in London. Onthe other hand he admits that people in southLondon who would be most affected might havea few words to say about the AA gun ners.They would say "Shift your guns to northLondon. We have had enough". N. London wouldin turn say "Why bring them here. Let themeither pass over or take them over the riverPile concluded WWe have never been reallypopular figures. little bad shootingin London and we would become Public Enemy No. 1"He nevertheless believes that London shouldbe given a chance.Crossbow report for 9th July st tes that a newfeature has been discovered in one bomb, aknife-edge cable-cutter in the leading edgeof the wing covered by a thin fairing. Thecutter is considered to be of an inferiortype. In The case of a balloon cable apparentlysevered by a cable-cutter is being examined.It has not yet been finally establishedwhether launching is by means of rocket orcatapult. There is however definite evi-dence that permanganate solution which isused to decompose hydrogen-peroxide in atwo-liquid rocket is being sent from thedepots in the Paris area to the launching sitearea. Since the two liquids are in use inthe main propulsive unit it almost certainlyfollows that they are used in the initiallaunching sy stem. 2% of the bombs launchedeither detonate on the launching rails or ata short distance in front of them. There isCatalogue ReferenCe:KV/4/194912no evidence that any of the original ski-sitesare in use. All but 5 of them have sufferedCat.A damage. Of the modified sites 85 havebeen identified, 67 have been completed, 17have received Cat. damage, and the numbercompleted and operational is estimated at 50.The number known to have fired is 56, 15 ofthem have received Cat.A damage. Of those notcompleted, 5 have received Cat. damage. In-vestigation of sites in the peninsula revealsthat they are easy to repair and that it isdifficult to inflict permanent damage on them.Four of the supply sites in the operational beltin .France have been damaged to such a largeextent as to make them unusable. It is not yetclear however that that their destruction haseaused any dimunution in the seale of attack.Their depots at Nacourt and St.-eu have beenattacked. The damage done at St. Leu has causeda reduction in the scale of effort. Repairsare proceeding energetically. The Germans areincreasing thair AA defences in this area.There is no indication that attacks on head-quarters or on theat woulens haveinterfered with the telephone system sufficient-ly to cause the enemy to use W/T. Theeadquarters of the DF system for followingthe siting shots has probably been found. Itis in Amiens and has been argetted for attack.This information was supplied by ZIGZAG. Nonew evidence has been acquired either to proveor disprove an agent's report that stocks ofbombs in mid-June were 8,500 and the productionwas of the order of 1, 200 per month.The existence of the large rocket veapon is nowestablished beyonddoubt.Catalogue Reference:KV14/19but the stage towhich it had been deveoped is not yet known.Experimental launches continue and at least 7missiles were fired between 7th and 30th June.Parts of such a weapon are benng examined inSweden. These are eonsistent with the largerocket, probably radio-controlled. +he use ofaluminium pipes in the fuel system as in theglider bomb indicates that hydrogen peroxideis probably used. A large rocket has been ffound on photographs of the s. camp at Debicein Poland which has been working closelywith Peenemunde. Reports have been redeivedfrom the Polish Intelligence Service whichpoint strongly to a large radio-contoolledrocket with a range of 200 or more kilometres.Considerable damage has been inflicted on largesites at Watten, Siracourt,Mimoyecques andWizernes. In spite of the inspectior of thelarge sites captured at Sottevast there isstill no firm indication that they are in factrocket projectors. It seems probable howeverthat they are intended for bulk storage oflarge rockets. A report from a prisoner indi-cates that the launching mechanism may well bemuch simpler than was formerly thought, andthat construction of launching points andstorage dumps may have started some months ago.Van HOVE was executed this momring, his appealhaving failed.July 13thI saw Maxwell today on the subject of ZIGZAG.He agreed to his position being regularised andis taking out documents his own name. AsCatalogue Reference:KV14/1949u9regards the possibility of a pardon he said hewas doubtful since if he remembered right itwas laiddown in the Dill-( of Rights that- theKing could not pardon a man who had not beenup on trial. On the other hand he said thatobviously if ZIGZAG were taken into custodywe should take steps immediately to get himout and it was necessary to use the HomeSecretary.'s name. If we were in difficultieswe could tell the police to communicate withMaxwell. I have told Ian Wilson to ascertainprecisely what charges lie against ZIGZAG. Wemight then consider an approach to the CCsconcerned and ask them 1whether.-they-woul-be prepared to drop the idea of a prosecutionMeanwhile it was necessary for us to lay on somemachinery by which, if ZIGZAG getsinto gets into troubleIan Wilson can get to work on the job at theearliest possible moment. The great thing isto prevent a charge being preferred. Once thathappens it is always difficultif-not-impossibleto get it back-pedalled. Maxwell is veryintrigued by the whole story.There is a move by Kenneth Strong to get Dickas a G.1 at SHAEF under Sheen. L haveid that, inconvenent as this would be, Iwould be prepared to let-hin go provided thereis realiy a job for him to do in the nationalinterest. As I see it and as Dick has pointedout it is really-a waste of 2 high-grade-securitintelligence officers; if Maunsell is to beappointed in the capacity of a brigadier surelyhe can look after SHAEF'S IB policy until thearmistice. If--on the other- hand Dick is to-goCatalogue in employment there Reference, and Cue Maunse to be found gaXXR some act with other215any real force unless he is in charge. KennethStrong gather is rather feeling the draughton the IB side and appears-t to be consciousof the fact that IB has shown serious deficien-cies in N.Africa and Italy.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDOIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958. eodThe RSIC meeting which was held on 6.7.44 hasdrawnattention to -the fact that owing-to-lack lackof staff RSS have had to drop a number ofservices. 8 months ago they were taking 10,00(messages-per fortnight. This-w was too much andgroups had to be e_dropped. In November they. wereintercepting 13,000 when a further grouphad to go and in March 14,000, when the W/Tnetwork of the Brandenburg Division haa toLater the Sofia network was dropped and theAegeans only just spared. GC &eCS say thatforeryptographic purposes coverage is now atthe irreducible. minimum. - The present difficultyof coverage is essentially to ensure the con-tinuance of the present supply of de-codesand a higher degree of coverage mignt oncertain current services alleviate cryptographicdifficulties. All W/T forwarding routes haveCatalogue Reference:KV/4/194216to be covered in order to provide a steadyflow of groups from one cypher system toanother. Small assessments of coverage ofoperationall unimportant W/T links mightresult in the collapse of much of the decypher-ing of Abwehr traffic. Maltby said tht 150more operators would be required and that hedoubted whether this could come into operationfor 9 months. The conference felt they couldnot rely on the war ending soon and thatsomething ought to be done now. Some ofstay-behind agents at present engaged inpractice traffic may be instructed soon tobegin operational traffic, the intereeptingand reading of which may be of tactical oreven strategic importance. The advance ofour armies may well require before very longan establishment of one or more forwardintercepting stations which may be anadditional tax on RSS.July 14thThe Japs are very worried by the disclosuresthat have been made in the ex mination of KOBBEby a spedial committee of the SpanishMinistry for Foreign Affairs. KOBBEBE con-nection with Alcazar de Velasco is now definitelestablished and the matter is in the hands ofa military tribunal. Any public disclosureswould have course be extremely embarrassingto the Spanish Govt. and it is hoped thatpossibly the proceedings of the tribunals mightbe indefinitely postponed. representativeof the State Dept. in Mashingtonwith a personalletter from Hull to Jordana. This has ratherprecipit ted matters since the U.S.principalsCatalogue Reference:KVI4/194propose thatin future the representation ofJapanese interests should in future be per-formed according to a procedure to be determinedby a committee appointed by the U.S.Govt.Until this has been done, tne Spanish Govt.are requested to exercise restraint overVelasco who is considered to be the wire-puller behind the incident. As there seemeda possibility that Velasco might be arrestedand shot steps have been taken to get himout of Spain, acorss the Py renees when theGerm ns will Look after him. The Japs areexpecting a formal demarche from the SpanishGovt. in which the latter may refuse to carryJapanese representation in future or may evenbreak off relations. It is pointed out thatthis would be a very serious matter sineeprobably if Spain broke off relations Portugalwould follow suit. Jap n would then be de-prived of a valuable look-out station whichthe Iberian Peninsula at present affords.Abt. has now been taken over by the RSHA nddoes not even form part of the Militarisehes AmtRSHA of which Hansen is now the head, working ofcourse ot Kaltenbrunner and Himmler. On the6th July Steengracht was still talking abouta possible attack by the allies across theStraits as the result of which Germany had notmoved the coast I divisions in that area.There is a change of plan in Narmansy. Insteadof driving through to Paris, the Brest Penin-sula is to be sealed off by operations directeddue south.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/194218Burt talked to me about ZIGZAG. THe said thate-was-pretty-confident-that-he-could-arrangewith all the C.C.S concerned to have thecharges against him dropped. He could alsoensure that any circulars-out couldbe. withdrawn.. In this way. we shall achieved ourobject.e-D.G. saw-Gen.Strong, Gen.Bedale-Smith-anGen. EiseNhower yesterday. He was thankedprofusely for the part that the office hadplayed and. a formal request sEmade for theservicesof Dick deputy to Sheenythe rank of full Colonel. It was made quiteclear thatsuch anappointment was necessaryin orderto er-tobolster-up-Sheen, ho-wasnotreally qualified to hold hisjob:It job: It would beno real use trying to change him for anotherAmerican who would.have to start from scratchthe-D.G.seened-to-think-Dick-shoulditake thejob. I said that provided he could operatesatisfactorily I thought he should; too:TAR andcould carry his workbetweenus.The only. thingthat was worrying me was.whether Dick would be in such a positionas would enable him to work effectively.z( Ourexperience-in-the-case-of-haylor-had-beerrather bad. He was clearly hamstrung witha totally ignorant full. colonel over his headwho did not know anything and would- thereforedo nothing but would not-let Ronnie get intouchtouch with his opposite numbers in thehope of getting things going. I also mentionecoalggye to Referengn:Kyientg4s. Reference L thought thatthe the-negotiations-ihich-vere-at were-atTHIS THIS IS ACOPYNDEPARTMEN NOER23 3(4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958. Mor 2oodthese might come to a head before Fong, inwhich case Dicks presenceThere might be ofsome importance. thoughtthisdfficultycould be overcome if we got an undertakningfrom Gen. Strong that Dick would be releasedat trthe-earliest the possible sible-momentandthat.i momentand-his services were required here owing toillness or other causes, an effort would bemade to release him either temporarily orpermanently,subject-of-course-to-the to-theexigencies of the moment. The D.G. is ratherinclined to brush all thia aside by sayingthatthere would be no change until aftertheiwar, that Bridges had givenihim an assur-ance etc. etc. and that in any case he wouldnot have SIS takeng us over. He was howeverstronglyopposedto-atot totalamalgamation.I tried toexplain to him that SIS had: verydefinite views and that if they put them forwardto the PM he might very verywell say say that anamalgamationshould take place and thatacommittee should investigate how this could bebest brought about. We should then have tobe e-ready-lth-our-proposale-and-conerete-arg eready-wiments. It was obviously no use my talkingon these lines since his mind was made up:He did however agree that Dick should beallowed-t to see Gen. Strong g-and-make-up-hisonmind whether he would be in a position to carryout what was required. This is the only reallyimportantpo As regardsthe-rest;we-shalprobably be able to get on all right.125 has just returned from Lisbon. We had acatalogue Reference:KVt KV14/194Hepaints a-positive-lamentabe o1cture O1SIS. When he arrivedTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT.RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS220ACT 1958. Mser 2oudhe was seen by Gledhill, who is-head of thestation and holds a cover positior with theEmbassy. Gledhill said "First I should liketo know whose idea was it that you should comehere. Was it C's idea, Section V's,MI5's orperhaps your own". 035 replied that ne reallydid not know whose idea it was. He had merely -been approached and asked to go out. U 35learned later that is-arrival had been viewedby Gledhill as an attempt to set up some neworganisation independent of himself. He thentold035 by hints of.one kind or another thatvery few people, particularly the ministerHopkinson, knew nything about intelligencematters. except himself. His whole conversatiorwas full -innuendos-of-one-kind-or-another035 is. horrified by the way both Gledhill,Charlesgo about their busi-ness. Theyndor not appear to exercise anyreasonable precautions and are-obviouslyb beingled up the garden in a number of cases whichwere brought to 1U35: notice. Attempts weremade to-put 35 himself in touch with sortsof undesirable people who would have ruinedall the work he was doing with Mariaux. Hetactfully declined: The office itself isoverlooked and no attempt is made to screen it.People can be seen from the other side of thestreet photographing letters and every sort ofthing. The only part of the work that heseemed to think was good was the facilitieswhich had apparently been obtained for examiningthe air mail. This is presumably done throughsome informant in the Post Office:Doubtless-theGermans catalogue are Reference doing since everybody takesapparently haveoORIGINAL INDEPARTMENT 3(4 THIS OF THE DOCUMEND IS PUBLIC A UNDER COPY RECORDS RETAINED SECTION 20001958mouinformation that LORENZO, the hief of Police,has been bribed by the Germans to the tune: of1 million escudoe. They nevertheless seekLorenzo's co-operation in cases where theirhand must inevitably be disclosed to the GermansThe whole business is childish. 035, saidthatwere both very veryni nicepeople but obviously complete amateurs andpretty indiscreet ones at that. Far and avatthe best element in the office. are thewomen. One of the failings of the post is thatthere is no one there with any intellectualqualifications. Huge dinner parties are stagedfor likely representatives of the Portuguesepress but they fail completely because nobodymakes -a real study of the man's personalityand interest and-ifthey if they did they would-I nothave the requisite knowledge or ability to talkto him in an interesting way. All thisof course confirms precisely what we haveknown and suffered from for a alongtime.Hopki long-tir Hopkin-son was the only man of real intelligence butof course could not play a very active partin these affairs, and kept- out of things asfar as it was within Gledhill's power to doso.U35 was very anxious that no use whatevershould be made of this information: He hadof course many amusing stories about hisvarious experiences.July 15thI was told by Marcus Hey wood that there was nowa proposal to bring 3,000 renchmen from theCherbourg peninsula who are to-be e-enrolled inCatatogt atategterefereneaueranisision. the O1 M. to Tritton here: otf O: f Norfolk I spoke House to292and to Sheen. It appears that G. 3 have madethis arrangement on consulting Gen. Koenig.They wish to have these men, some of who werefro the resistance movement, as reinforcements ffor their armoureddivision since they have notroops in .Africa to fill up casualties.I explained to Sheen that did not think wecould do very much by way of examinat on andof course this scheme was entirely a newone, and contrary to any previous arrangementsthat had been made. I thought that the Frenchwould have to do most of the examinationlocally and if there were any doubts we mightpass a few of them through the LRC and lookup their records. No attempt to examine themall in a comprehensive way was possible, andwould in any case be profitless. He said thathe was representing the security point ofview and he would let me know any furtherdevelopments. It is proposed to bring the menover about 250 a time.SIe want to bring out the head of the BulgarianCounter-Espionage, who is in Turkey, to Cairo.has been ordered back to Bulgaria and doesnot wish to go. He should be in possessionof agood deal of useful information. We haveagreed to this.The Germans have ordered Garbo's agents tomaintain wireless silence for 2, weeks. Infuture there is bo be no further reporting byGarbo's organisation on the doodlebug.. TheGermans have just been informed that Garbohas been released and that a le tter is on theCatalogue This Reterencn:ki49f94 has in their minds that92his arrest was due soley to his poking his noseinto air raid damage. They h ave consequentlystated that he should report only on opera-tional matters. This is all very satisfactory.Joe Lyneh has produeed for our edifieation anexample of a typically American piece ofsabotage. A vessel that had been built by ashipping company in SanFrancisco had recentlyexperienced a great amount of trouble withthe smaller punps failing to function properly.The pumps were found to be in perfect conditionand no reason could be found for their failureuntil a pair of ladies panties were taken fromthe suction pipe. These were, says Joe,undoubtedly discarded during the constructionof the vessel in a moment of thoughtlessnessand left lying in the tank, later finding theirway into the pipe line. Other tankers builtat this particular shipyard have experiencedsimilar difficulties. Joe thought that B. B.10 1Cmight run across the same difficulties ininvestigation of cases and passed on theincident for what it may be worth. He ends:"I suggest that if you or Lord Aothschildrun across cases of this type, L suggestthat you advise all the employees that inorder that all may co-operate 100% in thewar effort for the total destruction of theAxis powers, lady workers should be requestedto keep their pants on during working hoursfor the duration. I feel inclined to ask himfor a definition of "working hours.!July l6thI had a talk with TAR and discussed with himCatalogue Reference:KV/4/194224the case of COSTES and CARVAILLHES, about whichhe wishes me to talk to Cyril Mills and theFBI. We also discussed the case of a negrowho is apparently being sent as an agent to theUSA.TAR told me that he was having a certainamount of trouble with Stopford about MichaelRyde getting acquainted with B.IL'S work.Stopford has agreed in principle but he doesnot seem to be very co-operative. I told TARquite definitely that it was my wish that thisshould be done for tworeasons (a) Stopford mightbe away in the Channel Islands and subsequentlyin Germany when it would be necessary to havesomeone who was acquaintedwith his work, and(b) it was. necessary to have a closer liaisonbetween B.lA and B.IL. If there is to be anytrouble an order will be issued.I went to see our underground H.Q. at hanceryLane this afternoon. It is a section of the tubeThis is to come into operation if Big Ben is areal menace. There has been something of adecline in the doodlebug lately. Meanwhile thedefences are to be reorganised. There are tobe planes out over the channel, the AA barRagrage is to move down to the coast, there willbe another plane patrol on the Downs and behindthat a thick balloon barrage. The number ofplanes getting through to London is now somethinbetween 20-30%.ZIGZAG is now in regular communication. He hasfully satisfied hishinterrogators as to hisCatalogue Reference:KV/4/194275bona fides.Instructions have been sent from Arras toBerlin that there is to be a eoncentration dffire on particular areas and that it isimportant to get details of damage, locationand time. Whether this is Vl or V2 we do notknow. The information has been passed onto Findlater Stewart and also through Brooman-White to Duncan Sandy s. Basis now workingtemporarily with Duncan Sandy.s as a link betweenhim and the Intelligence Services and as aninterpreter of information received. DuncanSandy s is apparently seeing everything, includingMSS.Walker tells me that the Germans are now puttingtheir Own pigeons into the baskets dropped by usin occupied territory. They then place thesebaskets in the vicinity of some house in thehope that a message will be attached and thepigeon will then fly into a German loft.One woman who observed through a crack a fatGerman quently placing got the a pigeon basket out in her and gardne, attached subse- a rudemessage to the Gestapo to its leg. She wasshortly arrested. The message stated th tevery one in the vicinity knew that the Germanswere doing this kind of thing.Dan has picked up a pigeon from the resistanceMovement in France. He has sent over themessage but Walker apparently wants to havethe pigeon as well. This raises a question ofEire's neutrality. L have suggested to Cecilthat he should write a letter to Dan statingthat it cannot of course be denied that theCatalogue Reference:KV/4/194226pigeon was on an operational flight and shouldtherefore,accordine to international la, beinterned for the duration of the war. On theother hand, if he could see his way to assistingus we should be very grateful.I leave for America tomorrow at 7.45 a. a.m m. Tooearly.July 17thI left London at 9.15 am and Bristol at 4 pm,arriving at Rhynanna at 6 pm. We motoredthrough Limerick to Foynes and left there byClipper at 9pm. We were at Botwood in the earlyhours of the 18th, after a 13-hour flight.We remained at Botwood oniy about an hourbut took near,y 9 hours to get to Baltimoreowing to the failure of one of our engines.The failure of one engine is not consderedserious. Th fact if it shows any defect thepilot prefers not to run it in Case he maycause further damage. He might however put itinto commission in case of emergency. Theseships are run on 2 engines without losing height1d I believe keep in the air on one engine forapout 1 to 2 hours; if flying at a heightof 8,000 ft.I travelled with Alexander Halpern, who wasreturningto Security Co-Ordination. He isan interesting man and clearly yery knowledge-able about American politics and about alienminority questions in the States.We were met at Baltimore by a representativeCatalogue Reference:KV/4/194216of Bill's office and got a train to view Yorkwhich arrived about 9 pm. motored straight tomy rooms at the Nestberg on Madisen at 69th.July 19thI went to the Rockefeller building and had apleasant talk with Bill.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/19227August 22ndCecil and I got the 7.30 .m.plane today fromLangford Lodge to Heston, a flight of 2 hoursand 20 minutes in an American service plane.We ran intothick mist and had to come downvery low before getting below the cloud level.I had lunch with Dick. He told me that sub-ject to my approval it had been more or lessagreed that he should join SHAEF up to thearmistice. There have been the usual delaysand trouble about establishment. He is to bea full colonel and will more or less be co-equal with Sheen although Sheen of course willbe nominally the senior. Owing to the forma-tion of the American army Group,probably end-ing with the incorporation of the southerngroup, SAEF will be taking a much greatercontrol. There is therefore a good deal ofwork to be done particularly as regards theformation of SCI units under OSS. With Dickat SAEF we shall be in a very commandingposition. I understand moreover that Brooman-White is taking over the War Room at hyder St.There has apparently been a certain amount oftrouble between Omar Bradley and Fatton on theone side and Monty on the other. The Americansdi not think that we were being quickly enoughand wished Eisenhover to take command. T'hereis L think something to be said on both sides.Monty is perh ps bit cautious. On the otherhand Patton has rather run ahead of hissupplies and although he has stretched far andmore or less liquidated the German front itis said that the Germans in certain instancesCatalogue Reference:KV/4/19427%are dispersing into the maquis and then comingback ag in to persecute those French who arehanging out the tricolor. The Americans ofcourse have had practically no opposition exceptfor a counter-attack by the Germans atAvranches which they managed to repel. Prac-tically the entire German armour has beenconcentrated on the British and Canadian frontssince the beginning of the operation. Thereis very little opposition in the south. Igather that as the southern operation pro-gresses it will he ad for Belfort to trylandenter Germany pey ond that point. MeanwhileAlexander is to be reinforced by another AmericaArmy and will carry out his cheme of turningright when he reaches the north of taly andentering Austria via Kagenfort with theassistance of tito on the right. Opinion isoptimistic about the progress of events.Most people think that the Germans will berolled up before the end of the year.The conversations with Arnold-Foster have con-tinued during my abeence but have reachedrather an impasse. The account of on previousmeeting differed considerably. Arnoid-rosterin his report had rather gone back to theold idea of SIS taking over B and F Divisions,while Dick and Dick Butler on reflection hadcome to the conclusion ion that our plan 2 was theonly possible solution. The proglem of totalamalgamation postulates so much that we almostfeel that it can never be realised. We arehowever to have further talks as soon as Arnold-Foster returns.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/194THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED229IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4 OF THE RECORDSACT 1958.prleeoI h a a talk with anthony. He tells me that theattempt to get rid of CERVELL has been stymiedby the nir Ministry. Apparently they wereinfluenced to some extent by the fact thatthe Swedes nave given us the V.2 which droppedin Sweden a few weeks go,minus its headcharge. The head chrge is apparently not morethan 1,000 lbs or ecuivalent to V.1. Opinionsrary as to its imminence.L told TAR about my consultations wiCyril Mills on the subject of GARBO'S sub-agents. Cyril did not think that it would bepossible to run any of them very effectivelyfrom C nada oing to the dearth of suitablematerial. He has very greit difficulty. in gettinything from the D. S of I. and can only justkeep Moonbean alive under present conditions.If a transmitter is required it could probablybe arranged for Moonbeam to get one. TAR saidthat there were rather vider issues at stakeas we were considering the tr nsfer of GARBOall his works to the Argentine, where hemight be able to sell himself to the Jas.L also told TAR about the plan for threateningthe Germans with the uranium bomb if theyattemrt to use V.2. He said C. n d a gooddeal cf informe ticn aout the unanium bombbut was extremely cagey about the whole businessC. probably does not reilise that the FABIeafaleofle eterence PerenceKerfg4, 1o1 he KVArfG4 IO months the experiments or to years230and consequently knot what is going on. theyare extremely concerned since the communistshave muscled in on the experiments and on themanufacture, det.iils of which ire almost certainto be known to the Russins. Meanhile taeCanadian Govt. have bought up the El Doradomines in Canada whic' produce pitchblend fromwhich the uranium is extracted. There are agood many wheels within wheels since if theuranium bomb claims are substantiated (i gatthat successful experiments have already beenmade) there will be a complete revolutionin the method by which all machines aredriven.August 23rdI had a talk with Roger Hollis on whitson'svisit which seems to have been an ungualfied-success. There was a complete exchange ofinformation although it was made clear to Whit-son that we did not propose to take him overMrs. Grist's establishment since this wouldentail getting the sanction of two or threedepartments which were not under our controland would moreover empnasise the fact to theCemployees concerned that close co-operitionon communist matters was going on betweenourselves and the States. Hollis and Clarkespent nearly 10 days in continuous conversationwith Whitson, whereas SIS only gave him 2 hoursand a quarter. The fact is of course thatSIS have nothing to say whereas we have a great.deal. At the conclusion of the visit Hollistried to arrange that he should correspondeataoguelreferenterv4/b: eatalogue Y4Mb4 has raised a storm ashe thinks that we Shoud stick to the oldTHISIS CUURYORIGINAL. DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION2 231 303 (4) OF THE PUBLIO RECORDSACT 1958. oeooarrangement and help to build upin NewYork. He points out that after the war we shallhave no one in Washington and it is thereforein our interests to build up the SIS represen-tative. The real answer of course is that ecannot continue on the old basis indefinitelyand that we must be able to speak to our oppositenumbers direct. Both ourselves and the FBIorganisations which have the whole machineryf state at our backs and are operating inclose contact with officil Govt.Depts. and withthe H.O. SIS on theother hand are merelyconcerned with the obtaining of informationthrough secret agents, and do not have theresponsibility of taking action upon it. Vivianseemed to think that 1 was going to try andbuild up Evans while I was talking to the FBI.The fact is that by doing SO I should only havesucceeded in arousing suspicion of our ownrelations with the Americans. It was quiteclear to me from conversations I had withGeorge Burton and also with Hoover, that therewill be no real co-operation with SIS untilStephenson's organisation has been liquid ited.Even then it is doubtful how far Hoovergo with that organisation, which engages indfiensive operations. I shall have to explainthis to Vivian some time. I am afraid howeverthat he will start stirring up the mud again.There is in fact nothing to be done until therelations of our two organisations are finallydecided.I saw Ede and told nim about my conversationswith Henderson. I explained that Henderson hadneatalogte eeferehee.V4/192 a position for himsel23He felt however that if he was to be the headman in the Caribbean he should be kept informedas to what other DSOs were doing. He wouldtherefore like a wide interpretation of anyinstruction by which he should receive copiesof communications between DSOs and head office.There were a number of other minor points whichwe discussed. Ede said there was a proposalto send Stratton to Ceylon in order that heshould co-ordinate S.0.I.S and SCOs. The presentline of demarcation is that the SOI is res-ponsible for anything that happens on the seaand that the SCO takes on from the foreshore.This of course involves a considerable amountof over-lapping. Ede does not think thatStratton is quite the man to go. I am inclinedto agree, as Stratton will probably try andthrow his weight about in various quarters tothe embarrassment of Airy. Ede I think wouldrather like to go himself but the DG is opposedto this.Kellar brought in W/C Walker our DSO in Turkeyto see me. He told me about the Blackguardcase which he is running: This man who isa Persian was formerly associated with RashidAli, the Iraqi and has on more than one cecasionvisited Berlin. He is being paid a high salaryby the Germans but is working for us as hedid not approve of his treatment. in Berlin:Blackguard is in some way tied up with Father.Walker works in closely with ISLD but as faras I can gather the work that he is doing isin many ways more effective than that done.b by SISTheataloguereferenoe:kvp4regyery co-aperativebut the wheels of their organisation grind very233slowly, lyparticularly when it is in their intereststo procrastinate. They will tell us most thingsif we ask but do not volunteer a great deal.Victor returned from Italy a few days ago, andis now proposing to go to France with Trevor-Wilson in order that he may get in early onany sabotage equipment found in Paris. I gatherthat he did very well in Italy after he finallysucceeded in getting to home. Most of theeffective work has been done by the ltalianorganisation known as SIM. He hhad a talk withthe head of this organisation who disclosedthat for some considerable period before theArmistice with Italy,SIM had been double-crossingSOE on a very large scale. Much of the materialdropped had gone straight into the hands of It-alian agents. The counter-intelligenc organ-isation in Italy is extremely poor. AFHQ who havenow moved to Caserta near Naples are not reallyin the picture. No effective work has been doneexcept that carried out from Alexanders head-quarters. The local SCI chaps are notba butdo not appear to have much method. They are usedfor all sorts of jobs for which they were notFally qualified.The BBC announced at 1 o'clock that faris hasfallen to the maquia after 4 days fighting.August 24thI saw Ogilvie who runs the Australi n RSS underig.Simpson, who is head of the CommonvealthInvestigation Bureau which has certain federalresponsibilities akin to those of the HBI.Unlike the latter however it has in addition toCatalogue Reference:KV/4/19493uits law enforcement agency of detectives, auniformed branch known as the CommonwealthPeace Force. The origin of this force isinteresting. In 1916 when Billy Hughes I thinkas Minister of Defence was talking on thequestion of conscription in the state f Queens-land, he was pelted with rotten eggs, andreceived no protection from the loc I policewhose commissioner was strongly opposed toconscription. Highes therefore insistedthat some sort of federal police body wasnecessary The constitution however did notprovide for anything butthe State police,a andany body calling itself federal police wouldh ve been regarded is unconstitutional. It wastherefore decided to establish what is i facta federal police body but to c I1 it the Common-wealth Peace Force. This force has considerableresponsibilities in connected with protectedareas and astal areas. The security divisionof the Commonwealth Investigation Bure: isan org nisation apart from the main body andits records are not availabl to other ranchesexeept under special safeguards.I gave Ogilvie a brief outline of our organ-isation here. I shall be seeing him againbefore he leaves. He had recently been inWashington where he had had long talks with theFBI. He is very anxious to talk to me aboutthe Americans and what he believes to be adefinite attempt by them to driye a wedge inbetween ourselves and the Australians. Hementioned Hoover in particular. Hoover triedto ersu de him that his interests lay withAmerica and not with us. Ogilvie said that hewas British and th tustralia's King wasCatalogue Reference:KV/4/194238England's King. He realised however th t therewere some people who weee thinking on Americanlines. He did not think however that thiswould get very far. He was rather shocked thatHoover should have been so blatant in hisapproaches. He did say however that if wewere aving any difficulty with the FBI hethought they might be more ready to communic teinformation to the Australinns th n to theBritish. I S id tha as far as we were con-cenned Our relations Nere extremely cordial andthat we had a complete interchange. He said thathe had gathered that this was oas Hoover hadspoken in plain terms of our organisation.Hoover had apparently made it clear that he didnot like SIS.I mentioned to Ogilvie that Dick Casey had hada very gre t success with Adolf Berle of theSt State Dept. whose attitude towards us t onetime h ad been anything but friendly. This ledhim to talk about Casey whom he said he knew per-sonally. He thought Casey was finished asregards Australian polities and that he wouldnever be forgiven for having left Washingtond taken up the job as Resident Minister inCairo. He had been doing a magnificent jobin Washingtor for Australi and the feeling wasthat his duty was to australia first. Ogilviethinksm that the mericans are intending tostay in the polomons,ilberts and other adja-cent islands. He was in fact in one of theseislands when the rmericans landed. they hoistedthe Americ n flag and when this was remarked onthe officer in charge said "We have come heretostay".Catalogue Reference:KV/4/194Harker spoke to me afterwards about Ogilvie andshowed me a letter which the DNI had receivedfrom the Australian DNI. It was in very veiledterms but implied that Ugilvie and his colleagueHill were solely concerned with the RSS aspectof the Australian Security Service and had nomand te to talk about other subjects. Hehinted rather directly that their mission idsome politic angle, and that they were inclinedto poke their noses into affairs which werenot their concern. The purpose of the letterwas obviously to spike the guns of Ogilvie andHill if they made any approach to the BritishAdmiralty. Admir lty. Ogilvie makes a very good impressionand I daresay that he is the victim of someinter-intelligence intrigue in australia.He has come here mainly to see the workings ofRSS and also to get some explanation of themfor the presence of Sanford, the British RSSrepresentative in Australia. Apparently noexplanation of Sanford's presence in Australiahas ever been given to Brig.impson, with theresult that he has been under fairly closeobservation.turry came to see me this afternoon. He toldme th t ISCOT seemed to indicate fairly cle clearythat in a number df countries,Jugos Jugoslavia, China,Holland,Fr nce tc. the Soviet appear to have takesoundings after the abolition the Cominternas to the effect of this move. +hey were toreport on the reactions, particularly of thosewho were in opposition to Moscowand to take thenecessary counter-measures. Curry seemed pleasedwith Whitson's visit ind agreed with me aboutvivian's latest demarbhe on the subject ofdirect Catalogue irectcorrespondenseibetyeen ue Reference:KVI4/194 ourselves and237Whitson. I told Curry th t in my view it wasquite hopeless to build up SIS in USA and thatwe had much better continue as at presentuntil a final decision was reached as to theform of amagamation of ourselves and Section V.tonnie Haylor came to tell me about the latestdevelopments in CCMS. considerable amountof planning has been done during the lastmonth but is now held up on questions ofestablishment and decisions as to major policy,which have to be taken by high authorities.Ronnie is moaning a good deal about Nobby Clarkhis immediate superior, who apparently performsno useful function and merely prevents otherswho know something about the job from gettingtogether with those who can really do something.ronnie has totput his stuff up through NobbyClark but never knove what happens to it. Herather thinks that he ought to see Gen. Nestand bring things to a head. I advised himto hold it for a bit. Maunsell's position israther obscure. He is attached to SHAEF thoughnominally still head of SIME. He has no placein CCMS but there are vague references tosune dvisory co-ordinating function to beperformed by him as between SHAEF and CCMS.In CCMS he will be responsible apparently for C.Imatters which affect occupied territaies otherthan Germany. Nobody seems to know whetherafter the armistice he joins CCMs or not.Burt during my absence has fixed up everythingabout Zigzag. there are now no warrants for hisarrest or interrogation. Burt contemplatesusing himCatalogue Reference:KV/4/194He is quite convincedthat ultimately he will go back to his old lifeappear in the dock, and plead that he has beenog great service to the British Empire.Tommy Harris has a plan for evacuating GARBOto the Argentine, where he may have considerablepostwar value. This plan will be gradual andwill not take effect until we are sure th t thewar in the west is over. He is thereforekeen that No.14 and No. 7 should if possiblebe transferred to Canada.August 25thBaxter came to talk to me about the future ofthe LRC, with particular reference to theInformation Index. He wondered whether cardingshould go on to the same degree as heretofore.I said that I thought there was a slight dangerin thinking that the war in the west was overand that it would probably be as well to continueon present lines at any rate for the next fewweeks. The Index might be of considerablevalue later on in providing information aboutcollaborators and others who might wish toseek refuge in this country. As reg rds thestaff, Baxter said there Nere quite a numberwho were anxious to do a job of or in vermanywhen their work here came to an end. He himselfwas only too anxious to get back to eivilianduties.I discussed with Victor ind Burt the case ofMoss SIMMONDS, with particular reference to thesuggesticr that Burt should see Moss SIMMONDSwAo Catalogue was Reference:KV14/194 for evasion ofTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC37ACT 1958military service. Burt felt emphaticallythat he could not do t is without reference toNorman Kendal even though Howe nad given hisapproval. He thought therefore that he hadbetter hive another ord with Howe or With theofficers concerned in the Case.Later ne told me that he had not been able toee Howe, but he had had a t lk with Barrettand the officers specially concerned at theYard with the corruption case, whose integrityhe places bey ond question. He threw a flyover them and discovered that the case was nowin the hands of the Chief Constable, that thereport that we had had from the B.O.T. whichwould have provided. a good starting point forinvestigations was in the possession of theYard but that no action hd been taken uponit. Likewise other opportunities had beenmissed. He said "You can take it from methat nothing will materialise in this caseand that the Yard Know as much about it anaabout BOLSOM as we do here. 11 1 reached theconclusion that we are probably wasting ourime. This whole business of corruption inine police is a complete impasse. Theinformation that we received byenquiries shouldof course be substantiated by personal obser-V tion which would enable legal action to betaken. The only people "O could take suchaction would be the police but from experiencevie know that as soon as we pass our informationover the interested parties are warned.One of the basic troubles is that the policeCatalogue Reference:quoare badly paid. A1 Chief Inspector after hehas paid his income tax gets little more than15 a week; inile out on a job he would not getmore than 13/6 a day detention allowance with7/6 bed and breakfast. If he has a wife andfamily and a position to maintain he is obvious-ly very much up against it. War restrictionsmake it worth while for certain people to Povhighly to get round them. They amass largeprofits in black market activities and thenanglerthousands of pounds in front of thepolice in order that they may continueunmolested. If the police are SO badly paidit is not surprising that they fall for thetemptation. If an Inspector goes wrong herecruits under him sergeants and p. S whoare prepared to play his g me. In fact hevirtually trains them in corruption. Thisreaches a point where they are entirelydependent upon him fortheir promotion. Asthe Inspector rises SO corruption spreads underhim and may well reach the rank of D.D.I. oreven C.C. There is no reason to think thatthe whole of the police are corrupt. In factthere are many good people in the CID. alth2they know or have a pretty good idea of whais going on they will not come forard underthe present regime, whim is weak and lackingn imagination. They knowfrom exp:erience thatit will get them nowhere and in fact may costthem their promotio It. is very difficult toknow what to do. I should like to talk toMaxwell but unless the H.O. are prer prepare red to makea clean sweep in the higher ranks no usefulpurpose would be served. the only other coursecatalogue Referenceekvi4/gqonsult Kendal r-theCommissioner both of which would be useless.I lunched with Harker,Ede,TAR and Ogilvie.the latter enlarged somewhat on his previousstatements about American aggression in thePacific Islands. He is quite sure th t theywill make a definite attempt to ret in theGilberts,Marshals, polomons and others andtheir whole policy is to draw Australia intothe American orbit and away from the Empire.In speaking again about Casey he agreed thatad his appointment as Resident Minister inCairo been properly handled it would havebeen regarded as an honour to Australia ratherthan an incident rather derogatory to Casey.The first the Curtin heard about the suggestionwas in the form of a message from Winstonsaying that he had asked Casey to becomeResident Minister in Cairo and that he hopedCurtin would see his way to releasing himfrom his post in Washington. urtin feltthat he was being confronted witha fait accom-pli. The whole exchange of telegrams waspublished in the form of a White Paper inAustralia and caused a very bad impression.Feeling ran SO high that even a request forthe withdrawal of the Governor General wascontemplated.I saw "C" today about the uranium bomb andput to him the suggestion that it should beused as a threat of retaliation to the Germansif they used V.2. 2."0" "o" said that he had noreason to think that V.2 was imminent althoughit was possible that it might start in thenear future. He felt however that there wasnothing to be lost and said th t he would putthe suggestion to the PM who might take it upcatalogue Reference:KVI4/1 to which is to t keunplace early next month. On the other handhe might decide to act more quickly."C" was a little shocked when I told him thata large number of people in America, includingthe FBI, were aware of wh t was going on andthat the Germ ns had in fact been enquiringas to the progress of the experiments. He saidthat only about 3 or 4 people were supposedto know anything about it in this country.He said that the potentialities of uranium asa motive force were enormous and that someattemot was beng made by the nmerican toget control. The President had however madean offer to Winston to discuss some sort ofshare-out. I pointed out to "C" that we hadcontrol of the Dorado mines in Canada whichhad recently been taken over by the CanadianGovt. I do not know what other pit blendmines there are within the Lmpire. Presumablythe Russians, who Nere already aware ofthe experiments going on, had piteh blendresources."C" told me that the great expert on thismatter, Professor BOR, a Dane, had been gotout of Denmark by SIS a yer or two agoand was working in the tates. BOR told SISthat he had received an offer to go to Moscowand work on this problem for the Russians butnad turned it down."E" was very leased with his present set-upin France. He said he had 300 wireless setsoperating from behind the lines. Some of thesesets were being operated by the same man So asCatalogue to confuse Reference:KV/4/194 the operations by the2u3Germans. He was getting 100 messages a dayabout German troop movements and generalconditions. MSS had proved invaluable duringSecond Front operations, although it hadbecome far more difficult to deal with. Hehad in consequence asked for 500 more staffat G.C &c C S. It was doubtful whether hewould get them. The Americans had been warned48 hours before the German counter-attic atAvranches and had precise details of theGerman plans. When the German 7th ArmyH.. were captured copies of all these messageswere found. G.C. &c C.S. S. were congr tulatedon not having missed one. It appears th tthe Germ ns were within 3 miles of gettingthrough the Americ n defences in this counter-attack which is one of the few reallyseriousones that they made.I asked "C" about the alleged differences be-tween lonty,Bradley and Fatton. He said thahad did not really know what the rights andwrongs of the case were. Possibly there wasa certain amount to be said on both sides.The plan as it has developed was in factMonty's original plan, Ithough perhap inits latter stages it moved rather more quicklythan was anticipated. The Germans only have7 or 8 static deivisions on the oast runningup to Belgium and there is no doubt that theyhave lost a large proportion of their armour.Koenig's statement that Paris was in the handsof French Resistance is somewhat prem ture.rench and Americ n forces re now figntingin the city tler,according to MSS, hasgiven orders that Paris is to be destroyed.The Germin ns are making all sorts of promisesCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1949to the Luftwaffe about reinforcements and alsoare making out to the Japs that their produc-tion figures are on the increase. They arealso saying that they intend to launch anoffensive on a big scale in about 2 monthstime when they will have mobilised from 100to 125 divisions. The J ips are alarmed bythe defection of Roumania, who has now delcaredwar against Germany and have instructed theirminister in Berlin to press the Germans tomake peace with Russia. They appear to betaking steps themselves to bring this about."U" told me that the new fuse being used byour A.A.guns ginst the doodlebugs has beenhighly successful. The burst of the fuseis regulated automatically through the RDFpredictor, as it le ives the muzzle of thegun. 70% of the doodlebugs brought down arein fact knocked out by .fire, the remining30% by fighters and balloons. V. 2 sites areapparently a very simple contrivanee, just aplatform which you can putdown any here. Thereis therefore no answer except to get the Germaaway from the coast. +he range is roughly200 miles, but this is uncertain. We havea complete replica built up from the partsof the rocket fired on Sweden ind one foundin Poland.The proposal nade some time ago for theformation of a Sino-British or sino-British-American Intelligence organis tion with aChinese at its he ad has been torpedoed aftermuch discussion. The answer to the hinesehas been that after full considera tion it wasCatalogue thought Reference.KVT4/194 that it better at the presentTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL. DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTON3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS2uACT 1958. Dec oostage of the war to expend effort on improvingpresent arrangements for the exchange ofintelligence rather than to set up newmachinery which must take time to run in andentail some addition personnel.August 26thhad a talk with Joe Spencer of CICI anditn Brocas-BurrOws. Harry y,Hollis and Kellarwere also present. Spencer and B-B wereanxious to exchange notes, B-B being head ofthe British Military Mission in Moscow andSpencer responsible for liaison with theRussin ASATUROV in Teheran. Spencer hadestablished good relations there due to thefact that he haa bawled the Russians out ontho occasions and forced them to come to himhat in hand about one of their agents who waseither being followed or nad been arrestedAfter a greit de l of referring back to MoscowASATUROV had evedently got instructions toco-operate within certain limits. The latestcase was of a m-in cilled BISURI* who had for alone time been suspected as a hussian agent.pencer had been follo ing him about andmaking all sorts of enquiries which wererather jeopardising isagent's position.Theeffect had bee: to mike the Russians comeclean and to place them under somewhat of anobligation. On the other hand the Case ofKISS, whose re l n me isan ex-agentof MAYR tae Germn saboteur, was somewhathanging fire. It was desired to obtainchicken food from the Russiins to keep thisman's set alive but all overtures in thisgataegufadeferepeeexviungesponse although aVAZIRIgood deal of telephaoning to Moscow was stillgoing on. B-B did not think that an approachin Moscow was likely to improve matters,although he was only too ready to complain tothe Russians if Spencer thought it would havethe desired effect. B-B was afraid it mightjeopardise bpencer's reltions with ASATUROVand possibly le ad to the removal of the atter.It was agreed therefore that for the timebeing nothing should be done.Spencer was a firm believer in taking a strongline with the Russians -whenever they askedfor it. He thought however that it wasunfortunate that people should talk loudly in bbars in a derogatory fashion about the Russiansas this only got back to them ith disastrousresults. B-B seemed to be entirely in agree-ment with this view. His experiences in Moscowhad evidently been very bitter. He had toput his questions to some Russian dressed upas generl who was never able to give ananswer and always said he must refer thematter to higher authority. Endress delaysfollowed and very OI ten no answer aas obtainedat ill. In order to counter this policy hepresented notes to the general with theremark thati he did not receive an answerwithin 10 days he would assume thit theRussians did not wish to co-operate and wouldSO inform the CIGS. This almost invariablyproduced some sort of a reply,although veryoften an unsatisfactory one. B-B was veryworried about the policy of appeasement adoptedby the Govt. and in particular the F.O. HescalaloguorelerenceRv4pry only brought us intocontempt. The Russi ns were asiatics and247understood bargaining. He gave as an examplethe fact that there was only one air route fromMoscow to Teheran which was a nussian one andthat high British officials were turned offthis plane to make room for hussians, hereason our route and the AmeriC in route fromTeheran to Cairo British subjects were againturned off to make room f r wussian missions.+he right policy Nould be to keep the Russi nswaiting in Teheran indefinitely until theyallowed us and the Americans to have our ONnroute to Moscow. B-B had never been allowedto look inside a Russiar tank or Russianaeroplane and had only once succeeded in gett-ing up to the front after a very firm protesthad been made. He took a poor view of theRussian military machine in so far as itsequipment was concerned. He saidthat itsucceeded solely on account of its enormouspreponderance in men and material. A highpercentage of the latter was British andAmerican. Its transport was rather like acircus. You would frequently see a huge tractorwith a car hitched up te the back becauseits front wheels were out of order and tied tothe back of the car a easant's cart. In thecar would be ammunition and in the cart rationsIt was not at all uncommon to see the Russianmotor-cars with one German wheel on them, rathersmaller than the rest of the wheels. Theremarkable thing was however that things seemedto get to the right place at the right moment.Perhaps however this is not quite So aston-ishing if it is realised that an army commanderis just told tha t he has to to attack acertain objective. If he fails he is introuble. The occupantsof tanks which goCatalogue ReferenCe:KV/4/194forward and return without any scars areseverely dealt with. TheRussi ns are incred-ibly tough,h having lived under a tough regimefor 25 years, and there have been cases oftheir eating freezing mixture,and they wouldnot hesitate to eat a candle if they could notget other fat.I asked B-B how much he was told about theRussian offensive. He said that he wasmerely told old that that on a date subsequent toOverlord the Russi ns would launch an offensiveand that they would launeh another offensiveand the another. No times or places werespecified. It was hoped to keep the wholeRussian front oving until Germany wasfinally defeated. B-B has been given allsorts of gadgets connected with our armamentsto hand over to the Russians. They are notof the very latest type. He feels however thatas the Russian machine as at present constitu-ted is perfeetly capable of dealingith theGermans there is not much point in giving themfree gratis nd for nothing evices which weshall be bringing into production after thewar. We of course have been given noopportunity for inspecting any Russi n vea-pons at all. B-B had the opportunity of t kingto some German prisoners. de asked a fairlysenior German officer how it was that theGerman army was being defeated by the Russianswhom they so despised. the officer said thatthey had learned something from German speedand tactics but that the real eason was theirover-whelming superiority in man-power andequipment.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/194gSpencer believes that the Russians will tryand hold on to Persian Azerbaijan after thewar, inspite of their declaration regardingthe maintenance of Persia's irtegrity. Theywill probably get over the difficulty bysaying that the population have voted forincorporation in the Soviet Union. He thinksalso that they may want certain facilitieson the Persian railway which will give them anoutlet on the Persian gulf for the export andimport of material. He rather doubts whetherthey will go much further than this, at anyrate for the time being.I lunched with Curry, who is anxious to obtainsome sort of liaison with the French 2emeBureau. He understands that Paillole hasa small section dealing with comnunists. Hehas to keep this very dark as there are ofcourse communists on the Committee of Libera-tion who ob ject to these activities. I toldCurry that Idid not think that PAILLOLEwould have time to do much in this line atthe moment but that as soon as he wasestablished in the variouseregion in Franceit would be a wise move to get his full co-operation. I promised to speak to Dick aboutthis matter. Curry is alsooa little anxiousabout his own position. Vivian and Cowgillare both proceeding on the assumption thatSeetion V will be running subversive movementsabroad either by themselves or after theyhave absorbed F.Division. I said that allthis was under discussion and that for thetime being I thought it was best for Curryto carry on. If he came back to this of ficehext week I ertainly should find greatCatalogue Reference:KV/4/194difficulty in finding anything for him to doin .Division. I thought however that if therewas something in the nature of an amalgamationafter the war there would undoubtedly be Norkfor him todo.I had a talk with Kim this afternoon. Hewanted to know whether we "ould considerletting SIS haveLounttney Young as part oftheir Far Eastern organisation. I said thatI did not think there was really any chancesince dem ands were being made upon us andhe was our most promising candidate. I saidthat if he wanted to "C" could write to theD.G., but that L should have to advise the DGthat Coumrtney Young would probably berequired for v.i.5 duties.Kim seemed to approve of the memo which uaylorhad put up on the org nisation of CCMS. Hethought it was very sound and well drafted.He told me that Hill-Dillon was over hereand taking the line that he isto take overall CI duties in Austria and Nould notrequire any assistance fro SIS. presumethat he has in mind Alexander's offensive wbichis to take place shortly. SIS are not goingto take this lying down. It is incrediblehow Hill-Dillon gets away with it. He has notof course had the slightest idea of whit heis doing since the day he entered .Africa.His CI in Italy is a shambles,an John Mairis aboutthe pnly person who Keeps it on therails.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/194August 27thThe SHAEF Counter-Intelligence Review for theperiod 6th June to 6th August 1944, statesthat German espionage activity in France hasso far followed the lines anticipated. Therehave been two main categories of agents, thelong time stab-benind ty pe instlled beforeour landings with a wireless transmitter, andthe short term agent sent through our lines af-ter the commencement of operations withinstructions to collect information by obser-vation and return to his German masters toreport verbally. The great majority of theagents have been of French nationality,mostyoung men some of whom had connections withFrench collaborationist organisations such asthe P.P.F or the Francistes, while others agreedto work for the German I.S. as an alternativeto being sent to forced labour in Germany, oras a means of escaping punishment for blackmarket offences etc. Most of the short termagents sent through our lines have been of alow grade quality without much pertinacity.On the other hand two agents sent out by theS.D. to collect political information onconditions in liberated areas adopted thetechnique of making contact with alliedintelligence officers and endeavouring to gaintheir confidence by volunteering informationabout the Germans.Military Seeurity discipline has on the wholebeen satisfactory but there have been seriouscases of the capture by the enemy of classifiedocuments containing important information as tCatalogue our alogueefereree:kVia/ig4ention carried intoaction by officers. There has been no provencase of successful sabotage. Occasionallytelephone lines nave been short-circuited bymeans of gramophone needles inserted in thewire. The task of verifying or disprovingthe many accusaiions of collaboration hasbeen lengthy and difficult Delay has sometimescaused resentmet among good Frenchinen.There is somne compensation in the fact thatno indiscriminate blood-letting has yettaken place and the situation is under localcontrol. Any one belonging to the MiliceFrancaise, the rartie Populaire Franeaise orthe French agency which has recruited Frenchmenfor German civil or military duties are treatedas suspects to be autom tically arrested.These organisations boasted onlya very smallmembership in Normandy. The control ofcivilian movement has not been an easy taskand this has undoubtedly made it easier forthe Germans to infiltr te agents through ourlines. Security check points and mobilepatrols havw been established to deal withthe situation. This task has fallen mainlyon the FSP and certain members of theResistance Movement who have been recruitedThere is an appreciable dan er of enemyagents seeking to enter liberated territoryfrom the sea by small boats. Air patrols andvolunteer coast watchers working under thedirection of the FSP have the matter in hand.A German officer P/W has suggested that leafletshould be dropped aer the lines suggesting thatin the present plight of the German ArmyCorporal Schickelgruber should be called up.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/194A report on V.] and V. 2 gives the followingfacts:There have been cases of incendiary bombsbeing carried by V.1. From remains recoveredit seems that approximately 1 kio of explo-sive encendiaries are carried in a small frame.The monthly production of V.l was formerly putat about 1-1,500 a month. If any reliancecan be placed on the works numbers thisfigure may now be 7,000 per month. Whateverthe facts there would seem to be an amplesupply to maintain the present or even anincreased scale of attack until the coastalareas are occupied. the control of flyingbomb perations which was under the 15th ArmyCorps may be moving to an area south ofBrussels from Arras.A total of about 6, 750 flying bombs has now beelaunched against the U.K. During the fortnightending l6th August an average daily scale ofover a 100 launchings was maintained. Duringthis period a maximum of 295 flying bombswas recorded over the consequtive 24 hourson the 3rd August, but from the 8-l6th Augustactivities dropped to the lowest level yetrecorded, averaging only 60 iunchings a day.This was prob ably due to the better weatherand to the improving defensive measures. Lessthan a quarter of the bombs despatched pene-trated the London area. Launehings of flyingbombs from bomber aircraft were observed on2nd,3rd and 4th August but only on a very smallscale.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/194A number of documents captured in Normandyand the continuing examination of the partsreceived from Sweden enable a more definitiveopinion of the German long-range rocket tobe formed. This would appear to be 45 ft.10 ins. long and 5 ft 7 ins maximum diamerter.Estimates as to the total weight are between7 and 20 tons. Farnborough say 14 tons anda warhead of about one ton. One of the twoprinciple fuels is almost certainlyliquid oxygen. The second fuel cannot beidentified as alcohol with the same assurancealthough alcohol is at least its main cons-tituent. The full bomb is driven by hydrogenperoxide and permangamate. the rocket isradio co toolled probably from a completelyportable equipment. There is no evidencethat control extends bey ond the period ofburning of the order of 12 minutes but thepossibility of some later control cannot beruled out. The rocket has a range of ateast 160 to 200 miles. There is no doubtthat it is intended as a weapon of considerablepreeision but such evidence as exists indicatesthat the degree of accuracy obtained as yetis not impressive. The rocket leaves avisible trail of vapour in its initialstages of flight. It is erected verticallyon a steel firing base which is placed ona heavily reinforced platform. Firing isdone ffom a special behicle which is driveninto a control hut some distance off the sideof the road. This.of course points to avertical or nearly vertical take off unassis-ted by auxiliary launching devices. Thereis no definite evidence of the imminence ofattack although preparations seeme to beCatalogue Reference:KV/4/194fairly advance d.Through the FBI the objections of the StateDept. to granting a visa to Trieycle have beenovercome and if and when the Yugoslavs makeapplication a visa will be granted. Afurther application which the Yugoslav P.M.promised Tricycle would be made does notin fact seem to have been made. I duscussedthis case with the FBI while I was inWashington. They were rather worried becausethe previous application for Tricicle toattend t e monetary conference has been turneddown by the State Dept. (I understand private-ly from Joe Lynch because it had not beensupported by the Yugoslav Minister). The-State Dept. thought that we and the FBIwere trying to bounce them. The FBI did notknow that the previous application had be n madeand refused. They of course were particularlykeen on seeing Tricycle again but they quiteappreciated our position and Hoover had givenorders that every thing was to be done to getthe State Dept. to comply with our request.Since I have been away Dreadnaught,Tricycle'sbrother had arrived here as a refugee. TheGestapo were on his tracks for black marketactivities. He does not think that Artisthas been compromised, otherwise his youngerbrother in Paris would probably have beendisturbed. Moreover Ab vehr contact inBulgaria are still assisting him in hisdifficulties with the S.D. on charges ofcorruption.The Germans have resuscitated Dragonfly bysending him money through Swiss sources. He isCatalogue Reference.KVI4/194therefore on the air again but has not yetsucceeded in establishing contact.Joseph is now in New York and has beeninterviewed by the FBI. They have given usa suitable story for a notional agent in NewYork whom Joseph is supposed to have recruited.The FBI have also supplied us with trafficsuposed to have come from this agent. Itis hoped that he will be shipped back to thU.K K.shortly with the assistance of the Bureau.August 28thOn the 20th August a Swiss uegation wire fromVichy to Berne stated that at 7 am Petainwas arrested in his bedroom by the Germans-with the application of brut 1 violence.He protested to the Nuncio's represent tiveand the Swiss harge d'affaires, as havingbeen witnesses of the whole most unhappyeourse of events and of the fact tthat he nowno longer exercised his functions as headof the state. About 8 o'clock he was removedunder a strong German guard and with a smallpersonal suite by motorcar to an unknown derdestination, presumably Belfort. The Marshalexplained to the Swiss charge d'affaires thatLaval was also under arrest in Belfort,together with other members of the Govt. Laval nadbeen informed that he must go to Belfortbecause of Petain's presence there. Petain onthe other h nd was informed that he must goto Belfort because the Govt. with Lavl attheir head was there. At the moment in Francethere is no head of the State,r head of theGovt. and no Hovt diplomatic corps wereCatalogue Reference:KV/4requested to leave by the Germans but withthe exception of the Japs all refused.I saw Maxwell today. I told him about thecase of GUY, a Frenchman who had been broughtback fro Normandy to be interrogated. TheFrench here had asked if they could keep himunder interrogation all night. This had beenrefused, and Milno and Dick Butler had givenan assurance to Maxwell that the French werenot beling allowed to undertake ny interro-gations without a British officer beingpresent. From an indiscretionnby a Frenchofficer to Milton of the LRC it seems that anofficer from 020 had allo ed the French attheir request to interrogate GUY alone for ashort period and that a break had subsequentlybeen obtained. The 020 officer was actingentirely contrary to instructions and discip-linary action has been taken. I explained allthis to Maxwell as Milmo ind Dick Butler didnot wish him to think that they had deliberatelmisled him. He took the matter very weil andentirely accepted by explanation.I then talked to him about the case of CARONand left with him a letter. CARON is a Germanagent who has been operating in N.Africa.Unknown to himself he had been fed by an agentof the French and had been passing on theinformation by secret letter. y Recently howeverhe received a wireless set from the Germansand the French felt that he could not beallowed to operate any more except under contraThey therefore arrested him and have takenThey. cannot keep him undercatalogue Reference:KV/47194lock and key without bringing him to trialwhich would almost inevitably jeopardise the ccase. They have asked is therefore if wecan lock him up at any rate for tae duration.Maxwell felt this was virtually a re luestby the French to get them out of an adminis-trative difficulty which they ought reallyto solve for themselves. Henould howeverspeak to the Home Secretary,explaining thatthere was ndt likely to be a recurrence andthat we were anxious if possible to do theFrench a service. The proposal is thatCARON should be sent over here nd put into020.Finally I discussed the arrangement which hasbeen made for sending back spies or suspectedspies from Normandy. It has been agreed thatthey shall be treated purely as militaryprisonersg provided they are not kept heretoo long. They will not therefore be refusedleave to land or detained under any order.Thewill just be held by us on behalf of themilitary and then sent back as oon as theinterrogations have been completed. Adifficuity has arisen in the case of womenspies,t three of whom have recently beensent here. They have to be detained atHolloway and therefore have to be R.L.L. bythe I.0. This arrangement is perfectly satis-factory to us provided the H.0. see no objeet-ion. Maxwell agreed that this procedure shouldcontinue.I had a short talk with Maxweli about thefuture of the office and gave him our ideason the defensive and offensive organisations.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/194-He seemed to be interested and is obviouslygoing to think about the whole problem.I explained to him that much troublemight halve been saved in this war if we hadhad some footing on the continent.Col.Murray, the Canadian D.M.I.1 called in.Hesaid that he had not been able to get muchfurther with his problem of the P/Ws inCanada. The proposal is that they should bespiit up into black, white and grey and thatsome attempt should be made to lecture tothe grey and white camps in preparation fortheir being sent back to Germany. PWE appearto have designs on some of them. I said Ithought that his best line for getting asettlement would be to prepare a paper andput it up to the J.I.C. I think he is goingto adopt this course.We afterwards had a talk with TAR, who outlinedTommy's proposal that Garbo should be evacua-ted to Canada. The reason for this is thatvarious members of the Abwehr are coming overto us in Spain and must be expeeted to knowof Garbo and all his works. The Germanswould naturally suppose therefore that weshould get on to Garbo and liquidate him.Inanticipation of this he himself is going toground and leaving his organisation in thehands of his No.3 Garbo will then suggesthis going to Canada which willy be notionallyarranged by Moonbeam He will then suggestjoining up with the Germar rats in the Argen-tine. We may in that way maintain some sortof connection with the remnant of the Abwehr,Catalogue ReferenCe:KV/4/194ooS.D. and S.S, who may try to carry on the fight.the presence of Garbo in Canada will notinvolve sending over much traffic exceptthat which concerns hisdomestie affairs indhis organisation generally.I have just had a look at Lennox's map, whichindicates that there are only 9 divisions inGermany, practically no divisions in front ofthe Americ ns, and the remnants of some 40divisions on our front and the Canadian frontbetween theSeine and Belgium. These re nearlyall static divisions, the only armour beingthat with the 7th or 8th d visions whichhave already been eng gaged. e ged. now have twogood bridgeheads across the Seine and our planis to advance on a line from the Seine northeast in the direction of Antwerp. The americ ansare now beyond Vitry and the southern forceare moving up in the direction of Belfort buthave not yet reached Lyons. The whole ofthe southern part of France appears to bemore or less in the hands of the maquis.Cecil and I took Ogilvy out to dinner and hada long talk with nim until L a. a.m. m.He controls fairly big businessinterests inAustralia. These include a broadcasting networka group of newspapers and a chain of cinemas.He appears to be a personal friend of Brig.Simp-son, a federal barrister of high repute whois of course in charge of the CommonvealthInvestigation Bureau. Ogilvy seems to havethe interests of the Empire very much at ne eartand is extremely concerned about American pene-Catalogue Refererce:KVI4/194tration. He savs that, OWI are using their261organisation for big busines interests andhave been trying to get control of press andpropaganda. Their agents for this purposehave been the British advertising firm ofJ. Walker T'hompson. They attempted to buy acontrolling share in Ogilvy's broadcastingnetwork but vere turned down. It is difficultto say how far the american Govt. is behindthem. They have a certain number of supportersof an influential kind, who run a society callethe American-Australian Union or Association.TheChicago T'ribune which is bitterly anti-British, has been trying to get facilitiesfor publication of its paper in Australia Thishas been tunned down by the Govt. Curtinseems to have got over the Casey incident and tohave been completely won over by the P M. duringhis recent visit to this country. He is extreme-ly keen to get the PMto go outto Australia.Gowrie, the present Fovernor-General, hasaccording to Ogilvy done a wonderful job.He has travelled all over Australia and madecontact with every class of person. Hisdemoeratic behaviour has wen the hearts ofthe Australinns, Ogilvy gave various in ncesof this. Anyone who took the trouble to goto Government House and sign the visitor'sbook receives an invitation to the uovernor'sparty. It does not matter hether he is ahigh offici 1, a butcher or a b ker. sincethe war the Governor. has refused to havespecial tr in or even a special carriigeHetrav 1s as any other citizen and gets intoconvert tion with iny one he meets. The appoint-ment of the Duke of Gloucester as his successor,whidbh is entirely an australian idea, is con-Catalogue Reference:KVI4/194sidered by Ugilvy to be very good one. Thefact that the Duke is not a great brain is oflittle consequence provided he receives properguidance ind carries out his duties withreasonable taet. While Ogilvy thinks thatthe American want careful watching he agreesthat they will in the long run cook their Owngoose. He thinks however that it is necess ryfor this country to wake up to the fact thatAustralia assaawhole leans towards the BritishEmpire. The man in the street does not knowthe meaning of the words British common althof Nations. He never refers to them. Overhere, according to Ogilvy, we are too mealymouthed about the Empire. We seen to havethe impression that people in Austra ria donot care about the home country and theirconnections wibh it. In fact they do.Ogilvy admits that the American Fleet savedAustrali at a most critical moment and thatthe Americans have ene quite lot for thecountry in thebuilding of roads ete. The viewof most nustralians however is that Englandwould have been at their side if she had nothad another war on her hands, and they wouldmuch prefer to have British troops in Aus-ralia than American, whose behaviour has notaltogether been to their likingl At presentthere is only one battalion of. the Dlack Natchthere. These have bee paraded round to almostevery eity and an impression has not got abouteven in government circles that there as manyas 50,000 British troops in Australia.The government is OW taking a much firmerattitude ith regard to Americans and are takingefaloguerefeyerice:ki471g4 them that the Austra-3lians wish to be masters in their own house.Parties of Americans appear to be coming andgoing just as they liked. Instructions weregiven about 3 months ago to hold up a carty-of technicians who were returning to Americauntil the proper formalities had been completed.The Australian SCO at the airport refused tolet the plane leave. The head of the party rangup MacArthur who was told that the SCO h dhis orders and could now allow people in andout unless they complied with the necessaryformalities. MeArthur was extremely annoye edand got on to Simpeen and then on to Evatt theMinister of Defence, and finally on to Curtin.All concerned had been warned and he got thesame answer from everybody. The party was notallowed to leave till the followin day. Thishas had an extremely good effect. Otherincidents that have caused nnoyance arethe special guards provided for Mrs.kooseveltand for high-ranking officers (American).Evatt found some of these standing outsidehis door and kicked them out of the office.They were also asked to ithdraw from Govt. Housewhen a reception was being given for was.hoosevelt and they put in an appearance inthe grounds.Ogilvy is quite convinced that the Americansintend to hold on to certain of the PacificIslands. He thinks we may have a lot of troubleabout this in the future.I asked him what he thought we should do aboutour representation He said he thought that Neshould derive reciprocal advantage through havinCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1947ouan officer suitably camouflaged on the HighCommissioner's staff.He then told me about the RSS incident. Strattorthe professor ofAstraphysics had been sent outin order to collaborate with Ogilvy aboutsetting up the necessary machinery for detec-ting anything in the nature of the Jap ISOS.Independently however G-P and Maltby seem tohave recruited a certain Capt. Sandford astheir representative. Sandford is a eryptograp-era considerably abilities who is a repre-sentative of the Australian D.M.I's dep.t. anda member of a joint Anglo-Austalian-AmericanBureau which is concerned With picking upJap haval military and air messages, breakingthem and relaying them to G.C &c C.S. The headof this Bureau is an americar n amed itken.Sandford happened to be in this country andapparently received a charter from RSS toprovide them with any unclassified materialpicked up by the Y.units of his Bureau. Thisarrangement was I understand unknown to Prof.Stratton. Maltoy and G-P said that they spoketo Evatt's secretary about this matter and thathe was going to put things right on hisreturn to Australia. He however went sickand it is alleged that in consequence theproper people were not informed. Ogilvy isgoing to look into all this when he gets back.The result vas that Sandford was vorking forRSS without the knowledge of hiys own DMI andrig.pimpson. His activities were consideredpeculiar and observ tion was kept on hiscorrespondence, tele rams etc. on the assumptionthat he was trying to act as a political obser-atalogue Reference.kVI4/194n result of thisyesobservation Ogilvy discovered that Sandford hada house which was being paid for by RSS, thathe had furnished this in a lavish way, payingE70 for a dinner set etc.etc. All this-appears to have been news to G-P and Maltby andwhen asked that V lue they were receiving inreturn for the money spent had to admit thatthey got nothing from Sandford. This of courseis typical of RSS finances genera ll.Nobody really knows how their money is spent.Their accounts are supposed to be vetted byCreedy who is of course in no position to saywhat they all mean or whether anybody is gettingvalue for money.Ogilvy was rather nnoyed about the receptionthat he got from the DA who seemed quiteuninterested in the affairs of RSS. Ugilvyhad in consequence shortly after his arrivtelegr phed to Simpson ying that he did notexpect to get much help from Petrie. Sincethat incident however Ugilvy has been taken inhand by Ede,TAR nd others and E think is nowthoroughly sympathetic towards our methods.He told me that while in Washington Hooverhad given our organisation an extremely goodchit but quite clearly had his knife into SIS.Hoover's good relations with us had not preven-ted him from trying to drive a wedge beteen Aus-tralia and Gt.Brit in. He did not seem tounderstandre Ogilvy when he said that he was Brit-ish and that his loyalty was to the King ofEngland.Catalogue RefereNCE:KVI4/194August 29thTAR and John Senter c ame to see me about theease of CASSARD, a Belgian, formerly an SOEagent who got into the hands of the Germ ns.He returned here about a year ago and wasthoroughly examined by Geoffrey Wethered inconjunction with SOE. We found it extremelydifficult to accept his story, although itis quite probable that he obtained hisrelease by promising to serve theGermansalthough he never intended to do so. Apartfrom this however is rather indisereet.It is therefore decided that on no accountshould he be allowed to return to the field andthe Belgians were warned against giving himany confidential employ ment. He has now drifteinto S.A.S. and is concerned with briefing ofairborne troops. An operation involving4 airborne divisions is to take place on Fridayand CASSARD was apparently die to come dow toSOE in order to discuss questions affeetingtheirorganisation. It did not seem that therewas any great likelihood of CASSARI attemptingto communicate direct with the Germans. Onthe other hand he migt talk to the Belgiansthrough whom a leak might occur. I said thatthis was a matter for SHAEF to decide but thatin my view the best thing to be done in thecircumstances, and on the assumption thatCASSARD already knew what the plans were,would be to arr nge things in ysuch a ythathe did not have access to the Belgian authori-ties before Friday.TAR gave thespepers to Mark Johnston and sentatalogue Reference:K4/194THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED27IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4 OF THE HEPURLE PUBLE RECORDS1058LooAnthony talked to me about anrextremely badcase concerning special material. SIS hadgiven us 9 report Oi i conversation with theSwedes of. a somewhat sensational Characterwhich when compared with our convers tion Nascompletely erroneous. SIS expliined this bysaying that a different officer Nas workingon the board and that he had heard anotheronversation on a legation line not tappedoy us. He had amalgamnated this with theconversation that be had picked up. Apart fromthe danger of mixing up to conversationsSIS were not prepared to admit any liability.This once more SnOnS the very unsatisfactorynature oforganisation.I have asked Anthony to go over and see theinst Nation which had already been suggestedby Arnold-foster. le shall of course neverget any further but personally I very- muchdoubt whether any other conversation on thelines reported to us ever took place:Bertram Ede came tc talk to me about our set-upin the Far East. I said that thought therere to problems. One was the appointment ofa D.S.0. and the necessary staff in anti-cipation of the reoccuption oi Singapo andthe other was the militry question. We had plaolanned and partiaily staffed t,he C.i. set-upfor SAEF. ere ve called upon to do any hingon similar lines for SEAC? I told him that inmy view the best ble would be to let hiry visitKandy on is return from nustralia, consultCatalogueReference:kV/4n94ntribution that theymight require from us and then come on here.ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958Meanwhile I could see no prticuar point inStratton. going to Ceylanto set up the-relationsbetween various security officers and ourorganisation I -thought is-coulo quiteeasily be done by hiry and Patterson who afterall was an SCO. If the D. Nas Sold on send-ing Stratton out it Should be made clear to himthat he could confine himself strictly tothe port security question and not dabble inany thing else. I told Ede that I would domy best to put this across during his absenceon leave.John Phipps tells me that Legge, Legge,C.L.Berks, C.Berks, isagain making a nuisance of hiinself. Heapparently took excep tion to an address givenby Mitchell on Fascist and quasi-F ascistrgasisations. He wrote to the D.6. who gavehima suitable reply which was not to his likingHe then went to the 1i..0. but-g t-got no-change.has now, in his capacity of Chairman of theSpecial Branch meetings in his regional area,said that owing to the paucity of the agendahe does not think it is necessary to hord thenext meeting. In fact the agenda is just aslong as the agenda for any other meeting, anand moreover it is laid down by the H.0. thathese meetings are to take place at least onceevery tho months. I believe that Harkerntenas to take the question up with the H.0.Joe Stephenson has returned from Mid East andis inclined tc think that. his services thereare no longer justifiable. He tikes a verypoor view of SIS activities ind personnel inGatalogue ReferenGeky4/19t spot iswhois extremely good.79August 30thI had a meeting with Stopford,Lickso andAnthony about the Swedish project. It seemsnow completely set. We only have to wait thereturn of J.74 in order to get on with the job.We have, think and hope, taken every possibleprecaution.AEF have decided to leave CASSARD where he isas it appears that he has up to the moment nointimate knowledge of the pe ration. Meanwhilea suggestion has some forward that he shouldgo into the field tonight. This we are stronglyopposing on security grounds.Ogilvy came to see me again to say goodbye.He seems to be thoroughly satisfied with hisvisit and I think is taking away a good impres-sionn of the office which he will convey toSimpson. I ruged on him to do all he could towipe out the old troubles particularly theMawhood-RSS incidents which are nothing todo with us. Ogilvy is very keen that we shouldhave a representative in Austr lia and tie inclosely with Singapore when it is reoccupied.I saw Dick. He gave me a rough outline of thepresent SHAEE counter-intelligence scheme.There is to be pert control from Boreeaux,otte-dam, which is hoped will be staffed largelyby personnel rom M.I.5. who may be releasedfrom port duties here. There is also to be aring round Germany which will need securitycontrol personnel. The direction and planningof all this in the hands of Robb and hisassistants at SHAEF. C.C.M.S. is apparently toCatalogue Reference:KVI4/1947come under the direction of SHAEF and althoughit will plan separately it will emerge fromSHAEF C.I I. organisation. There has also beena dust-up between R.J. and "'onnie daylor.Ronnie has had for some time a planning com-mittee on which he, other members of CCMS andrepresentatives of SHAEF have been working.R.J. swept in yesterday as chairman and startedto attack the scheme which honnie's committeehad put up. With the exception of Melland, allthose who had been working with honnie joinedin the attack against him merely beeause theythought that R.J. was now the big noise. Thepoints on which R.u. attacked ronnie were thathe had put forward his propsals through West wit!-out the knowledge of SHAEF. To begin withthe Eonstitution of CCMS vis a vis SHAEFhad never been clearly defined, secondly SHAEF'Srepresentatives had been working on the committerall the time and had subscribed to erything inRonnie's memo, and lastly an outline of thememo was passed to McLeod at SHAEF a long timeago. SHAEF therefore have nothing to complainabout except their own incompetence. R.J.ir he had had any sense of decency should hayconsulted Ronnie and his planning committeebefore barging into the meeting. The factis of course that he dislikes Ronnie in spiteof the fact that he served him well in the sett-ing up of the LRC in the Mid East. He did notof course do this without considerable difficultyand opposition. R.J. has apparently bounced inon Harry Allen and said that Ronnie must go.I asked Dick about the DSO appointments forthe French regionsCatalogue Reference:KVI4/194id that all that had271gone by the board. All they would require wouldbe officers in the principal capitals,Paris,Brussels, Amsterdam and possibly Copenhagen.If we have anyone to fill these posts he wouldlike them..Dick thinks that 020 ought to be transferred toGermany after the Armistice, more or less lockstock and barrel, leaving just a small st affto liquidate the existing organis tion.nopody seems to have considered yet how thevarious bodies are going to be disposed of. Willthey just be released and told to make their wayto the continent or will they have to be handedover to the allied'government concerned. TheH.O. I think will be rather reluctant to takethis latter course.Dick has had long conversations with Hill-Dillonabout his set-up in Austria which will have totie in with SHAEF and CCMS. Dick evidentlyfinds him refreshing alter some of the eharae-ters he has got in SHAEF, though there is noreason to suppose that H-D nas any better ideaof what he is doing than when he went to NorthAfrica. The whole of his C.I. activities wereconducted in a typically Irish steeple-chasehorse-coping atmosphere.August 31stI have been reading various reports which camein during my absence in America about the plotto assassinate Hitler. It seems that all wasgoing fairly well until the news began to comethrough that Hitler had only been very slightlywounded. At that stage the officers hoCatalogue Reference:KV14/194were formerly in favour of the putsche began towaver and to talk about their oath of allegiance.There was a dramatic moment when Goebbels sentfor von der Heyde. A kind of sparring matchwent on while Goebbel's secretary was trying tofind out whether Goebbels was von der neyde'sprisoner or vice versa. His secretary came Inand whispered something in Goebbels' ear, pre-sumably a out the way things were gojg, andimmediately von der Heyde was placed underarrest. There seems little doubt that theplot had been brewing for a very considerabletime. There were a few active people surroundingBeck, the ex-chief of staff, but there were alsoa number of others who were in the know.The number of flying bombs launched has recentlybeen on a somewhat, reduced scale. On some daysthe figures have been very low and this may bedue to the fact that the sites have to be meedas the allied armies advance. The percenta ebrought down is fairly high and the pereentageof those that reach London is between 10-15/The J.I.C. are putting out a spate of reportsabout the weaknesses in Germany's capacity toresist. These include battle wastage, theallied bombing affensive, the blockade, pre-emptioand diplomatic action. They say that the alliespolicy of attacking Germany's oil productionis for the first time threatening her with apotentially fatal situation. The operationalefficiency of the German army in the west is beindrastically affected by lack of fuel whichhas been a major fictor in the present battle.Equally their oil shortage in the Navy is attri-butable to the the Discay ports.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/194273Production of supplies for non-military purposesis affecting the transport and armamentsindustry. The loss of Ploesti will reducethe enemy's supply by some 15%0. As regardsman-power the situation is growing daily moreserious. It is estimated that during thefirst half of 1944 the German army sufferedover 1 million permanent battle and medicalcasualties. If this rate is maintained duringO the second half of 1944, and this isregarded as a conservative assumption, thenumerical strength of the German army willhave deelined at the end of the year from theestimated peak figure of 7,100,000 reached lastJune to some 6,250,000 after allowing for theintake from all sources including the mortgagingof the 1927 class and Goebbels' total mobilisa-tion scheme. By the end of this year the Germanarmy of 6,250,000 will contain under 2 millionfit Germans between the ages of 19 and 46.The balance will be made up of 1,250 betweenthe ages of 19 and 46 with disabilitiescausedby wounds or sickness, ,million foreignerswhose reliability is steudily decreasing,1 million boys aged 18 or less, 750,000 menOover the age of 47 and 450,000 men inhospital. The Germans have suffered veryserious losses in arms and equipment in recentbattles and the task of bringing replacementsup to the present b ttle fronts appears to bealmost insuperable. Thus the os. ibility ofGermany opposing the allies in mobile warfarein the west is virtually precluded. Germanyfleet, particularly her U-boats, have suffe edserious 108 es and the position as regards hersurface craft remains very weak. The TirpitzCatalogue Reference:v/4)1g4 kingalimitedoperation. One additional 8" cruiser isavailable and some 6 Elberg class destroyersmay soon be in commission.. U-boats can nowno longer operate in the Atlantie unless theyare b sed on Norway or the Baltic. Therehave been serious losses in merchant shippingand the Swedish Government's decision towithhold insurance from Swedish ships throughto Berman Baltic ports has been an added blow.Germany's increasing shortage of aviationspirit is the greatest potential weakness ofthe German Air Force and has resulted in theprohibition of all non-essential and non-operational flying, the drastic curtailmentof air transport, the limitation of trainingoccasional countermanding of actual operationsordered By the end of July every hyarogenatingplant in Germany and German Europe, with onepossible exception, was for the time beingout of action, and stocks of aviation spiritin the west had been substantially reduced byair attacks. At present only defensive fighteroperations remained unrestricted. The onlypart of the German ir Loree which constitutesan exception to the genera] wakness are thenight fighter squadrons. They have beenexpanded by some 575 aircraft during thepast year. Low operation I wastage has ensuredthe maintenance of an ample cadre of crewswith long operational experience, and reservesof crews are available from the numerousdisbanded bomber units already rained fornight flying. These actors combined withGermany's development of radar and anti-radardevices has brought the night ighter force toa peak of operational efficiency.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/19427sIt has finally been decided by the Chiefs ofStaff in Washington that bona fides diplomaticand consular property of enemy governmentsincluding their arehives and the property ofenemy diplomatic and consular personnel foundin territory of third powers occupied in thecourse of hostilities should be accorded thefollowing treatment. If any such propertyis in the custody of the protecting power thatastody will be respected in every way. Ifit is not it will be safeguarded intilsuchtime as the governments represented by theoccupying powers gives speeifie instruetionsas to its disposition. In such cases importantdiplomatic and consular archives may be copiedpending disposition but not confiscated. Thispolicy does not preclude the theatre commanderat his discretion and on his responsibilityright of entry and search of premises allegedldiplomatic or consular in character whichhe has substantial reason to believe to beor to have been used for elandestine warlikeoperations against his own forces, andexamination of which he believes to be essentialto the security of his own forces, communicationsand operations. In all sucn cases a fullreport must be referred to the governments towhom he is responsible, justifying the entryand search.Hill came to see me this morning about his work,and particularly about the case of Moss SIMONSand BOLSOM. There was a suggestion of puttingin a Jewish FSP who would try and get BOLSOMto get him out of the army on medical groundsthrough a doctor who is Morning for BOLSOM.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/194False X-ray photographs indicating duodenalulcers are presented to the medical authorities.This has become a regular racket. Hill. talkedto me about his other cases and in particularabout the police. He is quite convinced thatStevens, who is working under Supt.Barrett oncorruption cases, is working in with STOCKMAN,He has the following chain of evidence. Sergt.Noble in whose room Stevens formerly workedis asked whether Stefens is reliable andhas said "He is one of us".Ned Reid at therequest of the Bank of Engl nd is asked toexplir eertain banking transactions regardingthe account of one BUXTON who is defraudingthe revenue. Noble is asked by STOCKMANwhether he can obtain these figures, and anindividual calling himself STEVENS subsequentlytelephones about these figures to STOCKMAN.The case of Greeno who had opened an accountinto which he had paid in in a very shortspace of time some E4,000 in treasury notes,has not progressed even though this informttwas given to the Yard. Some of the noteshave been traced to dog-racing bookies. It ishowever wellknown that such transactions arerecorded in the ledgers of doubtful bookiesfor a consideration in order to give thenecessary cover. For some reason or otherKendal does not wish Greeno's account to bepassed to the Inl nd Revenue in order that theymay claim ineome tax and possibly take pro-ceedings for failure to disclose. Greeno isa Supt. and considered to be the ace CID sleuthat the Y ard.Catalogue RefereNCe:KVI4/194277Brian Melland came in to ask whether I couldhelp him in digging out cert in pre-war infor-mation relating to the organisation of theGerman I.S. and propaganda organisation and the:foreign branch of the NSDAP. The beavers hadalready done a considerable amount in thisconnection, of which he has had the benefit.I said L would do what I could to think ofother cases.I took the opportunity of tackling him aboutReJ.s performance. He said tht it was anextremely bad show, that ronnie was a verysound fellow with an excellent brain who h adWorked hard and produced a good report.R.J.Scriticisms were clearly prejudiced and per-sonal. Mell nd said that although in certainenrcumstances it might have been difficult tohave two Cols. Working alongside each otherhe had got on extremely well with Ronnie. Hethinks it would be disaster if Ronnie packedup since he is a. very good organiser whileMelland himself can sup ly the necessary nowledge of German organisations,particularly thepolice.Burt came to see me. He had been to Southendto have a t lk with ZIGZAG, from whom he has-extracted a certain amount of useful informa-tion on criminal lines. He also at our equestthrew a fly over ZIGZAG about the reward thathe was expecting for his services. It seemsthat Michael Ryde had mentioned a figure ofE6,000. Burt said he thought there must besome mistake, but that in any any case case Ryde was notCatalogueReterehce:kva4/rgaisati Catalogue high to m uke apromise of that sort. It transpired ultimatelythat ZIGZAG thought that if he got 13,000 newould be doing extremely well. He is apparentlywell s tisfied With the way that his ease hasbeen conducted by this office. He seemsanxious to m ke contact again with the Germanssomewhere in the North Sea where he has an ideathat he will be able to hand over bogus photo-graphs of Asdic devices for which he thinks hewill receive the sum of 15,000. I said toBurt that I doubted whether the German wavywould ever fall in with a scheme of thissortparticulrly at a time like this. We nadpreviously had cases of submarine rendezvousbut the indications were that the nav author-ities were not prepared to risk their shipsfor the Abwehr. They would be still less likelyto do so now when they have had so many sub-marines sunk.We have been asked to estimate the sabotage riskto factories and dockyards now and after thecessation of hostilities. I said that at themoment they were practieally negligible and. afterthe hostilities would be positively negligible.I felt hovever that the question o sabotageould have to be joined iith tha of espion e:After nostilities I did not think th t therisks were very great from the point of vienof Jap espionage. I did think ho owever that Neought to watch ourallies. This ho owever was quiteuseless as long is they were given free accessto all our latest devices. There is no doubtthat the Russi ns are out for all they can get anthat the Americans will commercialise our inven-tions after the war.Catalogue ReferenCe:KV/4/194