The National Archives(c) crown copyrightCatalogue Reference:kV/4/190Image Reference:45074them with them. Duff said that it wasonly his first impressions but that he meantto study the papers very closely beforegiving a final opinion. I told him aboutmy visit to S.I.S. when I saw C. and Viv.about our direct communication to America.He said: "Oh, I understood that all thathad been settled, and you can take it from methat it has been. L said that I was quitecertain that this was not C's view. Whilhe agreed that we should communicate directwith Stephenson on matters affecting theCaribbean, he did not agree that we shouldcommunicate direct on matters affecting usin N. America. Duff implied that he intendedto fight this point and more or less intimatethat we should carry on on the assumptionthat we were authorised to communicatedirect. This won't do of course. We shallhave to get it settled.Duff also talked about the Black Market.He seemed to think that it was wrong forthe Security Service to take part in investi-gations of this kind, and evidently thouhtthat we were dealing solely with thegrocer who gave overweight to his customers.When we explained to him however that ouronly interest was that some other departmentsdid not abuse our machinery and SO jeopar-dise our C.E. enguiries and that we onlyimpo ed checks in cases of big deals involv-ing sums such as E500 and bigger, he tooka different view. He evidently did not knowthat the Black Market was operating on sucha large scale. I agree in principle thatCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190787it might get us into difficulties if wewere associated with Black Market enquiriesbut I think that the limited action whichwe are taking is fully justifiable. Victoris going to try and arrange a meetingbetween Duff andCharles Teggert. I thinkDuff was feeling rather oad about thisquestion since Diana is threatened with aprosecution for having accepted free gratisa sack of stale bre ad from the baker whichshe was intending to give to her pigs.Duff talked a good deal about his politicalcareer and particularly about the Munichcrisis. He held the view that we shouldhave fought at that time, because we shouldhave had the support of the Czechs who hadperhaps one of the best equipped armies inEurope and that at that time we might alsohave had the support of the Russians. Asregards ourselves he said that although ourarmaments were poor they were by comparisonwith the Germans far poorer at the outbreakof war, since the Germans during 1938 and1939 were producing at least 4 times as muchas oursleves. He thought too that the Frenchwere in much better fettle at the time ofMunich. They had mobilised and were readyto fight whereas after demobilisation andanother year of corruption and indecision tthey became thoroughly demoralised. Thereis I think a good deal in what he says.Duff has a trenemdous feeling about thesuperiority of the British race and aboutour system of Government. He is entirelydie-hard an questions such as education forCatalogue Reference:KV/4/19014%the poorer classes and the old school tie.He thinks the old school tie is one of thefinest institutions that we have got and thatwidespread education is a mistake. Hisargument, is that people in this countryhave far more freedom and better conditionstha in any other country in the worldand that therefore there is much to besaid for the existing regime. Duff alsoreferred to the decision of the Cabinet tto go to the assistance of Greece. Hesaid that he had weighed this matter upvery carefully and that he had voted infavour of the action taken. His reason wasthat we should have lost a great deal inthe eyes of the Americans if we had refusedto go to the assistance of a nation whichhad fought SO gallantly. He maintainedthat whatever we had done we should nothave been able to go on to Tripoli, owingto lack of equipment and transport diffi-culties. He did think however that had wenot assisted Greece we might have peeventedthe Germans from landing south of Benghazi.After the collapse of France, the P.M. sardto Duff "The end is very near, but therewill be no surrender. We shall go downfighting". At this moment we were ofcourse at our loest ebb, without any HomeGuard and with330,00o troops returned f'romunkirk totally unarmed.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/190781September 23rdHarker, M. Fulford, Tangye and L consideredthe case of Claud CCOCKBURN, who hadapproached Tangye and wanted him, Hyde,and Wilfred Roberts MPI. to form a smallcommittee to assist C. in running The Week.The policy of the Week was to get insideinformation about Government scandals.Tangye,Hyde and hoberts were to follow upcertain clues that he would give them, andalso supply him with as much informationas possible. Roberts was not very sanguineabout the part he could play. He said thathe did not think it would be possible toget much out of the Civil Servants, andindeed many of them might not know what wasgoing on. We decided that in approachingTangye COCKBURN must have a fair idea thathe might well be connected with the SecurityService. On the other hand he probablyfelt that he was a person discontentedwith the general conduct of the war andtherefore probably ready to assist inexposing the deficiencies of Govt.departmentsIt was decided that as far as possibleTangye should use Hyde as a screen. Itwould be difficult for him to go very farsince we could not possibly supply informa-tion about the scandals in Govt.circles,without the knowledge of the departmentsconcerned. There was a danger that ifTangye was ultimately found oat or retiredfrom the party COCKBURN might try andexpose him in the Daily Worker. This Nouldbe extremely damaging to ourselves. On theother hand we thought that the party shouldCatalogue Reference:KVI4/19019090go on for tae moment as it was valuable tousto know exactly what COCKBURN was up to.We formed the impression that under coverof pep movements he was really seekinginside information and having compromisedTangye he would probably try to blackmailhim.I took the weekly meeting. We are expectinganother agent here, who goes by the nameof Georgie. It is just possible that hemay be FRITZCHEN. he is a saboteur. Thereis also a possibility of a Belgian namedHUY SMANNS coming here, his destination atthe moment being uncertain. There isanother agent on the Shetland and it seemslikely that PRYNNE is acting under instruc-tions of S.O.E. in Lisbon.Eggs had got in alongside SIMOEZ. Thelatter's room has been searched but withoutresult. Eggs' view is that SIMOEZ is nota very high-class agent. We are stillunable to get up MANEZES ink and we nowconsider the question of extracting thenext letter and subjecting it to major tetests.coit came to seeme. He had just come overon a fast convoy and was horrified that boththe customs officer and the I.0. at Belfastwere tight when they came on board andtighter when they finally landed. Hethought that some order should be issuedthat 1.0.S add Customs Officers should nottake drinks on board. The fact is that theyhave a drink with the captain of every shipCatalogue Reference:KV14/1907a1in the convoy. I said I thougt thisup should with be the a Treasury matter for and Duff the Looper Home Office. ta takeI would mention it t him next time 1 sawhim. Coit I gather has come back to thiscountry for good.I lunched with Machell who seemed to thinkthat he had not got enough work to do.I suggested to him that he should try andget some general assessment of leakagein this country. Strong, D. M. I. Home Forces,had recently stated that the enemy werevery well informed about the dispositionof our troops. It would be a good thing tofind out exactly what information theyhave, when they got it, and what the timelag was. He might do the same with regardto the sinking of H.M. ships. He might alsoconsider making an index of all informationwhich was known to have reached the enemy.This would enable us to take stock ofthe position from time to time, and givean answer to various departments who wereinclined to question the security measuresat ports, e.g. Capt Altham who is worriedabout the control of ports to Lire.I saw Reilly in the afternoon about theZionist intercepts. I said that I thoughtthat the military should have been consulted.but that as it had now been decided to closedown the station this might not be necessary.I thought that we should have a completeset of these messages which could bestudied by Kellar who is responsible forPalestine. 1 also said that I could notCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190see that there would be any harm in eitherRothschild or Hart seeing the messages ifKellar thought fit. They had been ofconsiderable assistance to him on Lionistmatters. hothschild was violently anti-Zionist and asfar as I knew Hart is too.There was also the question of inforiingMaunsell. There has been a great dealof fuss about these telegrams, which Robin-son of the D.O. and I gather also theS. of S. did not wish to be shown to us.They have consequently been piling up.We should never have know the true situa-tion unless the matter had been raised onthe R.S.S.Committee. Page pointed outthat n.S.S. and G. C. & C S. were dealingwith this material and the Committee were askto give them priority although they had noinformation about their contents. havenow got to tell the Committee that the C.0.was interested in these telegrams but havenow decided that the station should beclosed down, if it can be located by theR.S.S. unit in Egypt. In the meantime thedecoding of these telegrams is to go on.The interception would if possible betransferred to some Y. unit.The D G. had written a letter to Sir JohnAnderson about H.C.E. It containsa numberof inaccuracie which Dick and I are tryingto get straightened out.Stopfrod had made a careful analysis ofthe Ostro messages as a result Of whichhe has come to the conclusion that theyeCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190793being carried probably by B.O.A.C. pilotson the West Coast Doutess. We have decidedtherefore to search all B.O.A.C. planesat Bathurst for a period of 2 to 3 weeks.We propose to inform the head of the CivilAviation Dept. of the Air Ministry, D.M.I.,A.C.A.S.I., the Governor of Bambia via theC.0., and Haigh-Wood. I think that weshould also inform Maunsell whose enquirieshestates have reached a delicate stage. Itmay be that our action will jeopardise theseenquiries and before moving we should havehis approval.I talked to the D. G. about Frost and hisproposal to take over the mobile units.Ifind great idfficulty in convincing himthat this was necessary. He kept on sayingthat as there was no evidence of any illicittransmissions from this country did notthink there was any need to worry. I triedto point out that Ne relied upon the M. .Usfor the final round-up of any wireless spy.We were at this moment expecting FRITZCHENand the prospects of looating him throughwireless interception were not particularlybright. If he transmitted three times aweek for about 10 minutesuor quarter of anhour at a time we might reasonably expectto pick him up in due course. we shouldthen have tohave an area of some 60 milesin which to operate the M.U.S. These unitswere not however particularly satisfactorysince unless she happened to be fairly nearat the time of transmission and searching onthe direct frequency we should not pick upCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190quthe transmission. If the man only came upoccasionally on the call sign and changedhis frequency and time it was on the wholeimprobable that we should pick him up atall. The technical tool was not thereforea particular y efficient one. If we werecalled upon to operate on the Second Frontwe should find ourselves singularly ill-equipped. The D.G.S only suggestion wasto get hold of Morton-Evans and somebodyfrom the Post Office, exactly why thePost Office I do not know, and have aconference. I told him that it would bedifficult to consult M-E without bringingin Maltby since the proposal was to takeover dertain units which were at presentunder Maltby's command. The D. G. did notseem to think that this mattered. Nothingcan be done till he returns from leave, whenI shall hope to get the whole questionatraightened out in his mind.I told him of my difficulties with Frost.L should never be able to trust him and Icould not say whether if he did take overthe mobile units they would be any betterrun than they are now. Not being a techni iamyself, he would always be able to pull thewool over my eyes with a lot of mumbojumboabout megacycles.// told the D.G. thatI had seen Viv. about Nothschild going toAmerica but a further letter was comingfrom C. proposing that another telegramshould be sent to New York. Our originalproposal to S.I.S. was dated llth August.Six weeks had elapsed and a good deal ofacrimonious correspondence had taken place.Catalogue Reference.KV14/190"y93The D.G. remarked that the final sentenceof C/s letter was rather out of place. C.had pointed out that this was a clearinstance of how any sort of dual communica-tion with Stephenson led to misunderstanding.D.G. S view with which I entirely agreeis that had we been in direct touch withStephenson we should have merely telegraphedto him saying that we proposed to send outwothschild to discuss the sabotage caseand unles he registered aprotest within48 hours, Rothschild would have gone, andwould have been back by now.September 24thI attended a meeting of the W.Board at whichall members were present and in additionCol.Bevan and T.A.R. C. read out variousnotes which L imagine must have been preparedby Felix. They were designed to show thatwe were not solely responsible forthe D.A.organisation, which is working to theTwenty Committee and the N.Board. Theargument was not very clear to me nor toanybody else. I said that the presentnetwork really started with Snow and wasdeveloped through the arrival of parachutistsand others, some recruited here and someabroad. We originallyconceived the purposeof this organisation to be insurance againstpenetration; deception was a subsidiaryadvantage to be gained as well as generalintelligence about the enemy' intentionsand organisation. I felt however that Iought to say that it we x at any time weredirected by the W.Board to put informationCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190796through our channels which would jeopardisethis network, the D.G. would reserve tohimself the right to refuse.1 In the samemanner he felt that in the case of theCALVO arrest he was the final arbiter.This did not mean of course that he wouldnot give every possible consideration to theviews of any department concerned. C. saidthat he also would put his foot down ifcertain action by the Twenty Committeedid not meet with his approval it was notclear however what would happen if C'sinterests and our own were in conflict.It was pointed out that the Twenty ommitteehad no charter butAwa agreed by all thatas things had worked smoothly and everyone'sinterests had been reconciled withoutfriction it was better to leave well alone.C. had based his intervention in this matteron some phrases in the D.M.I.S circularletter to members of the W.Board turningdown the D.N.I.S proposal that Bevan shouldbecome chairman of the Twenty Committee.The meeting then considered certain sugges-tions by Montagu that there was notsufficient intelligence deception asdistinct from strategical deception. Heinstanced the case of a query about somefactory. In proceeding to this factory theagent was forced to pass certain aerodromesetc. The Air Ministry had refused to allowhim to report on these aerodromes becausethey were new fighter aerodromes. Montaguthought that this was foolish since theaerodromes had probably lready been locatedby the enemy and that if it was desired notCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190to emphasise the fact that they were fighter777aerodromes some form of implied deceptioncould be ptt over to mislead the enemy.Thesame applied to Army and Naval matters. Itwas generally agreed that this should bedone in future. T.A.R. asked that those whoppprove the traffic should have periodicalmeetings. He thought this would give greaterunity to the methods employed. This wasalso agreed.After the meeting Stewart showed me a copyof a B.J. from Madrid to Iokio disclosing along report by PEPPERMINT to his masters.This report embodies a good deal of theinformation which we gave to P. but it alsodeals with other matters. There is noreason to suspect any disloyalty on P'Spart. In fact he seems to have done prettywell. The other facts mentioned may be inanswer to certain questions which were putto him by his masters or may have beeninveabed by ALCAZAR.I had a discussion with the D.G. about ourobligationsns on the Second Front. He saidthat he would take this matter up on hisreturn. He told me that during his absencehe wished me to talk to Duff-Cooper about(a) Ustro and (b) direct representationin America. He thought I should tell D-Cwhat Viv. had told me about Stephenson,namely that S.I.S. thought that if we haddirect representation Stephenson wouldtry and play one party off against the other.I told the D.G. that in my view S.I.S wouldbe considerably strengthened in theirdealings with Stephenson if we had directCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1901 148 4%representation since he, the D.G. , would bemuch more likely to drop heavily uponStephenson than S.I.S., who seem to beafraid of him. I told the D.G. that theyhad considered his replacement by Denham,but had ultimately come to the conclusionthat he was SO vell dug-in with vonovan andthe President that there would be a majorupheaval if he were removed.Gibbs, Dick and I saw the D.G. on Gibbs'W.African visit. Gibbs had prepared abrief for himself which dealt with ourown security and C E. organosation withinthe colonies, our relations with D.I.S.and S.U.E. and with the americans.September 25thI hada long conversation with Gibbs thismorning. I gave him as much informationas I could about our obligations quasecurity in .Africa. 1 also discussed withhim at length our future relations withNew York. He pointed out that wi.S. S. intheir correspondence with Duff-6ooperhad clearly attempted to limit our activitiesin the Carbbean area to purely securitymatters. He drew special attention to thephrase in C's letter of the l8th Septemberin which it is stated that Stephenson as ourrepresentative would deal direct with us inthose matters which fall within our fieldof responsibility , viz. security in colonialpossessions and security liaison in dominionterritories. Gibbs thinks that the wordsecurity means that we have no locus standiCatalogue Reference:KVI4/190799in matters of counter-espionage. In otherwords that in places like Bermuda andTrinidad we should not deal direct withStephenson on C.E. matters. This positionwill clearly have to be qualified buton the analogy that we are the SecurityService I should have thought the wordsecurity should be held to embody C.E.Gibbs thinks that we should send copies ofall our communications to our stations inthe Caribbean area to Stephenson and thathe should do likewise. This might promotea fairly healthy exchange and avoid any sortof contrary instructions. Gibbs then wenton to tell me about recent disclosures inregard to "Pacific Cottage". Bird integratesall censorship material and passes on thecorrespondence with with references andcomments to S.I.S. These comments justremain in Christie's files. A recent letterfrom New York indicates that D.S.C. whoof course receive these intercepts directhave not integrated them although theyhave the same facilities for doing thisas ourselves. Christie receives theirletters and in spite of the fact that hehas the integrated censorship materialnever refers back to them drawing theirattention to the points that we have raised.The net result is that the work is not doneproperly either in New York or at Glenalmondand that we who eave none of the facilitiesfor checking up that S.I.S. have really knowmore than they do. It is no wonder thatnobody is in any position to give a compre-hensive account of Abwehr activities in theU.S.A.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/190gooI went over this afternoon to see C. andBridges about PEPPERMINT. Bridges was mainlyworried about MacCarthy who is quoted asone of P'S informants. MacCarthy is employedin the ar Cabinet Offices. He residesin the same house as P. P. knows him andI think regards him as being mildlyg indis-creet. I explained that the statementattributed to MacCarthy had not necessarilemana ed from him. P. might have beenusing him as a peg to hang the informationBridges however wished to get rid of Mac-Carthy in any case, as he was inefficient.I asked him to postpone any action thathe could for 2 or 3 weeks which he agreedto do. I/Bridges then left, and C. and I hada long talk. He was generally optimistic.He thought that the Germans had committeda frightful blunder in knocking their headsagainst Stalingrad. He thought they mightlater on go to Astrakhan but that time wasagainst them. His best informant who hadalways reported that the Russian venturewas a ghastly mistake on the part of theGermans was still convinced that Moscowwould not be taken, and that the attackon Leningrad would probably fail. A B.J.showing a conversation between nibbentropand Oshima in Berlin indicates the impor-tance of getting oil. C's informant whohad always thought that possibly theGermansmight get Maikop and Geozny, does not think tthat they will get Baku. In any case theywon'1 derive much benefit for a considerabletime.C. talked to me about an ISOS messageCatalogue Reference:KV/47198oindicating that GIRAUD was to be approachedby a V-man. He said that he was droppinga man over tonight to warn Ginaud. He alsotold me that Giraud was thoroughly on ourside and that 75% of the army at leastwere with us. He had recently dropped ananti-tank gun in order that the Frenchcould adapt their armoured vehicles to takethese guns as soon as the second frontopened. The man who took the gun oversaid that the landing-place was floodlitto a degree that was almost unbelievable.C. had subsequently had a message to say thatthe gun had been received intact, andthat the operation had been entirely success-ful. It is to be hoped that he is not beingdouble-crossed. Slesser late of the 2emeFreau is in command of a battalion andwas ready a short time ago to take Nantes,We were prepared to meet him. The Frenchare getting to a stage where it may berather difficult to hold them. As regardsN. Africa, the Americans have been makingall sorts of approaches but it is not knownyet for certain what opposition there islikely to be. On the whole it is consideredunlikely that the French "avy will put upmuch of a show since they well realise thatit can only lead to the bombing of toulon.C. is rather worried about certain membersof the 2ieme Bureau who have recently beensacked. They were formerly working withus., Rivet is no longer head of the bnneauwhich is working very much behind the scenes.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/190corSeptember 26thI had a long conversation with Curry andHart about the keeping up to date ofCurry'work on the Abwehr. Hart's view is that withthe large increase in the ISOS product andwith the increasing flow of information reach-ing Section V f'rom other sources, itisreally impossible for us to write upeither the Iberian Peninsula or theMiddle East if we have not got their fullco-operation. This they are not at themoment in a position to give. He thinkswe should confine ourselves to writing onspecial subjects such as the Sicherheits-dienst, Wehrwirtschaft etc. concerning whichwe can come into possession of all theavailable data. In the meantime Gwyermainly for the purposes of the R.P.S.is collecting information on an area basiswhich will enable us to extract informationfrom S.I.S. more easily. When he has gotthis work on its feet we may then reopenthe question with Section V. who are general-ly speaking rather inclined to regardcomprehensive reports as an academicluxury. I am sure that they are entirelywrong. It is undoubtedly a good thing forall workers to stand back periodically andtake stock of their position. Apart fromthis it is essential that some comprehen-sive view of the Abwehr should be ublishedfor the education of those who are not SOintimately acquainted with the subject.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/190$o3Montagu came to talk to me about PRYNNE.It seems that he has to some extent beenemployed by S.O.E. and Kinnaird House.I had a talk with Burt who has just returnedfrom N.Ireland. He seems to have smoothedout the I.G. He is quite certain thatthe only man who is really well informedon I.R.A. matters is Moffatt head of theS.B. in Belgast. As regards the Guinnesscase, Col.G. is regarded as entirely reliableby the G.0.C. The problem therefore isto ascertain who wrote the anonymous letteraccusing him of being in touch with theGerman Legation. Skardon is doing anotherscrutiny of Army forms in order to comparehandwritings.R.S.S. have once more blotted their copy: -book. They were co-operating with ourselvesin a special exercise run by G.OC. NorthernCommand The problem was to detect an illi-cit transmitter of our O n which was beingrun by Swann and also another which was tohave been provided by Signals. At the lastmoment Signals failed to produce a trans-mitter or to inform Elmes or Sclater. Elmeshad strict instructions not to make anarrest without prior reference to one ofour officers. Our own transmitter had beenlocated by intelligence means and not bythe mobile units. Elmes started to workon what he believed was the transmitterprovided by Signals. Unofrtunately howeverhe get on to the transmitter being usedby the Umpire controlling the operation.This transmitter was located at Jesmond andCatalogue Reference:KVI4/190GouElmes who I believe got some indication fromHope that the second transmitter would bein this area, put two and to together.Elmes then observed an Army Wireless Vehiclebearing Umpire marks, in which were twooperators wearing single white arm-bandsinstead of two white arm-bands, the officialmarking. He leaped to the conclusion thatthis must be the agent's transmitter. Hethen effected the arrest of the operatorsin collaboration with the police. The opera-tors protesting violently that they wereofficial umpires, were taken to policehead uarters where they were detained.It subsequently transpired that they were thothose working under the direction of theChief Umpire controlling the exercise andthat O ing to the breakdown in the unpire'scommunications which resulted, the exercisecame to an abrupt and early conclusion. TheG.O.C. Gen.Brooman-White and his staff, werenot unnaturally extremely annoyed. Theywere loudly demanding blood, but werestalled by being referred to the D.M.I.It is to be hoped that in future R.S.S.will be able to catch the spy and not theumpire.Lennox came to see me about the prosecutionof DAUBENY for revealing information aboutTorch. The Chief of Staff now wants topoetpone the prosecution tilly yafter theoperation as they feel that it will giveaway our order of battle to a number ofunauthorised persons even though the proceed-ings are held in camera. There has beenCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190fosa further incident in connection with Torch.A case of maps which had been sent to Swin-don en route for the p rt of departure nasbeen opened and resealed. The officer incharge of the party is suspected. It issuggested that Cookie and Burt after gettingthe full facts should investigate. Thedifficulty in these matters is to avoidspeeading the leakage through emphasisingits importance.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958. Dc 20900September 28thI had a meeting with Dick,-topford, Hart,about action in connection with Ostro. Wesent off a more explicit telegram to Maunsel.explaining to him our reasons for thinkingthat we are more likely to be successful intalogtheuRfefetenceinvisegeudan. We decided thataction in the Sudan would take place 10 dayscolafter the first serch at Bathurst. In orderto set the wheels in motion I sent to seeMedhurst to get his help with Civil Aviation.He told me that he had seen the Vice Chiefof the hir Staff who approved of our action,and he, Medhurst, would have a talk withHildred of Civil Aviation, and tell himthat he had to be prepared for a good manyprotests owing to the searching of aircraftand possible delays. Medhurst suggested that,it might be possible to make some arrange-ments for other planes to take on thepassengers after they had been searched.Gibbs went over to see the Colonial Officein order to get them to send appropridteinstructions to the Governor of Gambia.Gibbs is leaving today for W.Africa.I have just read Curry' memo. Its concludinparagraphs draw attention to the possibilitythat if all the material regarding the Ab-wehr vas carefully integrated from week toweek with operational material from C.sources it should provide an important pieceof evidence as to the enemy' intentions.He tentatively suggests that for examplethe fact that Vienna is controlling st tionsof the Abnehr in the Balans and on thesouth Russian front indicates the Germansintentions of making a pincer movement onthe Middle East. There is L think a gooddeal in what he says. It would be no argu-ment to my mind to say that there were otherand more positive indications of the enemy' Sintentions to be obtained from other sources.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/190807If ISOS only produces only a fiftieth partit should be included in the calculationsof the General Staff.Maiski is still propaganding here about aSecondFront. There is a certain ironyin the present situation. Russia with theutmost cynisism signed the Russo-Germanpactand thereby precipitated a world war, doubtleon the assumption that the British Empireand Germany would fight themselves to a standstill when Russia would come down like avulture and pick up the pieces. It is nowRussia and germany that are fighting themsel-ves into a state of exhaustion while we areto a certain degree enjoying a welcomerespite. This situation must be a sourceof considerable irritation to old Joe,although in advocating a second front hefails to recognise that we are alreadyfighting a war in the Middle East, in theAtlantic and byaerial bombardment of Germany,not to speak of supplying war materials tohussia and other theatres of war.I dined with Barty Bouverie. I asked hima good deal about Security Co-Ordination.He confirmed all my stories about agentsemployed in the Embassies in Washingtonwhich had caused SO much trouble betweenD.S.C. and the F.b.I. L asked him how farStephenson's removal would have caused anupheaval. He said that Donovan would probablyhave protested but he did not think it wouldhave gone much further than that. He doesnot think xkxxonx Donovan's fluence inthe White House was particularly strong.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/1904oDonovan was becoming more and more under theclose control of the Chiefs of Staff. Heinstanced a case where Donovan's people hadwished to employ somebody on the staff ofthe .S.Embassy at Vichy. >hey found asuitale person but the State Dept. insistedon telling the French that this man was amember of O.S.S. Donovan was powerlessto prevent this. In other words he couldnot use his influence with the Presidentto control the State Dept.Barty has seen a good deal of S.0.E.while over here and was impressed by the workthat they are doing. They had sent overno less than 90 canisters with arms etc. toFrance during the month of August. Hethought that they were making real progress.I asked him about V.H.F. ne told me thatS.U.E. were already using it for communica-tion with their agents. It is not completelysatisfactory but improvements were constantlybeing made. He talked about detectionin America with particular reference to therecent statements in the press about Mr.Kaiser's achievements in shipbuilding.He said that there was a good deal ofballyhoo about all this. In actual fact wagesin America are SO high that a good manypeople do not feel it worth while puttingtheir backs into the work. The consequencewas that in terms of man hours Americanproduction was very far below'ou on.Americans could turn out a ship in l0 daysfirstly because they put 1500 men on to thejob as against 250 in this country andCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1908u9secondly because they are able to work atnight, which isnot possible in this country.The Americans were now faced with a con-siderable shortage of labour, simply becausetheir workmen were slacking.September 29thI attended the D.D.G'S meeting, but nothingof any interest was discussed. Pilchergave an account of the BEZIER case. BEZIERwas suspected of being a German or Michyagent for several reasons, one of whichwas that he was the recipient of El0o notewhich had formerly been in the possessionof the Abwehr or Gestapo. There wasnotsufficient evidence for us to hold him.Subsequently the French induced him to jointheir forces. They then placed him underarrest and ubjected him to a certain amountof 3rd degree. BEZIER succeeded in gettinga message out to his mistress as a resultof which a writ cf habeas corpus has beenfiled. The French are rather inclinedto ignore this writ and Toby has had consid-erable difficulty in getting them to takethe matter seriously.Later I attended a meeting with D.D.G.,Lennoand Bevan. I am not quite sure as to thepurpose of this meeting, except perhaps forBevan to make his number and explain hiswork. He had one special question on whichhe desired to consult us. Dudley Clarkeis returning here shortly on a visit. Heis anxious to have ways and means of puttingCatalogue Reference:KVI4/19Cgoover deception in E. .Africa, and was suggest-ing setting up his organisation for thispurpose in such places as LourAnco Marques.Did this meet with ourapproval? We saidthat being foreign territory itwas notstrictly our concern but that on generalgrounds we thought it highly undesirable.S I.S. and S.0.E. were already in the fieldand it would obviously be a mistake to setup another orgnisation If Dudley Clarkedid not think that the existing machinerywas satisfactory he should have complainedin the appropriate quarter and steps shouldbe taken to see that his demands were met, asfar as possible.Orr came to see me with a general complaintabout S.I.S. He seemed to think that theremust be something wrong with their organisa-tion. His main complaint was that he sendsin reports about interviews at Room 055 butnobody pays any attention to them till severaweeks later when they ring up and ask himfor information about the individuals concern-ed. When he tells them that a report has al-ready been sent in the answer is invariab. ythat they have not seen it or that it can:-not be traced. Similarly in thecase of S.1.5agents who come his way with stories ofone kind or another, it takes weeks beforehe can find out who is responsible for them.Frost, Hughes, Dick and I had a meeting aboutthe detection of illicit wirekess and thepart played by R.S.S. The first complaintwas that R.S.S. had produced no suitabletechnical devides other than the vans. WeCatalogue Reference:KVI4/190had designed a special machine for recording80(frequencies within a distance of 100 yardsor SO cf an enemy transmitterTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958tooAs R.S.S. ourtechnical tool, had not helped, were wejustified in going direct tc the Post Ofice?The second point we considered was thequestion of the Mobile Units. Frost saidthat they had no means of inter-comunicationand that the personnel were bad. ThirdlyFrost complained that there was no policingof our own services. This was essentiallya security matter. Lastly we consideredthe giestion of V.H.F. Frost said thatthe vans which handled it had to turn outon an average of once a week only and couldvery well be employed on experimental workof this kind. We decided in the end to stateour varicus complaints and to ask G.P.and Maltby if they ould come and discusshem.I had a long talk with darker in the eveningwhen I told him that there were many thingsin the department with which L personally wasfar from satisfied. This had followedcriticisms of S.I.S. These were (1) re-grouping of sections dealing with 5th columnwork (2) 0. O.C C. (3) E. Division in relation tothe R.P.S. and (4) the registry. I gave himmy reasons for each case which I have alreadyCatatoguet detReferenee'/190iSeptember 30thI had a slight dust-up with Harker on thequestion of N.D.O.S. L said L thoughtthere ought to be some uniform procedurethroughout the office. L was quite readyto withdraw the privileges from certainofficers in B. provided people like Abbodid night-duty. Harker evidently does notwish to deal with this.L took the weekly meeting. Hart said thatthere had been a large number of inaccuratereports from the Fidrmuc source reachingthe Germans this week, dealing with thealleged arrival of British troops in India,the "launching" of the Hood and Anson, bothof which have been in commission for sometime, etc.The agent on the "Shetland" has not yetbeen identified, although it seems certainnow that his name is the same as that ofhis mother i.e. JANNSEN.We learn that PRYNNE had no mission fromS.O.E. to pass information to the Germansor indeed to contact them at all.ISOS indicates that sabotage of the "BaronForbes" is planned. There have been aspate of Second Front reports, mainly re-garding British attempts against Norway andintentions in Africa.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/190The Germans are showing interest in ADen,813and seem to think they can get informationfrom Jibouti. Harry Allen who was presenton my invitation mentioned that Websterhad sent ina report to this office, whichhas never been seen by anyone in B.Division,mentioning his fears of leakage throughthe uncontrolled air routes from Aden, andalso through dhow traffic. Harry has promiseto try and locate this report, which musthave gone out through 0.C to whateversections they think are interested. B. Divisidoes not seem to be included in the number.We have heard that FRITZCHEN is to leaveon some date prior to October 9th.The cases of Pierre MOREL and KarlTRUNINGEN, now at Camp 020, and others ofthe same kind, point to the existence ofa Swiss seaman courier service on Swiss boatsrunning between Genoa and U.S.A. ISOSmentioned such a service some time ago andalso said that Turkish Seamen on boatsgoing to U.S.A. are to be approached.Nevile Bland came to see me about a case ofleakage through a Dutch friend of his. He isgoing to make further enquiries.I had a long discussion in the afternoonwith Jock Whyte about arrangements for deal-ing with escaped P/WS and evaders. We havecome to an arrangement with M.I.9 by whichwe will, on receiving the names and numbersof these people in advance, get descriptionsof them from their W.O. papers. These willCatalogue be sent Reference:Kfi4/1o to the will notify usgiu(a) whether the description fits the manwhen he arrives and (b) in the case ofescapers, the number of the P/W campfrom which he comes. B. 4 will then have alook up on the individual and also on thecamp, which may be one in which there arecertain disloya] individuals whose activitieshave come to the notice of censorship. Wecan then ask the escaper what he knows abontthese people. If we are interested eithe.in the individual or the camp B. 4 will sendan officer to the transit camp to intervieweither the escaper or evader. Any recordsSO obtained should be closely related tothose of British subjects returning fromoccupied territory or internment campsin unoccupied territory, aldo with therecords of the R.P.S.Bamford of I.P.I. came to see me aboutPeter Fleming, who is returning to thiscountry from India. He is responsible toWavell for deception work. it seems howeverthat his channels to the enemy are slow andcomplex. I should say that what he requiredwas a good XX agents. in touch with Kabulwhere all the Axis countries areepresented.D.1.B. should be able to provide such anagent. Bamford is going to see rleming andBevan on this matter.I saw Bowlby who has just returned from theMiddle East. I had hoped thaty he might beable to tell us something about Ostro andthe investigations being carried out on thissubject in Egypt. Unfortunately he seemedto know very little. He is of course concerneCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190with the offensive side of espionage. Lgather that he leaves most of the defensivework entirely to Rodney Dennis. EquallyBowlby seemed to be somewhat ignorantabout Max and Moritz.Spent the evening with Curry at Woldingham.He is still very worried about his positionwhich is obviously unsatisfactory in manyways. What he really wants to do is to getback to some active job with definiteresponsibilities. I am seriously consider-ing try ing in conjunction with him toorganise a complete reorganisation of theoffice for presentation to the D.G.October lstI discussed with J.C. a really pathologicalletter which I have received from Viv. aboutthe case of MULLET. J.C. said that incertain eventualities the case would have tobe passed back to us as it would have tobe handled by the Twenty Commttee. Viv.takes this to mean that we run and controlthe Twenty Committee, and cites it as aninstance of friction between B. lA and SectionV. He goes on to express the hope thatit may some day be possible for me to controlmy subordinates. The whole thing is non-dense since MULLET was dug out by us, anddirected by us as being an agent resident inthis country. The whole thing vas done withthe full co-operation of all parties concern-ed. If therefore P.W.E. or the F.O. or C.do not wish to control him he will have tocome back to us, who will have to be responCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190416sible for the instructions issued to himafter they have been deliberated in theTwenty Committee.Lennox came to see me about the Catalinawhich crashed off the Spanish coast. Allthe occupants were killed, including arepresentative of S.0.E. and some ficer whowas carrying a letter to Mason wac aboutthe Second Front. This letter actuallygave the date. The body of the man whocarried it was washed up on the Spanishshore and handed over by a Spanish NavalOfficer to a British R.A.F. officer. Theletter was sealed and did not appear tohave been tampered with. I.S.S.B. are how ina great flap as to whether Torch has beencompromised.Machell came to see me about a letterwritten by Diana Cooper to a certain womancalled Dr. KOMMER in the United States.In this letter she mentioned Randolph'swife's affair with Averill Harriman. Shetells Dr. KOMMER to keep it to herself asshe doesn't want to spread gossip, whichif of course exactly what she is doing.She also alludes to Duff having to payincome tax on E5,000 a year while he isreceiving only E2,000 as Chancellor of theDuchy of Lancaster. She adds that he getsno money for his secret service work asthis would be improper for an M.P. PersonallI do not think that there is any very greatharm in either of these remarks but a nicepoint has been reached when the letters ofCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190the wife of the head of a department are sub-mitted to his subordinates for censorship.If we advise that the offending passagesshould be erased and it subsequently trans-pires that this has been done on our instruc-tions Duff would be annoyed On the otherhand if we give him the letter he may tellus that we are being stupid in taking exceptito certain remnks which are more or lesscommon knowledge.Machell also told me about two people calledCOLLIE and ANTON or ASTON who have recentlycome back from Occupied Territory and are intouch with Kenneth de COURCY, to whom theyhave given a good deal of information.They have written a book, the MS of whichis now in the hands of Jonathan Cape. Thebook discloses a certain amount of informa-tionabout escape organisations. There isa good deal of conversation of a derogatorykind about S.I.S. I gatheralso that deCOURCY has been talking about the SecondFront and that he is in close contact withKennedy of the Planning Dept.Viv. talked to me about our plans during theSecond Front. He seemed to think thatS. I S. should have been represented at theN.O. meeting which L attended some daysago with Harry Allen. I said that themeeting was a purely informal one of anexploratory nature, and explained to himhow it had arisen. said that we did notwant any new commitments but we were anxiousto know in advance whetherve were going toCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190grebe called upon to produce people withspecialised knowledge. It seemed to mefairly clear from the meeting that theresponsibilities were very ill-definedand I envisage the possibility that we mightat the last moment be asked to produce 10bodies for wireless, sabotage, R.S.L.O.or B. lA functions. I suggested to Viv.that he should get a copy of the minutesfrom Harry Allen and that some representa-tive of S.I.S. should be present at the nextmeeting. In the meantime I have ritten toG.I about Mobile Units and the Second Front.Frost has had a conversation with Maltbywho seems to be more or Less prepared toconsider all the points which were raised atthe meeting between Frost, Frost,Dick, Dick, Hughes andmyself the other day.I saw Duff-Cooper on 3 matters: Ostro, AMERI)-can representativn and Peppermint.I explained the origin of Ostro and themeasures ve were proposing to take Hequite agreed with our course of action.I showed him the B.J. giving reppermint'sreport to Madrid. He read it all carefullyand seemed much interested and amused thatthe deception had gone through./ I explainedto him once more the position about represen:tation in America, namely that, S. I.S. were inagreement about direct rerpesentation inmatters affecting the Caribbean but that theyhad tried to whittle this down by definingour position as security in the colonies andCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190319security liaison with the dominions. I wasinclined to think that they were trying tomake a distinction between security andC.E. work. He said he thought that that wasquite possible but recommended that we shouldaccept the wider interpretation. I thenmade it clear that S.I.S. did not regard theagreementias giving us the right to communicarect with Stephenson on matter S affectingour liaison with the F.B.I. and North Americagenerally. He said "Oh well, once you haveestablished direct contact with Stephensonthere is nothing to stop you from communi-cating with him on these matters. I saidthat L did not think it was as simple asthat, as I had already an an interview withC. and Viv. and they had made their positionquite clear and this had been followed bythe turning down of a proposal of minethat we should keep them in the picture bysending them copies of our telegrams andletters and ringing them up before sendinga telegram, in case they had alreadycommunicated with New York on the same sub-ct. I thought there would have to besomething in writing, which woud make itquite clear that we could not go on bottle-necking our stuff through Glenalmond.Duff then started talking about A.C.E.He said he thought arguments put forward bySection V. for not coming up to tonn werevery forcible. I told him once more thatI thought it was essential that they shouldnot only come u to London but should be inCatalogue the same gureeReterentcienkviansorselves. saidTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.1- 2000.that the arguments about communications didnot strike me as being valid. There was al-ways the point that if they were housed inthe same building as ourselves we shouldno longer require our lines to Glenalmondwhich would be availabme for them forcommunication with their registry and othersections of their office. As regards thefiles, they would on the whole be losingnothing and possibly even gaining a certeamount. He then suggested that possiblycertain of their most important sectionssuch as the Spanish, Middle East and americanmight come up. E said that we should bevery pleased to see them but that II did notthink that such an arrangement would beacceptable to Section V. who would say thatthey could not have their show split intotwo parts. It would be far preferable tomy mind to have them all up here.October 2ndThere is a tremendous flap going on aboutde COURCY. Apparentlyshow that something about the Second Fron+is coming out in the next number of hisNews-Letter. Jim Hale has been sent offto see Dents who were supposed to be thepublishers. On arrival he found that itwas some other firm. This could have easilybeen ascertained by looking at one of theback numbers. Meanwhile Toby and Harkerwent over to M.O.I. to see yril Radcliffewho explained that he could do nothingCatalogeRefereneexv4/tooy rang up the publish-ers who said that a number of copies hadalready gone out and the rest were due togo today. I do not know what the sequelhas been but clearly de COURCY will nowknow that the W.O. are interested in hisbulletin and that therefore its contentsare probably correct.Stopford and Hart dined with Diplock lastnight. There has evidently been a good dealof lobbying at Kinnaird House on the subjectof A.C.E. and the undesirability of SectionV. coming to London. Diplock had been per-suaded that their arguments were good, butafter several hours with Hart and Stopfordhe now thinks they are bad. He has I thinkbeen persuaded that there is no validobjection to their coming up and thatit would be impossible for us to go down.He does not think that anything in the wayof amalgamation is possible for the moment,but he thinks Section V. coming to Londonis a step to something of the kind.He has asked Hart and Stopford to producea note giving concrete examples of howimpossible it would be for us to functionin the country owing to our relations withGovt. Depts. in London. They have alsosuggested that he should see Philby. Hisinvitation to uart and Stopford came entirelyout of the blue. They told Diplock thatbefore accepting the invitation they wouldhave to refer the matter to me. E naturallyagreed, since it is to everybody' advantagethat Kinnaird House should know as muchabout the facts as possible.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/190We had a meeting to discuss the arrangementsfor FRITZCHEN'S arrival. Stanford is goingto be at Fighter Command H.Q. to watch thetracks for any suspicious plans coming in.The Regional Officers have been given fullparticulars and will mobilise the C.C.S anda few selected S.B. officers under thedirection of Burt and his sub-ordinates.Cam020 are in the picture and will be givena brief for the interrogation. I sawMaxwell this afternoon about the case.Itwas decided that FRITZCHEN should go toCamp 20 and that he should, be detained inthe first instance under the arrival fromEnemy Territory Act. It seemed unlikely thatcircumstances would arise which wouldnecessitate his being brought before anAdvisory Committee but if we were faced withsuch an eventuality the H.O. will do every-thing in their power to safeguard ourinterests. We propose to turn FRITZCHENround immediately if his case has not causedtoo much publicity. We know a good dealabout him already. fe is probably anEnglishman called CHAPMAN. He has an IdentityCard and a card permitting him as an Iriman to work in this country. He has had alarge sum of money spent on his teeth. He is6' tall, and has been carefully trained inWireless, Secret Ink, Sabotage and Parachutejumping. He will be wearing a special kindof kit, details of which are known, and willbe dropped somewhere in the vicinity of Londolbetween now and Octo. th.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/190623I have sent off a letter to Viv. about theMULLET case, in which I have told him thatthe misunderstandings between us appear tome to be almost pathological and suggestingthat we should tear up the whole corres-pondence, but that if he does not agreethat I must pa ss his letter to J.C. for areasoned reply and since he has alreadyconsulted C. submit the whole thing to theD.G.I have just heard that Herschel Johnson,as American Ambassador in Sweden, has justarrived back from Stockholm and wants tosee me.Helmut CLISSMAN has arrived in Madrid and hasbeen accompanied by, we believe, Frank RYAN.There is nothing at present to indicateexactly what hs in the wind. CLISSMAN wasof course formerly active in EireHarry has asked me whether in the light ofour experiences during the last 3 years we ththink he would be justified in allowingaliens to take up work which might conceivablgive them access to information of interestto the enemy. I have said that there are2 problems to be considered:(] the entryof Axis agents and 12) the static 5th columnelements who might becne dangerous in timeof crisis. As regards the former! we weremore or less satisfied that we were on topof the situation although there were one ortwo u known quantities. As regards the latte:there is no evidence to show the existenceCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190guof a widespread organisation either controlleof uncontrolled by the Germans but that intime of crisis there might be more people thawe know about who would be prepared to giveassistance to the enemy. ur informationon this part of the problem seems to be morenegative than positive. His action 1thought should be based more on our knowledgeor lack of knowledge of German agents, andthat his problem is to decide whether togo for 100% safety or to make a reasonablebet. If the latter he should consider care-fully how far the employment of the aliens arreally in the national interest. We had hadrather a striking example in the case oftechnicians. There had been a drive f ralien technicians. Only 33 had been found -two of them were spies and the remainderuseless from the technical point of view.ISOS indicates that on the 2oth Berlin knewsomething about the Catalina which came downin the sea near Cadiz on the 24th. Sincethe Abwehr in Spain seem to be ignorantabout the matter, there is at least a possib-ility that Berlin got this informationthrough the interception of our messageson the subjeet. I am asking Viv. for hisviews and suggesting that some enquiryshould be made.October 3rdGilfillan begins his report for the monthof August by saying that the peace of northernIreland was well maintained during the monthof august 1942. 152 indictable offences wereCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190825reported compared with 148 in the previousmonth.Stopford showed me a memo that he had receivedfrom his agent who has just returned fromD. .Africa and was apparently responsible forthe arrest of SERAFAMIDES. Thishad not beenapparent from the report from S.I.S. whichindicated that their representative wasresponsible. Doubtless however Muggeridgedid a good job in protecting the agent. Thelatter is clearly full of resenrce and hassucceeded in obtaining quite a lot of valuableinformation.Hart has given me a memo reviewing the ctivit-ies of the German Intelligence Service eversince the last 3 years. he said that out ofa totl number of 66 enemy agents apprehendedor identified in the U.K. during this time,only 2 or 3 were resident here before thewar and had engaged themselves before thewar to work for the enemy. He seems to haveomitted a few names who might have beenincluded in this category. Secondly hestated that since the outbreak of war onlytwo German agents out of a total of 66 havehad instructions to contact other agents whowere both residents and working for theGermans here before the outbreak of war.Thirdly evidence shows that the Germans haveno sources resident in this country beforethe war through whom they could pay theiragents here. Fourthly ISOS has never referredto an agent in England in terms to suggestthat he was resident and acting under instruc-Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1902otions before the war. On the other handthey do make reference to sources known orpartially known to us to have become residenthere since the war. Fifthy with the excep-tion of SCOTT-FORD, the German and Britishagents have been persons of Aryan Germanorigin who have acquired by marriage, naturalisation or accident of birth, British nation-ality. With the exception of WARSCHAUERthey have ot been drawn from the refugeeclasses. Lastly kone of the agents whoehavebeen apprehended or identified since the warhad any instructions to make contact withany subversive political movement in thiscountry, not even with the B.U.F. Thisis not entirely correct if we accept themission of HORSEFALL-ERTZ who was an officialof the B.U.F. instruetd to get into touch withMrs. WHINFIELD who controlled the Party fundsand whose son had gone into Germany throughSwitzerland under the direction of oneKRUGER, a German agent. Further, Snow hadcertain instructions regarding HORSEFALLERTZ.On the other hand Hart goes on to say thatthe Germans have made an attempt te establishcontact with theWelsh Nationalists and alsowith the I.R.A. He thinks therefore thatthe Germans have not in general concentratedon political movements but on movements whichare racial or nationalist in character. Fromall this he deduces that there was no Kriegsnetzin this country because the germans reliedon the N.S.D.A.P. etc. to keep us out of thewar; because they themselves were too pre-occupied in 1933-37 with internal problems andproblems affecting European states; because aslong as France was in the war information aboutCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190$27ingland could be got out of their organisa-tion in France, and lastly because of theirtrust in Snow and his notional group of 12sub-agents. There is I think one otherfactor which Hart has left out of the account,namely the knowledge the Germans had throughthe machine tool industry of our incapaictyto make war. This information had beenobtained SO easily and they were SO confidentthat we should not make way that they did nottake the trouble to establish a reallyefficient Kriegsnetz. While Hart thinksthat we are rightly impressed by the Abwehrand the Sicherheitsdienst, he does not thinkthat we should be dazed or hyptonised.by theminto believing they can operate in all timesand places with the thunder-boit energy andprecision sometimes attributed to them intheir work of espionage and disruption ofmorale. He argues that the position on thecontinent at the outbreak of war bearsrnno analogy to the position here today. Ientirely agree with this but L do not thinkthat Curry in his memo ever implied nythingof the kind. Hart draws the following lessonsfor the future. He suggests that we shouldlay less attention to aliens or people ofenemy origin resident here before the war andconcentrate more on those who have arrivedsince the war. In the latter category heincludes seamen, persons arriving from German-occupied territory, neutral diplomats orofficial persons, persons wishing to jointhe allied forces, particularly the air forces,S.I.S. and S.0.E. agents and persons comingto this country and taking employment asCatalogue Reference:KV/47190technicians etc should devote more time929to examination at the RPS, lines of communi-cation whether wireless, secret ink, diplomaticbags, courier or otherwise, and that we shoulddevote some of the personnel to the work whoare now employed on combing through the pre-war alien population. I agree with a greatdeal of what he says, if we are purelyconcerned with catching spies. I am asconvinced as he is, and have been sincethe early days of the war, that there wasno long-term German espionage organisatinnleft behind in this country. 1 always feltthere might be one or two still operatingalthough our evidence on this point wasnegative. If however we are to considerthe potential 5th column here in a time of reacrisis we cannot altogether ab andon ourenquiries into the pre-war populationwhich in my view has never really been sifted.There is an interesting report by G.H.ILHome Forces on a German manual called "DasBritische Kriegsheer" dated april 1942,recently captured in Libya. This book whichis marked "Secret, only to be issued down toDivisions" shows that information aboutor army organisation in the post-war periodis, on the admission of the authors, somewhatscanty. They have no detailed informationabout new formations in this country sinceJan. 1942. Little is known about the Intelli-gence Corps, airborne troops,R R.A.F. F. regiment,Commandos or the toyal Artillery. G.1i.Q. isdescribed as being probably at Leicester.signs of formations are confined to those unitswhich have had contact with the enemy either inCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190629France, Norway or the Middle East. None ofthe armoured dormations at present in thiscountry appear to have been identified. Thereis very little about the forces situated inthis country and even as regards our forceselsewhere there is less than is availableabout the German Army to our own staffs.This is encouraging from our point of view.October 4thPEPPERMINT has returned and has been seen byBrooman-White He was welcomed with openarms by ALCAZAR, who explained to him thatalthough his military information had beenof great value he was now more concerned withpolitical information. The motive behind thisis that SUNER is particularly anxious tore-establish his position as a mediator betweenthe Allies and the Germans if an appropriatemoment arrives. SUNER thought of payinga visit to the U.S.A on such a mission if itwas likely to have any success. The spaniardsare anxious that the war should come to anend as they feel that it is reducing theircountry to a state of abject poverty.PEPPERMINT then explained that ALCAZAR hadoffered to give him money in Swiss francsand American dollars, a Minox camera on whichwould be films containing a questionnair, thecamera to be used for photographing documentssecret ink which had to be developed in 3processes, and cover addresses if the bag couldnot be used. PEPPERMINT explained the diffi-culties of using tthebbagwowing to its beingCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190$30censored by the Ambassador. ABCAZARsuggested that a use of the Greek bagmight be made since the Greek minusterin Madrid was in his pay. When PEPFER-MINT went to collect his bag at the F.0.in Madrid he expected to find a smallinner bag with all the things which hadbeen promised him by ALCAZAR. Instead ofthat he was handed a letter from ALCAZARby a representative of the F.0. whois in ALCAZAR'S pay. He did not openthis but rather foolishly had it placedin the bag. When he arrived the bagwashanded in and the letter opened by theAmbassador, who wishes to see PEPPERMINTon Monday. the letter contained $2,0009,000 Swiss francs, and the film withthe questionnair. PEPPERMINT is goingto say that he had no knowledge of thequestionnair which must have been insertedby ALCAZAR who for a long time has beentrying to blackmail him, but that themoney was to pay the debts of the PressBureau and finance it for future operatiorIt is hoped that he may get away withthis. It seems from conversations betweenPEPPERMINT and ALCAZAR that VILLAVERDEhas for a long time been cognisant ofALCAZAR'S activities. He isliked thembut felt it politic to play with him.Now that SUNER has gone he will probablychange his tune. He is a real time-server.B.W. also told en about certain negotiatiorwith Sir George Young who is in touchwith NEGRIN. NEGRIN says that he isCatalogue talogueuRreterence.Rti4higc Spain and he has beenTHIS THISIS ACO IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION930ACT 3 (4 OF 1958. THE PUBLIC RECORDSasked to disclose to us his informationand informants. He has replied by ayingthat we should talk to Gen. Rotas onthis matter, and that the latter shouldbe allowed to come here for this purposefrom the Argentine. This seemed to bea ruse to get Rotas to this country.Sir George Young returned to the chargeand suggested that he must at leasthave about somebody the organisation. here who knew NEGRIN something then saidthat he could not disclose nything ofthe kind without the knowledge andapproval of the British F.O. He wasobviously playing a political game andwas looking ahead to the time when hehopes he may get some support from theBritish Govt. in setting up a new regimein Spain. Obviously the F.U. cannot bea party to this. On the other hand itseems a pity that we or rather b. L S.should not be able to take advantage ofNEGRIN' organisation, which is probablybeing run in conjunction with the RussiansONEGRIN spent much time with MAISKY andin the meantime there is a wrangle betweerEden and Morrison on the question offor NEGRIN. Morrisondoes not like the idea. We say that itisdesirable that we should know about anyopganisation operating on British terri-tory and have the support of the F.O.I do not quite know what the next moveshould be.Catalogue Reference:kVI4/19oI had a long talk with Sneath who is93rather wondering what he is going to dowhen he has finished his enquiries intothe alien population. 1 told him thatour minds were working on some sort ofre-shuffle. There should be useful workfor him to do. I read to him Hart'smemo and told him that Iwas very anxiousto know exactly what had been done bythe various sections concerned who werereviewing the cases of enemy aliensin this country,my impression beingthat we were singularly ignorant aboutmost of them.October 5thTwo Dutch brothers named ERASMUS havearrived here as escappes. They havebroken down at the RPS and are beingsent to Ham. They were apparentlytrained in Brussels.Dick is now writing a memo on the workof the whole office for the last 3 years.I think this may be a suitable peg onwhich to hand some sort of regrganisa-tion scheme.Viv. rang me up about the security ofthe factory that is making "the bomb "40 people are employed on the work andit is now suggested that they should beasked to sign the Official Secrets Act.I said that 1 wondered whether one mightnot be doing more harm than good byCatalogiaterererie&ksyapigd security measuresat this late stage. Might it not perhaps33emphasise the secrecy of the work? Isuggested that possibly Joe Archer mightgo down and have a look at the place.Viv. rang up afterwards to say that hehad referred this point to Nigel de Greywho seemed very agitated and reluctantthat anyone should look into thesecurity question.October 6thI attended the D.G.S meeting today.Toby explained the position with regardto the SERAFAMIDES case. The latter isa Greek seaman who has been working forCAMPINI, the Italian Consul and .S. agentin Lourenco Marques. Through the ingen-uity of a B.] L agent and the S.I.S.representative in Lourenco Marques he waslured on to a ship and subsequentlyhanded over to the S. African authoritiesin Durban. We wish to get him back herein order to interrogate him and ifpossible produce a case for representa-tions by the F.O. to the Portuguese Govt.for the removal of CAMPINI. o obtainthe extradition of SERAFAMIDES is asomewhat complex matter. We have powersin the case of colonies under OB(a)but not in the case of dominions. In thecase of a colony the Army Council wouldhave to empower a competent militaryauthority on the spot. It'would bedifficult for them to empower a Britishofficer to issue an order in a dominionand it woudd equally be impossible forthem to empower a . African authorityCatalogue Reference:KV/4/19099uover whom they have no jurisdiction. Itis therefore suggested that the DominionGovernment should deport SERAFAMIDESand that on his arrival here we shouldrefuse him leave to land and detainhim under 12(5)a. It seems to methat this action could be challenged ifSERAFAMIDES was brought to trial butsince there iseno other machinerywe shall have to take the risk.Viv. has replied to my letter aboutthe MULLET case. He takes the line thatit would have been simpler if I had quietascertained what J.C. had in his mind.He then goes on to say that there hasbeen considerable advantage in the pastin hewand myself speaking our mindsfreelyyand acting as a safety valve.He seems to think that my remarks wererather strong and apt to be offensive,to which I might reply suggesting thathe should have a look at his own letter.He has hoever agreed to tear the corres-pondence up and talk when he sees me next.Senter brought round Lord Allertonwho is taki g over the security of S.0.E.outstations. I discussed the questionof the Wireless Panel. Senter is quiteemphatic that Archie Boyl will nottolerate any interference by Frostin this matter. This of course raisesan awkward situation.I showed Senter C's letter about leakagethrough the Fighting French. u. does notCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190835 35wish to stage any "plant" in conjunctionwith S.0.E. as he thinks such action mightjeopardise his relations and because hehas already proved that things do leakthrough that channel. I have writtenback asking him for evidence on thispoint and details since it is a matterof some concern to us.I had a meeti g with Toby, Adam, Lick,Abbott, Albert and Orr, on the sub bjectof a Receptior Centre for British subjectsarriving from abroad. I said that the reasonfor setting up such a centre yas that Britishsubjects of a somewhat undesirable typewere arriving in increasing numbers andI felt that they should be examined withgreater thoroughness Quite a humbercome from unoccupied France. I believedto that we mayrhave a number of Americansof a similar type, whocannot go to theRPS and must therefore be examined else-where. There was a good deal of irrele-vant discussion, at the end of which itwas decided to put forward a memo totheExecutive. Adam, on the basis ofany advance information that we obtainfrom the establishment of an examiner inLisbon and through other sources, willsort out arrivais at the port andcasthis net somewhat wider than heretogore.These people will later be' asked to callat the Reception Centre, which it was feltcould not be at Wandsworth but should besomewhere in the vicinity of Whitehall.Catalogue ReterenGeekVg4/1goast two examiners.$86Albert will go to the RPS where he willcontrol the records and do all the spadework. Orr was the only dissentient voice.He seemed to think that this new arrange-ment would involve us in a good deal ofunnecessary expense in view of the factthat the ground uis already covered. Hewishes to record his views on paper tothe D.G., which I have told him to do.the real trouble is that he feels thatthe new arrangement is a reflection onhimself, which in fact it is not. We onlywant to &o the job much more comprehensively than it has been possible to do it inthe past.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.Oak000Catalogue Reference:KV/4/190837October 7thI took the veekly meeting. The Germansappear to contemplate an attack by uson Dakar fronGambia, landings by air andSea in Sicily and Eastern Italy and anattack on the French coast in the areaof the Gironde Estuary. There has beenanother Ostro message giving detailsabout the Bth Army supplies in the MiddleEast. TheSicherheitsdienst in Norwayhas been trying to penetrate escapeparties by sending agents to England inthe guise of bona fide eseapees. TheirrecentXX attempt was unsuccessful sinceO ing to premature arrests the boatleft without the S.D agents.Rainbow has received a new type of Duffwhich consists of white letters on blackbackground.From the 14th May to the 25th SeptemberGarbo has received $4,000.P/W reports shon a general decline inmorale as compared with any period priorto 1942. There was some anxiety aboutthe progress of the war, more dissatis-faction with service conditions, andmore political criticism. within theperiod under review German successes inRussia appear temporarily to h ye broughtabout some slight rise in morale and thewill to resist was also strengthenedby fear of the conse uences of defeat.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/19068I had a talk with Trevor-hoper who istrying to gain his independence fromSection V. He wants to Nork directlyunder C. with free access to all depts.to whom be supplies his material.-Grogam came to talk to me about thecensorship of P/WV mails. A letter hasbeen received in code from one of ourP/Ws in which he indicates that thecorrespondence of P/Ws is very carefullygone into and that curiously certainpeople for completely unexplained reasonsreceive their correspondence much quickerthan others. He suggests that the Germansmay be making improper use of the P/Wmail in some way which he cannot plain.Ve went into this subject in connectionwith the EVERSDEN case, and L was told thaP/W mail takes anything up to threemonths to reach its destination. Iasked that further enquiries should bemade as to how long P/W mail takes toreach German territory or possiblySwiss territory. I was told that judgingby the date of posting and the date ofarrival on British territory of incomingmail the average time was about 10 daysto a fortnight. It may therefore beassumed that much the same applies inthe reverse direction. If thereforeletters for one of our P/Ws were pickedout at the frontier a epy letter couldbe held back and the remainder of themail would be sent on, in rather specialcircumstances, direct to the camp con-Catalogue Reference:KV/4/190839cerned. This might account forsomepeople getting their letters quickerthan others. Censorship are going totest P/W mail more extensively infuture. Probably the bath system will beapplied. There are roughly 200, 000letters going out per week.Grogan told me that he had heard fromDent of Bermuda who has recentlyreturned to this country, that thegeneral censorship for Duff had ceasedsince March or April of this year. Dentexplained that he had been informed byan American officer of signals of thetext of an ISOS message indicatingthat Duff was to be discontinued. Denthad been rather indignant that he hadnever received any confirmation of thisfrom England, but had neverhteless decidedto order the cessation of a general searchA particular search, namely of suspiciousletters, is still going on. These aretested both for Duff and S/W. Themessage to which Americans Signals hadreferred has been traced here, but itdoes not give any clear indication thatDuff is to be stopped on other routes.It would seem only to refer to lettersfrom Brazil. There seems to be somedanger in Bermuda taking action in thesematters without prior reference to London.I saw Herschel Johnson who is over herefor a few days from Stockholm. He told methat the atmosphere in Sweden was on thewhole extremely. fayourable to the allies,Catalogue Reference:KV14/190suoalthough the Govt. were maintaininga very strictly neutral attitude. theywere quite prepared to deal with intelli-gence agents of either side very firmly.Herschel Johnson was anxious to know alettle about the German intelligenceservice. I could not tell him much aboutStockholm but I gave him a general pictureHe apparently institutes fairly effectivesecurity precautions at the Legation.I dined with oger Hollis who has returnedafter a long illness. We talked about thede COURCY case, details of which werenot really known to me. He seemed to thinthat the whole business had been Lamentab-Ly handled. Harker's final interviewwith Hanau was miked and on record.Hollis felt that it was far too friendlyand that an excellent opportunity hadbeen missed for taking action againstde C.We then discussed the 5th Column. Hoilisis rather sceptical and had the impres-sion that Curry' memo was trying todraw an analggy between the situationhere and that which had existed on thecontinent at the beginning of the war.I said that I did not think that thiswas Curry's intention. He had merelydesired to collect all informationthat there was on the subject of the 5thColumn and to make it clear that whatwas commonly known as the 5th columnwas really part of the functions of theCatalogue Abwebr "eferend8'kv/n1gorectior of the OKW.gurHollis then referred to Curry suggestedremedy of adding to the Invasion Listsin an arbitrary manner and referring thewhole matter to the Home Secretary.I said that I entirely agreed with thiscriticism. I thought it was purelya question of utting oun oNn house inorder, and that if any names were addedto the Invasion List they would have tocome up to the re quired standards. WhereI thought we were deficient vas inknowledge of the alien and dual nationalpopulation.Hollis then talked about the D.G.S andFulford's views on the Comintern, whichhe thought were unsound. There wassome idea that the Comintern had ceasedto function. Admittedly it is probablynot functioning in exactly the same waybut its activities are going on justthe same. Neither Hollis nor I thinkthat there is any evidence to show thatthe policytofst Soviet Govt. and theComintern has changed one iota. Clearlythe whole second front campaign isdictated from Moscow. Whether theinstructions come by courier or throughthe Embassy makes no difference. thereis no doubt that the hussians are takingevery possible advantage of the presentsituation to dig themselves in and thatthey will cause us a great deal of troublewhen the war is overCatalogue Reference:KVI4/19(cu?October othThe D.G. returned from leave today. Iinformed him about the various majorincidents that had occurred duringhis absence.Atthe R.S.S. meeting this morning Iexplained the position about the Palestineintercepts. Maltby said that stepswere being taken to have the servicemonitored by some other .Unit. AnItalian S. S. network has been discoveredunder cover of some Italian Naval Cypherand a move is on fott to set up asection in R.S.S. to deal with ItalianISOS. H good deal of Group 8 materialhas been accumulating but G.C. C. Se C. S.seem to have been rather lax in solving it.D.G. called me down to a talk with Bevanand Lennox. Bevan was very concerned abouleakage of information regarding Torchwhich is being discussed Ireely in FleetSt. It was decided that possibly wemight try and find some channels throurwhich we could put Fleet St. off thetrack. This however was likely to e ext-remely difficult. You can't fox peoplelike KUH, ,POLIAKOV and LITAUER, at anyrate for long.Toby Pilcher has been made a Judge.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/190gu3Philip JORDAN of the LveWs Chronicle hastold Casa Maury of 0.C.0. thatthere ismuch talk going on in Fleet St. about thesecond front and that he had been toldby .J.Cummings of the News hroniclewho knew that JORDAN was one of thesecond front war correspondents, thataccording to Maisky N.I Africa was theobjective. It is JORDAN'S impressionthat Maisky imparted this informationwith the deliberate object of suggestingthat a campaign in N. Africa wouldnot be considered by the Soviets assufficient to meet their request for theopening of a second front. The purposeof Maisky's statement was propaganda andhe intended that Cummings should use itas such. On hearing this news JORDANhad gone round to see his contact at thePublic Relations Depth at the W.0.This contact assured him that he would belooked after wherever he was sent andthat it was possible that he would notbe going with the first flight. He alsosaid, a little to JORDAN'S surprise,that two motorcards had already beensent off for JORDAN'S use. No actualobjective or date was mentioned, but fromthese remarks JORDAN very naturally ruledout the possibility of V.France orNorway. He thefore came to the conclusicthat Maisky' information was probablycorrect.Viv. came round to tell Dick and myselfthat an order had now been issued appoint-Catalogue Reference:KV/4/190quuing Dansey as V.C.S.S. and himself asone of the many deputies in charge ofsecurity. He had replied to C. say ingthat although this order was only givingeffect to a situation which had existedfor some considerable time owing to thewhittling away of his various functions,he nevertheless found it pretty morti-fying. He wished to be informed as towhether he was in any way intended tobe responsible to V.C.S.S. since if this Wwere SO he would refuse to consult him.So far he has had no reply. Viv.emphasised that this new arrangement did nnot auger particularly well for counter-espionage and that he more than everregretted that we had found it impossibleto accept the A.C.E. plan. L said thatI could not see how H.C.E. would giveC.E. a beti er thance than it would haveif it were all brought under this office.In the former case it would only havehalf the D.G. S backing and in the lattercase it would have his whole backing.C's backing, in Viv's opinion, was notlikely to be of much use. Viv. said tthat he would sooner bring the wholeorganisation in here than work under Dansebut he did not think the plan was a goodone nor did he think it would be possiblenow to get C. to accept it. I am fright-fully sorry for Viv. who is one of thefew really honest people in S.I.S. Ido feel however that his attitude towardsour original proposal was intransigeantand misguided.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/190susI saw Kenneth Younger and Milmo aboutSZUMLICH. SZUMLICH is a Pole who at onetime was in the hands of the Germans. thePoles want to try nim on the grounds thathe was never demobilised from the PolishForces and is therefore their trisoner.In fact they wish to make the Act underwhich they have jurisdiction retroppec-tive. SZUMLICH has never been a priserand is at present under interrogationby ourselves. Certain information thatwe want from the Poles to complete ourinterrogation has been refused for some un-known reason. There is obviously agood deal of politics at the back of thewhole case. te ar'e telling the Polesthat they must apply for the custody ofSXUMLICH to the H.O. and thatmeanwhile they will greatly assist usby answering our questions.October 9thHart and I went to N.I.D. to discussthe Kameradshcaftsdienst. In additionto Leary from the coding section ofcensorship, Hinsley of G.C. &c C.S. wasalso present. the latter is by way ofbeing particuarly brilliant. He hasexamined Leary's work and has come tothe conclusion that tere. ere is definitelysome sort of code in the K.D, and othersimilar broadcasts. He feels howeverthat antal the whole field of such broad-casts has been surveyed it would be wrongCatalogue to attempt RAfeEAnGAKNA/19 relate these the messages German Armed to anyTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDsubIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958. Ou 2000Forces or Intelrigence Service. There isapparently definite evidence from Italianthat code is broadcast in certainmessages which ikmeaiately following theplaying of a certain tune. Leary isalso examining the broadcasting of certaintunes and has found that they come upat certain specified times although f'rdifferent stations.Jim talked to me about an enquiry thathe is making into certain S.O.E. agentswho went to Denmark and about the whomthe Germans appear to know a great deal.He is rather at a dead end and in my viewcannot get any further unless he goesthoroughly into the life history of allconcerned.D-C has drafted a letter for Stebhensonabout his new mandate for the Caribbeanpointing out that there are certain matterwhicb will still have to be dealt withthrough London and the C.0.I told the D.G. abouthe Mutt and Jeffplan which involves an explosion inHents. The objective is a food storeon army property and the Germans will beinformed that the store must have con-sion tained was ammunition a very big as one. wel.l since .C.Hants, the explo-R. R.S.O 0. and Burt are in the know.October l0thCatalogue Reference:KVI4/190Viv. spoke to me today about a lunch847that he had had with the D.G. The D.Ghad suggested meetings 3 times a weekof about 3 or 4 people from each dept.Viv. like ourselves could see no veryuseful purpose in such meetings but hadnot liked to say SO to the D.G. as he feltthat he might be regarded as uncooperativeI said that I did not see what thesemeetings could do and they would certainlyinvolve us all in a good deal of wasteof time. We could of course resume ourPlanning Committee, but experience inthe past had shown that it was mainlydevoted to smoothing out questions offriction than to any concrete planning.I had a meeting with Lennox, Machelland Harris about plans for misleadingFleet St. about Torch. The Chiefs ofStaff have been in consultation with theM.O.I. and appear to think that theleakages in Fleet St. can best be dealtwith either by talking to certain selectedjournalists and asking them to takea definite cover story line or bytaking the Press fully into our confidencePersonally I think that either line wouldbe a mistake. As regards getting atleading journalists here I suggested thatthis could better be done through Embass-ies such as the panish and Turkish.The information would then leak bake tojournalists such as POLIAKOV,LITAUEand KUH. it was proposed that we shouldmake a conderted attack on Alba andalso on Orbay the Turkish Minister.ICatalogue Reference:KV/4/190susthink the line would be to start with twominor indiscretions by people who mightbe slightly in the know, and follow thisup with a major indiseretion by somebodyobviously in the know Alba would bebound to report this to wviadrid and theinformation would go direct to the Japsand Germans. I thought it necessaryhowever that whatever story went over itshould be different to any of theprevious cover stories.I am going down tonight with Victorto see the fireworks.October llthWe met two officers of the police at thegiven rendezvous, and then drove aboutquarter of a mile to the objective. Thiswas about 12.15 am. We drew the to carsup inside a field along the hedge. Mean-while guardsow were put out on the roadto give us warning of any cars or cycliststhe S.0.E. experts put in the explosiveswhich consisted of. 9 lbs of aminol,incendiary material andthunder rockets.The fuse was laid through the hedgeon to the road. When this work had beencompleted and we were satisfied that nocars either way could reach the sitewithin a period of two minutes, the carwhich was carrying the S.OYE. represen-tatives pulled out into the road oppositethe end of the fuse, and remained withengines running. We then came out andheaded straight for an observation postCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190gunabout quarter of a mile away. As wepassed the first car the fuse was lit.TheS.0.E. representatives and Victorimmediatey jumped in and streaked upthe road behind us. The explosion tookplace in about two minutes 10 secondsand was a formidable one. The incendiar-ies worked well and a blaze of light wentup which could be seen for miles round.There was an aeroplane somewhere in thevicinity which dropped a flare. Wepresumed therefore that the matter wouldbe reported back to some R.A.F. head-quarters. Not wishing to be in thevicinity of the conilagration we madeoff after watching the fire for about5 minutes. We reached Michael Ryde'shouse at Newbury at about 3 a.m. Weheard later that the fire had been seenby a number of the Air Observer Corpsand had been reported to the AndoverPolice who had sent out two sergeantsimmediately. They had remained on thesite during the night. They had alreadyascertained that somebody had been seenin the vicinity of the hut several dayspreviously. This was probably one of theS.0.E. men who was putting in the materialThere was also a shepherd who might havegiven information, since hewas questioneddiscreetly by Michael Ryde in order tofind out whether any of his sheep wereleft out at night. We had originallyintended to use 18 lbs of aminol but feltthat this might be dangerous if the wholehut was lifted into the middle of theroad. We anticipate that the police willCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190Somake enquiries with the military aboutthehut, when they will be told that it wastaken over by G.H.4. Home Forces.Mountain Home Forces has been informedand will say that the hut was taken overfor special purposes and stored withcertain Commando equipment. If the debrisis carefully examined it is possiblethat a piece of a German Dickford fusewill be found and a Norwegian compassor the remains of it. Burt who is inthe know will be sent down as a specialinvestigator. I am told that theexplosion has disintegrated the whole hutand that a few loose thunder rocketshave been found. Steps have been takento get some notice of the incident intothe local press.October 12thDixon came in this morning. He is doinga course here before going eut as C.S.0.to Africa.Park of S.0.E. came to see me about arather peculiar message which VALLIN,a dubious member of the righting Frenchwished to put over on the D.B.C. Themessage alludes to lines of communication"through wouglas or through Switzerland".I asked Park if he could find out whatthese lines were and let u's know. Therehas been a good deal of trouble aboutthe F.F. communicating code messagesin broadcast. C. is rather inclinedCatalogue Reference.ktv/4i1ggou have been lookingSSIafter the security Of this matter. Wehave in fact been writing to his organisa-tion ever since November 1941 withoutgetting any reply until fairly recently,when Kirkpatrick took the matter up withDansey. Dansey then agreed to Kirkpat-rick writing at the end of May to theFree French suggesting that such broad-casts should go through Passy and .I.S.but no reply or final decision vasreached until 29th June when Dansey wroteto Kirkpatrick saying that it had nowbeen arranged that all messages for broad-casting from the F.F. should go throughPassy who was in touch vith the S. I.officer who dealt with such messages onthe one hand and with S.0.E. on the other.Kirkpatrick was asked by Dansey to issueinstructions to his representative inthe B.B.C. that such messages must arrivein future either from Passy,M.I.6 orS.O.E. This arrangement was apparentlysatisfactory to Dansey at the time, butthe latter, having seen a number ofmessages going through, is now tellinghis hief that the Security Serviceare not doing their job.//I had a longtalk with Frost this morning about RSSand todays meeting on the Second Front.It is not worth recording the conversationas most of the points were raised at thesubsequent meeting in the afternooncalled by harr, Allen, at which repre-sentatives of s.t.S.,Home t.S. Home Forces and our-selves were present. S.I.S. took theview that they would be responsible forCatalogue Reference:KVI4/19009supplying I.B. Units with inteeligenceboth in the forward zone and in the staticzone. The Chief Civil Affairs Officerwas appointed and they were anxious fortheir men to come under his direction.They also felt that Passport Controlshould be established on a civilianbasis since it would have to be largelyresponsible to the Home Office and theF.0. S.I.S. were clearly anxious toestablish their rights on foreign terri torbut admitted that they might on occasionwant some expert assistance from theSecurity Service. They thought this wouldbe of an ad hoc nature. rig.Strongseemed to think otherwise. First of allhe was very insistent that whateverunits of M.I.5 or M.I.6 operated abroadshould come under the force ommanderand be part of the I.B.staff. Secondlyhe thought that the experience of theSecurity Service should be made use of.He was rather in favour of our having arepresentative at G.11.Q. Hill-Dillon onthe other hand who had been largelyresponsible for the training of I.B.units clearly felt that their functionswere going to be usurped by ourselves andS.1.S. He seemed to think that if theywere not capable of carry ing our dutiesthere was not much point in their exis-tence. The real facts are of course thatS.1.S. are not equipped for dealing withsecurity in a static area and that ifthe I.B. staffs are asked to perform anyof our functions and to run XX agentsthey will make a howling mess of it.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/190g33G-P tried to pull a fast one on the meet-ing by saying that he was solely coneernedwith Abwehr material while I.B. unitswould be concerned with military traffic.He did not propose to function on thecontinent until the situation becamestablised. He argued that it would beimpossible for mobile units to do theirwork in an area kghere a battle was goingon. If Abwehr agents were dropped duringthat period he would merely take a bearingon them and inform the .B.Staff. Ifopertional agents were dropped it wouldbe up to the I.B. units to deal with them.Frost pointed out that the I.B.SignalUnits would not be able to do any workof this kind as they would be far toooccupied with other matters. Brig. Strongagreed. He did not appear to know thatthe roundingoupiof illicit wireless setswould be one of their responsibilitiesG.P only proposed to send over M.U.Sto deal with static agents after thebattle had moved on. He said that suchagents could be actually D.F.ed fromthis country which is of course quiteuntrue. The final hunt with the M.U.sgen- gen-eraliyt involve an area of some 50 milessquare. Any D.F. bearings therefore givento H.R. units during the early stages willbe more or less useless, since there willbe no means odi locatingg the agents untilthe M.U.S M.I S operate.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/190THIS IS A COPYofORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECCDDSOber 13thACT 1958.Ou e00I talked to Kellar about the Pasha. Weare still no nearer to discovering howhe communicates with his Govt. SuchB.J.S as there are are unimportant andfew in number.have notproduced the answer. In the countrythey are difficult to operate since a24-hour watch is necessary. It isproposed that we should try and geta line on the matter through introducingin the case of someof the Pasha's more dubious associates,LOTFALLAH etc. We are also consideringintroducing a Nireless operator in theguise of a chauffeur. There are difficul-ties here since he would have to take hisapparatus down as part of his own baggageevery time he went to Luppitt. We alsopropose to review all telegrams to andfrom Egypt if this is at all possible.Field-nobinson came to see me about aGerman deserter calledthisman who was a lorry driver deserted fromFrance and according to his story gotacross the border into pain. He waseventually brought back here via Gib.and has been interned as a'/W. Althoughhis story is not very convincing on paper,Field-Robinson feels on the whole that heis genuine. He is a young fellow ofCatalogulertefereneeKv KAPP9US to be a SocialDemocrat, notly opposed to the Nazi$5regime. Field-Robinson wants to have biminterviewed and give him our independentopinion. He also wishes us to take himover as a civilian prisoner. The manis apparently quite ready to be droppedback into Germany.Censorship have put up a paper on internalcensorship of mails, telegrams and tele-phones. They say that the increasingdemands of the Services and the SecurityService are taxing their resources veryseverely. They do not think that theycan continue as at present without reduc-ing to some extent the work that theyare doing on external censorship. Isaid that as far as catching spies wasconcerned I did not think that we couldjustify internal censorasip. We werequite pleased to see it go on as it tosome extent acted as a check upon ourwork, but the results from our pointof view were purely negative. As faras one can see the main purpose of inter-nal censorship was to enable the militaryauthorities to check leakage of impor-tant information to unauthorised persons.I raised the point that there was notmuch object in policing internal mailsand telephones if we did not police ourown wireless which was open to the wholeworld to listen to. As far as I knewpractically nothing as being done.Apropos of this, Frost tells me thatinformation has just come in that one ofCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190<56our own army signals operators has beenfound to be communicating, probab quiteinnocently, with the Germans.I saw Capt Stone, one of the F.S.0.Sfrom Freetown. He seems to be an excellenfellow. He knows the set-up in Freetownvery well. He was inclined to doubt thenecessity of having a D.S 0. but he wanot fully aware of our problem, whichwas to give effect to information fromsecret sources obtained in this countryand elsewhere. He did not understand thatin order to do SO we either had to passthrough Haigh-Wood, The Governor and thePolice, or through the W.0., G.O.C G.O.C.West C.Afrida, and the F.S.P. at the port. Whatwe really want is a direct liaison withsomeone on the spot who has knowledge ofour problems. He thought it possible thatthe F.S.0. could carry this work if wecould be allowed to communicate with himdirect. On the other hand he said thatBrodie of the police had often told himthat he was SO cluttered up with otherwork that he could not really attendto security matters. On the whole there-fore it seems desireble that we shouldhave a D.S.0. It will be interesting tosee what Gibbs has to say on this matter.At a meeting with G-P,Maltby,Di Dick andFrost the subject of R.S.S.'was discussed.As regards our commitments on the wirelessfront abroad it was generally recognisedthat we should probably have to providea man for the staff who would beCatalogue Reference:KVT4/190857capable of performing similar functions toB. 3B in this country.THIS IS A COPY.ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.00000 1958It was agreed thatour representatives in the Regions shouldbe responsible for directing wirelesshunts. The question of almes was dis-cussed. G.P took the line that ve mighthave informed him earlier about our mis-givings. There was L think a certainamount of justification for his complaint.R.S.S. have undertaken to supgly special-ised reliable personnel for the purposeof our enquiry.Major DAUBENY, who leaked about the secondfront to Audrey Richmond-rown has beencashiered and given 12 months imprison-ment. This is an extremely severe sentencwhich is to be widely promulgated. Igather from Egerton-Johnso whom he con-sulted in his official capacity thatDAUBENY is still quite unaware of theseriousness of his offence. Egerton-Johnson suggests that Officers Should belectured on the dangers of careless talkand have it explained to them how a casualremark can develop into a serious leakage.An ISOS message discloses that the Kamer-dschaftsdienst is definitely being usedCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190ssofor Abwehr purposes, whether solely tocommunicate the receipt of a message orto convey instructions is not yet quiteclear. It seems doubtful whether aservice of this kind works on any uniformbasis. robably each agent has 3 specialcode. If this is so, it is questionablehow far it is worth while to pursue thequote question; without knowing soe ingof the context it would be impossiblefor anybody to crack these. codes.I saw Sinclair who is on a visit fromNew York, and took him down to the D.G.sle gave an account of the Belize case.In his view there Nas no question ofrefuelling of submarines. GOUGH isundoubtedly guilty of a number ofbreaches of the regulations and could beprosecuted if necessary. There are stiila certain number of points which havenot been entirely satsifactorily clearedup. A certain amount of good has howevercome out of the case, since security inBritish Honduras has been tightenedD.October 14thI attended a meeting t Kinnaird House.Leakage of information vas the firstitem on the agenda. TheirYattentionwas drawn to the recent cases of twoofficers who had been courtmartialled.It was thought that the best method ofCatalogus RSepekyAgH9Qil on military to impose personnel severe and$59if pessible on civilians, if magistratescould be induced to do SO owing to pres-sure of public opinion. It was thoughtthat possibly the most effective actionwould be to get the P.M. to make somestatement in the house in answer to aquestion.The meeting then discussed internalcensorship. Herbert said that he hadreached the limit of his capacity. TheServices on the other hand pressed veryhard for a continuance of internal cen-sorship which was put on/tighten upsecurity. Our view was that while wewere interested indirectly in securitymeasures which narrow the field of investigation we could not say that internalicensorship had led or was likely to leadto thecatching of spies.A telegram has been received from theM. A. at Berne to the effect that a mancalled HEWSON, a P/Wcaptured at Erete,had turned up. After a rough time asa P/W he had been approched owing tohis Irish parentage with a suggestionthat he should work for the Germans.He had been taken to Brussels where hehad been given a good deal of training.He was to use a special kind of matchfor his secret writing. This is interes-ting since similar matches' were inpossession of the ERASMUS brothers.Hewas trained by a man called UlrichWNERNER. He was to correspond throughthe P/W mail. This is the first positiveCatalogue Reference:KVI4/190alsoevidence we have had of an agent usingthis method of communication although wesuspected something of the kind for sometime HEWSON is to follow the escape routefrom Switzerland about which the Germansare anxious to have details. He hasinstructions to send them a postcardfrom each stopping place. On arrivalin U.K he is to collect militaryinformation.The D.G. has written to Duff about ourrepresentation in America. He has drawnattention to the unsatisfactory natureof the situation created by S.I.S. inrestricting our correspondence withStephenson to purely security matters inthe Caribbean. He recommends that Duffshould make a further approach to C.I had a long talk with Denniston on thesubject of enquiry into enemy aliens.He agreed with me that practically nothinghad been done about Cat.B enemy aliensand that there had been many very badreleases prior to about April or May1941. It was only by accident thatany of these cases were coming to light.I had a talk with Bevan, T.A.R., L.Hale,Lennox,Dick,Brooman-hite and Harrisand Marriott on the subject of co-ordinatirmisinformation. It was decided thatBrooman-White would be responsible forthe production of misinformation withasmall committee formed to decided on thechannels through which it should go; thatCatalogue Reference:KV4/190840B-W should ask C. to give him copies ofany rumours that he was putting out andthat T.A-R. should make a similar requestto N.I.D. All this information will nowbe carded with the B 1A traffic.October 15thI saw Loxley and handed him Lennox'smemo on his interview with Philip JORDAN.Loxley said that Eden had already beeninformed of the indiscretions of Maiskyon the Second Front, that he was extremelyannoyed and had been pressing to send afull-dress protest to Moscow. He hadhowever been ill in bed for the last twoday s. The F.0. view is that Maiskyis doing this on his own and not underinstructions.I lunched with Montagu and Sainsbury.The latter is looking for a job. He madea good impression and I am suggestingthat he might be employed as a No. 2to Haylor at the R.F.S.Dick attended a meeting at S.I.S. withCrockett, Viv. and Dansey to decide aboutHEWISON. It was agreed that ne should beallowed to come through the escape route.H e will be accompanied and will havedefinite instructions about the postcardshe is to send off. These will be of amisleading kind. M.I.9 reashiserthatitheyCatafoguenpeferencensvasigole risk but they thinkIt 1S wotI went with the D.G. to see Col. Ralston,Canadian Minister of Defence. He had beenasked to call on Duff to discuss port sec-urity work in Canada. we had receiveda letter fromRobb from which it appearedthat after tr ining a few N C.Os andofficers he was unable to get any further.The Commissioner was proposing to reci itcivilians who would be paid SO much aday and be under no obligation toremain in the service. Robb thought thatit was dangerous to make informationavailable to people over whom the author-ities had no real hold. Col. Ralstonsaid that the matter was largely a dom-estic one and that there was a battlegoing on between the Dept. of Justice andthe Ministry of Defence. He had certainvery definite commitments and could notafford to give more than 50 men forport security work We informed him thatSO far these 50 men did not seem to befortncoming. We also told him thatthe powers of port security officerswere totally inadequate to meet thesituation. He undertook to look intothe whole question on his return. Hethinks that xk Commissioner Good has notreally got his heart in it.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSCatalogue Reference:V/49190 2000963THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958. Ool oo0October l6thI attended the RSLOS conference in thecountry. In addition to the RSLOs anumber of people from other sections werealso present. After giving a short accountof the work of the various organisationsin America, and Canada, i summarised theposition as I saw it today on the HomeFront. I felt that the somewhat tentative0conclusions reached Wilen I spoke to theRSLOS about a year ago had been largelyconfirmed. it was our view then that theGermans, being confident that theirpropaganda would keep us out of the warand that the poor state of our armamentswould make it impossible for us to fighteven if we SO desired, had not taken thetrouble to establish in this country priorto the war any very deep-seated espionageorganisation. We had up to the presentcaught 66 enemy agents in this country andCatalogueateferangeiki/in9gn Empire. Of thoseouwho had arrived here, 12 were Norwegians,8 rutch, 8 Belgian, 5 Spanish, 5 German,6 British, 4 Portuguese, 3 French, 3 wuban2 Swedish, 2 Russian, 2 Yugoslav, 2 Polishone Greek, one Czech, one Swiss and oheDanish. Only a handful of thesewereresident here before the war. Only two01 them had been instructed to get inttouch with a pre-war resident. In onecase with an agent of ours and inthe other with the moribund Duchessede Chateau-Thierry. the Germans had greatdifficulty in paying their agents inthe U.K. Reliable information received fomspecial sources did not indicate that theywere getting any information from agentsresident in the U.K. before the war Onthe other hand there were indicationsthat two or three possibly notionalagents were supplying information to theGermans which was of such poor qualitythat they could not last a minute if thedata acquired by the German intelligenceystem about matters in this countrywas of any quality at all. The Germandocument captured in April 1942 on theBritish Army showed that they had verylittle information about our formticnssince the outbreak of war and practicallynothing since Jan. 1941. It followed fromthe above that as far as we could see therewas no extensive spy organisation hereabout which Ae did not know, and noorganisation here of a pre-war residentkind that hadprobably not been sterilised.Catalogu CataloguerseferenteRv4/19o,! more WARSCHAUERS butthe propabllity was thattthey did existthey were inactive. Did this justify ourdiverting our attention from the pre-warresident population to the post-wararrivals. I felt that it would if wewere only concerned with catching spies,and that it might if we were convinced thawe were never again going to be facedwith an invasion crisis. This led me toconsider the 5th column position. thepotential 5th column elements were:enemy aliens, parties of the Right, dualnationals, allied nationals and the I.R.A.How far Should ve feel satisfied thatthe whole of this ground had been properlycovered if we were faced with the worstpossible invasion crisis - Russia outof the war and 150 German divisions onthe western front, a jitter broadcastcampaign by all the wireless masts on thecontinent and the dropping of Abt.IIsabotage agents,resulting in the creationof a real spy psy chosis. Would notcertain people at this stage perhaps comeout of their holes and did we know exactlywho they would be?. L then reviewedthe situation as regards enemy aliens, whiis the only 5th column body with which Lam strictly concerned. At the beginningof the war we had a list of 750 suspectsof whom only about 250 were finallyarrested. The remainder had been allowedto trickle out. ome of those originallyinterned had been released without muchinterrogation. There followed the settingup of tribunals whose business had beenconducted by individuals who had no know-ledg of the subject no standards and noCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190background. Moreover they had kept norecords Their examination was thereforecompletely valueless. Next we had thegeneral internment order and that back-peddled half-way through. Regionaltribunals were set up to clear up thematter. Their records were sketchyand they had not had much knowledge ofthe subjectwith which they had dealtTheyhad categorised enemy aliens underA.B. and C. Those under A. had beenstool-pigeoned and examined to a consider-able degree in camps. Some of them howevehad been released ostensibly on groundsof ill-health and there was no record ofwho these people were. Those in Cat.Dand C. had never been interrogated, nor hactheir cases been sifted except in ahaphazard manner. We had a case runningnow which indicated that certain peoplewhose cases had nevermbeen investigatedwereof a highly dangerous kind. Theinformation about themhad beenobtainedby agents and not by the ordinary routinemethods of H.O.W.S etc. Ought we perhapsto change our method of investigation.We knew the man who waved a swastikaflag in the street, the man who waved itin his backgarden and was seen by hisneighbours, but did we know one who wavedit inside his own house? I then askedRSLOS to let me have their views. Evident-ly they wanted to think the problemover before making any definite reply,Baxter however did say that 3 cases had.coto his notice of members of the NSDAPCatalogue Reference:KV/4/19067who had got through all tribunals. Hehad only got on to them by accident. Onehad since been interned and the other twohad been placed on the invasion list.I had a talk with people in B. in theafternoon, in particular with Ernie Allnuttwhose correspondence I examined in somedetail. He seems to be doing quite alot of work but without much guidance.There are things that he is handlingthat ought to be known to .1B. If weever sueceed in getting a point for D.S.0.control under Gibbs, I think that Allnuttisection should form part of it.I saw Stewart at the club in the evening.He told me that the Germans were waitingfor the ice to form in order to make anattack on Leningrad. The Germans werenow organising a direct attack on Stalin-grad which had become a matter of Hitler'spersonal prestige. He had sacked von Bock,Halder and other generals and put inyounger officers who were more likely tobe of his way of thinking. The resulthas been chaotic conditions in the rearof his lines. News from Germany showed ththat morale and conditions were extremelybad. In France the demands for petrolhad only been met to the amount of one-third. There was indications that theGermans were contemplating bombing thiscountry from very high altitudes with anew type of explosive. It was thought toothat they may make attempts with long-Catalogue distance Reference:KV14/190 aircraft to bomb our Atlanticshipping. The situation with regard toISOS was becoming increasingly complicated.The Chiefs ofStaff in America had decidedt that only the Navy Dept. were to receiveillicit wireless communications. Matterswere constantly cropping up where it wasnecessary to inform Donovan that he wasbeing penetrated but under the presentruling this could not be done. A furtherwire had been sent to New York, in anendeavour to clarify the position. Mean-while it has been discovered that theFrench have been intercepting certaingroups in Tangier which we do not knowabout. The Russians have been given a nuI-ber of groups, some of which it is believedthey are already decyphering. Stewartthinks that it is a little short of amiracle that ISOS continues, and his mainprecccupation now is to safeguard the ISK.We are now getting certain German diplo-matic material some of which is consularand relating to Africa. L do not knowwhether this is high-grade, but doubt it.Messages are in some cases betweenAbwehr points.For some completely unexplained reason aBritish areoplane has dropped an Americanagent in the middle of Dakar. This may bethe work of Hutchison the O.S.S. man.American Intelligence seems to be generallyhaywire.Last night 40 maps of French Morocco feelout of the back Of an American lorry. OnlyCatalogue Reference:KV/4/19086933 of them have SO far been recovered.To make matters wvorse the police haveasked de Gaulle's eaduarters whetherthey have lost any m os of French-possessions.October 17thThe HARZBURG case has just been broughtto my notice again. It occurred morethan a year ago and may have a beringon the use of P/W mails by the Germansfor intelligence purposes.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958. Oct 000it seems that Duff is determined that weshall send a party Oi 6 people to Glen-almond, the senior officer to have equalrank with Felix Cowgill. There is tobe a meeting on Wednesday between DuffC. a.nd the D.G.Blackford has been sacked and will besucceeded by Chappell. Charles Medhurstis to be temporary Vice-Chief of the irStaff, and later Director of Plans on theCatalogiue Reference'k//9/190. is to go and also61070The D.M.I.Ned Reid told me about the de BARY notes.The tracings are extremely interesting.In a number of cases the notes came intothe h nds of knon Gernan agents. Whetherwe Cin inter that the others Who got themare also German agents is another matteThere is however uite an interesting caseof a Dutchman, ZANSTRA, who is at preser.employed in some factory here. In niscase the notes were traced to 3 hotels.The Dutchman was the only common factor.October 13thCurry came to 3ee me at my flat. ile isextremely distressed about his position.He virtually has nothing to do sinceGwyer is covering a good deal of researchwork and the major problem can only betackled in conjunction with S. I.S. hohave neither the staff nor the time.Curry Nould like to come back into B.Division in his old capacity as Dy.B buhedoes not wish in any way to interferewith Dick. de is most insistent onthis point. He thinks however thatthe activities of Abt. II should be con-trolled under one head. This wouldinclude B.1C 10 and other 5th column sections.I said that I would have to discuss thiswith Dick and also to other suggestionswhich Curry out up as to work he mightusefully do.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/190October 19th87)Spent the day till 4 p.m, at the LawCourts.I had a word with A. D. N. I. on my return.He was very worried about the Kameradschaft-dienst. Apparently Robertson-Macdonalis not on speaking terms with Frost andwhen Frost turned up at the meeting thisafternoon R-M refused to speak in frontof him. Hart took the situation inhand, told A.D.I I. that this was non-sense and a rathersticky meeting ensued.It seems quite clear that the broad-casts are decypherable and the questionfor decision is who should control thework. Clearly the application of a greatdeal of intelligence information isessential. Section V. are really thebody who should contribute this informatiobut F eoubt whether they will ever do it.It is a whole time job for one man.October 20thI attended the D.G.S meeting. Nothingof any real interest was discussed.There is a peper coming before the Execu-tive which defines its functions. Theduties of the Security Service, and itsposition, are very badly explained.Dick tells me that the Met. reports havebeen going on for the last 3 months and thathat it is non definitely established thatsome one in the Croydon area comes upevery morning and every evening and ratherintermittently on Sundays. This may beCatalogue Reference:KVI4/190an indication that the operator is a manwho has a job which takes him out duringthe day and gives him Sundays off. itdoes not seem that very much has beendone about this case which somehow mustbe solved. If it is a true bill it verymuch upsets our calculations. The otherstations which were formerly operatingin other parts of the country have notcome up again.I had a meeting With D.G. add Frost.D.G. does not approve of Frost's appointingRegional Officers, with the mobile unitsections at Darlington and in the Readingarea. He thinks the work should be doneby the Asst R.S.L.0. Frost pointed outthat it was necessary for these peopleto have some technical know ledge if theywere to keep their end up. 1 am inclinedto agree, but do not see why In shouldnot appoint someone to the RSLO staffwho could do ordinary duty as well aswireless hunts which are fewand farbetween. If we are building up for theSecond Front we may as well try and finone or two people with a knowledge ofwireless. I have told Frost to try andget Maltby to move his units to Newcastleand Reading SO that they will be closeto our regional offices. I have also askedhim to consult with wacIver who is lookingfor regional officers and may be able tofind two with wireless knowledge.Dick has seen Diplock, It seems that Duffis absolutely set on our sending a partyCatalogue Reference:KV/4/19073to Glenalmond. The head of it is to havedual responsibility with Cowgill and willreport to Dick and myself. I do not imag-ine that this arrangement vill pleaseS.I.S. and frankly I cannot see that itwill do anyone much good.Gibbs has arrived in .Africa.I dined with J.C. Marriott and Cavendish-Bentinck. The latter told me that he knewof 3 cases where people had paid sums aslarge as 13,500 in il notes to art galler-ies and jewellers. In one case the pur-chase was made at Tooth's gallery andthe other at Mappin &c Webbs. A Mr. Toddof Mappin &c Webb knows about the latterdeal. Cavendish-Bentinck suggestedthat it would be more difficult forblack marketers to conceal their ill-gotten gains if a D.R. was passed makingit illegal to tender more than 125 in lfor the purchase af goods. Prima Faciethe idea seems a good one, but theremay possibly be snags.October 2lstBrooman-White and Courtney Young came toconsult me about Chinchilla Bobbe, the newSpanish consul who is going to Vancouver.B.J.S disclose that he was flung out ofthe political bureau of they alange onaccount of his anglo-American sympathies.The Japs were consequently very disturbedto find that he has. now been sent toVancouver. It had previously beenCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190uarranged thoough Alcazar and the vermanOrgan that someone should be sent who wouldwork as an Axis spy, in this veryimportant post. In the course of hisbusiness Cobbe would be representing theJaps and he has therefore made contactwith the Jap Embassy at Madrid. He wasfilled up with a good deal of propaganda asto ow.Spain's interests were wrapped upwith those of the Axis, and finally itseems that rather reluctantly he hasagreed to work for the Germans and Japs.B.-W thinks that he would be easilyturned round. He is going to New Urleans,Washington, New York and Montreal en routefor Vancouver. The difficulty is that theris nob ody very suitable to run him eitherin Security Co-Urdination or in Vancouver.I am asking Victor to take the matter upin New York and Canada and if necessaryB-W might go out to Montreal to do thejob, which he would undoubtedly handleit extremely vell. Having placed the manin touch with the police in Vancouver he Ccould then retire.I took the Wednesday meeting. An important German agent, a Portuguese journalstnamed Manoel Mesquita dos SANTOS, leftLisbon at the end of April on a missionto Lourenco Marques. The ship in whichhe was recently returning to Lisbon putin at Freetown and he was arrested. He isbeing sent home for interrogation. Animportant German agent, Andres Pigrau BLAYa araguayan has recently been detained atCatalogueiRefereneB:kvf4/yev to S.America. He is87San agent of the Marine Section of theAbwehr.The Germans are getting into the Portuguescyphers which give them good informationfrom Brazil.Milmo spoke about the case of PierreMOREL. His interrogation at 020 disclosesthat he received considerable sums ofmoney from the Germans for servicesrendered, over a fairly long period.According to his own story he originallygot into touch with the Germans throughone CONSTANTINI who was recruiting anair force after the French collapse whichwould be used against this country. Hesaid that his purpose in joining thisunit was to escape to England with hisplane. Through CONSTANTINI he was approaeched by one SCHMIDT of the German Embassyin Paris who ultimately sent him toEngland in order that he might jointheFree French and fly one of our planesback to France. -re also had otheralternative assignments. lie is one ofthose difficult cases where a man tellsthe truth but not the whole truth. Weregard gim with the gravest suspicion.Joe Stephenson talked about DONOHOE whowas closely associated with PREETZ. Quiteunknown to us he succeeded in reachingthis country some months ago. wately hehas been employed in Mooney's Bar, andhas now been arrested and interrogated.He has told us a good deal about PREETZCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190G16and his story though interesting in manyrespects is not a very convincing one inSO far as the part he played isconcerned.There is little doubt that he knew whatPREETZ was doing. The Irish held him fora short time but he was released, probablyowing to some dispute between the Gardaand the Ministry of Defence. At that timehe was a prisoner of the Garda. I amtold that now all such prisoners comeunder the Ministry of Defence. The mostinteresting fact that emerged was thatPREET'Z came here in the name of MITCHELLon the 20th September 1939. He arrivedat Holyhead and aroused suspicion oNingto the German visas on his passport. Hewas thoroughly searched but nothingincriminating was found on him. Clearlyhe los t his nerve since he returned toublin by the next boat.I raised the question of HARZBERG. Rams-botham said that after enuiry the F.B.I.came to the conclusion that he was agenuine philatelist. E am not altogetherinclined to accept this since tradition-ally philately has been a cover forespionageThere are some interesting ISBA messagesshowing that Tricycle and Balloon are bothstill regarded as somewhat doubtful inBerlin, but have got away With it in SOfar as their master in Lisbon was concernedTridycle has been given $25,000 and a newink knon as "H". He is due to arriveCatalogue SRefererce.K:4y19o677Osbert Peake came to see me about a Germancalled LOSER. It is alleged that thisman washaturalised at our request. I toldPeake that I could not remember nythingabout it but I thought it had more probablybeen at the request of S.I.S. or S.0.E.1would find out and let him know. it seemsthat LOSER has told someone else thatit cost Baron HATVANI E2,000 to obtainhis release from internment.Peake also said a word about the DAUBENYcase. I told him that we regarded it asa very serious one, that the extent ofleakage was appalling and that it wasworse in high than in low quarters. thesaid that he hoped that did not includethe H.O. I told him of the suggestionby the Executive that the P.M. shouldanswer a question on the subject ofleakage in the House.I suggested to the D.G. that he mightlike to see Smuts as 1 felt that thismight be of assistance of Websber. He isgoingto see what can be done.Lewis came to see me about the amerad-schaftsdienst We told him that we thoughtitwas a matter for Section V. and theG.C. c C.S. Lewis agrees thatit was notreally an Admiralty matter and that al-though great credit is due to Robertson-Macdonald for the energy he has displayein pursuing the case, his continued employ. -ment on the work could not really beCatalogue ReferEnCe:KVI4/190816justified since he personally was not anexpert in codes. I said that L would takeup the whole question at the R.S.S. meetingtomorrow.I had a talk with Jock Why te aboutpre-war spies. He mentionedone or twowhom I had totally Dorgotten. I suggestedto him that he might go over the originallist in order to consider whether athorough interrogation, possibly by theCzechs, would not field some result.I attended the dinner given to Toby bythe office. The D.G. made an excellentspeech and was followed by Toby, who gavean account of some of his experiences inthe Security Service. He recalled theearly day s of the war at the Serubs when TiTin-Eye used to walk about with a largehiatus between his sweater and the topof his trousers, putting up minutes about"loathly Germans" and "scrofulous Bosches"His best remark was connected with thecase of a German who said he wished toremain interned. Tin-Eye wrote thefollowing minute "Since when has itbeen, the privilege of a scrofulous Boscheto arrogate to himself the right todetermine his own destiny?'After Toby,Theo rose to protest against the unwarranted attack on "Tin-Eye's No-Man's-Land".He made an extremely amusine speech.Everybady seemed to engoy the evening.We have now got some further detailsCatalogue Catalogbertefepercet:ki4rrock The Nissen hut679was completely disintegrated. Pieces werediscovered as far as 70 yards away. with-in half-an-hour two policeman, a HomeGuard officer, Home Guard private anda shepherd were on the scene. since thenthe police have been busily investigatingthe case. Interest appeared to be flaggingwhen the Home Guard officer advanced thetheory that the top of one of the stickybombs had corroded through and set alaghtto all the rest. However an expert fromthe W.0. has now been down. Parts ofa fuse have been found. At least 5 police-men have been engaged for the last 24hours digging among the ruins andsuspicion now falls on a private in theR.E.S who asked for a lift that night atabout midnight and who has made a state-ment which hasbeen proved to be incor-rect. The Intelligence Officer of the25th Division has also been called inand is showing a lively interest. Anannouncement will go into the press onFriday and the Det.Seupt. of the HantsConstabulary is also going to arrange forthe local press to run the case here-after. Photographs are availableBurt came to see me as ne felt that thediscovery of the German Bickford fuseand the Norwegian compass was workingthe local police into quite a fever. Theynow feel that they have a serioussaboteur in their midst. IY told Burtto soothe them down bit.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/190OfIt is possible that the Yugoslav whorecruited the Snark in Madrid may begoing to America on a forged Brazilianpassport. In that event the Snark andthe head of the Yugoslav intelligencehave got a plan for having him eatenalive by rats in order to make him talk.The matter is under investigation.Mosley has written a petition to theP.M. on behalf of the interned members ofthe B.U.F. We have beendasked to rendera report. If we release any of thesepeople it would seem to be a furdamentalmistake since it would obviously raisemisgivings in the minds of the Russians andthe parties of the Left. it would alsobe undesirable from a purely securitypoint of view.October 22ndI took the R.S.S. meeting. Groups XlOand 11 have now been handed over to oneof the "y" units. Some progress has beenmade with the talian ISOS. Group 8is to be gingered up and other materialwhich has been under cover of some navalprocedure looks like coming aut. R.S.S.have had a record week in intereepting7,700 messages, 2,500 of which have beendecyphered. I raised the question of giviGroup 7/23 to the Russians. It is by farthe most important Russian groups andunless it is one huge XX should be vitalto the Soviet at this moment. We haveCataloguevReference.k0r4/196 of other groups which881are no good and some of which are defunct,but not the ones that are really vitalto them. There appears to be no crypto-graphic or intelligence reason why theyshould not have it. The argument ismerely that they are being extremelycagey with us and that therefore thisgroup is being held up in the meantime.The Committee passed t resolutionrecommending that it should go to theRussians as a matter of urgency.We also discussed the KameradschaftsdienstFrost announced that he had had a meetingwith Felix Cowgill at which it had beenrecommended that Gilbert Ryle of T-R'ssection should take over the whole thing.T-R was rather piqued that this shouldhave been done Without prior consultationwith himself. The idea however seems tome a good one since if ny is in chargethe work will be well done.The D.G. has been to see D.C to discusswith him and U. the future of ACE. Duffsaid tha in normal times ne would haveno. hesitation in ying that Section V.and ourselves should be amalgamatedunder one head. He thought however thatcircumstances being what they are, weshould send 6 people down to Glenalmonoand that the head of this section shouldhave equal status with Felix. He wouldreport to me and be responsible forcollecting fra Section V. any informatiorthat we require. The D.G. had previouslyCatalogue Reference:KV/4/19086 2made up his mind that it was no good oursending 6 officers to bury themselves inthe country. It would mean getting othersto take over their duties in London and aconsequent dislocation of our work. Hefelt that the only thing to do in thecircumstances was to have two or threemeetings a week alternately in London ndGlenalmond and he would like a freehand to deal with Viv. on all thesequestions. He then went on to say thathe felt that C.E. had been very muchneglected in the past. Felix Cowgillhad been the country to ploughhis own furrow and had had little support.He did not consider him a big enough manto be in control of such an importantbranch of S..S. work. Apart from theinterest which he personally had in C.E.abroad he thought that the offensiveside of S.i.S. did not realise howimportant C.E. was to their operationsfor if they did they might not have lostSO heavily in the field. He said thiswithout bitterness. His one idea wasto get on with the war as quicly aspossible and to retire when it was overto his fireside and carpet slippers.I gather that C. did not demur at any ofthe D.G.S criticisms and agreed that teShould have a free hand to settle matterswith Viv. Personally I am rather appalledat the idea of the meetings, particularlyif we are going to hold them twice aweek. The D.G. has dome idea that thevarious sections will bring along theirCatalogue Reference:KVI4/190883important cases and that they Nill bediscussed across the table.I havetold him that I cannot see this workingout in practice since cases are alreadydiscussed constantly on the lower level.L did however see a need for JointPlanning. If however we are going tomeet 2 or times a week it will be aserious strain for me to go to Glenalmondwhich means at the least the loss ofhalf a day.October 23rdViv. came in. He told me that he hadobtained approval from C. for a newcharter for Section V.giving them afixed tablishment. He was very pleasedabout this.T-R's section had also been under dis-mission. He thought it would be Eivenindependence under the direction ofMorton Evans and would have Ryle as aliaison with section V. I gater thatDansey is likely to retire before verylong and that probably Moses Beddingtonwill take his place. I do not know howmuCil this will be a change for the better,As S.I.S. is at present constituted thereis no seat on the Production Board forC.E. Viv. has put this forward but ithas been turned down. The argument givenwas thiit il Section V. were representedM. M.E. E. nould also want a representative,CataloguesReference:kv4/19o Production Boardnever really met. It sounds almostTHIS is A COPYIN ORIGINAL DEPARTMENT DOCUMENT UNDER RETAINED SECTIONgou3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.Dut eO0incredibie that .EShouId not be givenmore say in the affairs of an organisa-tion like S.I.S. It is tantamount tosaying that Bentevegni of Abt. III shouldnot oe at Canaris's head quarters.Vivhad been given tae correspondence onsecurity meisures in connection withbroadcasting oi messages to agents.I explained to him inat had already bebeen done. In future all such messageswould be approved either by S. I S. orD.U.E. E. and Kirkpatrick of the B.B.C. wouldbe given the names of tae approvingofficers. 1 made it clear that we werenot in a position to advice on the contentof the messages since only S. S.i.S. S. andS..E. had any knovledge of what theAllied Govts. vere doing.Viv. talked to me about the Case ofHUMFHREYS which 1. nad brought to hisnotice. HUMPHREYS who had been employedin G.C. & C.S.. knew all about M.S.S.C.and was non at Gib. in connection withTorch. le had gather caused a cer-tain amount of trouble with G.C &c C.S.Viv. was norritied about our informationwich showed him as a former associateof Artnur Albert TESTER and Charles ADDiStaesolicitor. de had not pre-viously seen the correspondence which hadbeen handled byI said thatif thergwas any prospect of HUMPHREYSbeing lacmailed by ADDIS he as probblyCatalaguetefferencekyt4/19p. than in this country88SOctober 24thThe D.G. has sent off a letter to MasonMac on security at Gib. He draws atten-tion to recent incidents and asks rathertentatively whether Mason Mac is altogeth-er satisfied that everything has beendone to prevent a repetition of suchincidents. We feel very strongly thatMedlam is not really up to the job. Hetakes little interest in security and issomewhat gullible on the C.E. side.Probably Kirby Green would do his workmuch more effectively. Medlam is hearti-ly disliked by most people on the Rockand has been making difficulties forBristow the Section V. man.I had a talk with Curry on Research.I rather hope that with their new estab-lishment b.i.S. might be able to makea better contribution. I thought itpossible thatif Italian ISOS came outCarry could combine a study of thatproduct with his research work.I had lunch with Jimmy Rothschild whois worried about the behaviour of hisFrench cousin in Canada. The latter hastaken on a mistress who is reported bythe Canadian Police for defeatist talk.Victor left last night on' the first stageof his journey to America.Catalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/19096October 25thI had a talk with Mills about the U.S.A.and explained to him the position. I amstill anxious that he should go there.This suggestion, which L made when I gotback from New York, has been side-trackedpending some settlement between ourselvesand S.1.5. on future liaison with theF.B.I. It is possible that we mightsend Tricycle to Canada, in which case itwould be essential for someone there tohandle him properly.Viv. telephoned about a report on Irelandwhich is being sent to the Foreign Ministe:for transmission to the .M. the latterhad become alarmed by one of the tele-grams by the Italian representative inDublin which appeared to him to indicateleakage of information. In actial factthe information that has been obtainedby Berardis in Ireland is of littleconsequence. Much of it has been inaccuratI told Viv. the I thought the report whichhad been put up by Jane gave away toomuch about our relations with Dan andS I.S. agents. I thought this could bette]be said verbally to the foreign Secretary.I asked Ramsbotham to come and see me aboutthe case of the German LUNING who had beenarrested at Havana. It seemed to me therewas a lot of information which mightusefully be distributed to interestedparties. L thought that for this purpose heCatalogueReference:kV/4/19o Catalogue touch vith Milmo.Hreally ought to pe in B. IB.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN 3(4 DEPARTMENT OF THE PUBLICRECORDS UNDER RECORDS SECTION$8: ZACT 1958OLewis rang up about une wameradschaits-dienst. I told him that tue thole ques-tion was in the hands of S.1.S. but thatI thougt that nyle was going to take itover. 1 undertook to speak LO Viv.S.i.S. have a report containing a copyof a letter from REICHERT of D.N.B. Rometo JORDA of D.N.B. nkara dated 13.0.42 SEsaying that there was a plan to build upa Near Eastern Directorate of the D.N.Bunder REICHERT in Cairo vitn agencies atJerusilem, Damascus, Bagdad, Teheran andKabul and in Arabia. Teheran is thoughtto be te first of these Places likeiyto be occupied. JUKDA'S final destinatioris to be Bagdad, which has been earmarkedas the capital of the "Uelebraled Unifieddrab State of Ira ,Syria and L alestine"in the light Of forthcoming events thisall seems to be a little premature.J.C. ,Marriott and Harmer Came to see meabout a woman calledthis woman had beenrecruited here some time ago and sent outto unoccupied France by D.L.S. within avery short time she Lot into touch Witha friend vao was a collabgrationistcalled CHAUDEL. this. man introduced herto a German agent know as Dibi at annes.Bibi is probably an S.D. aent. thewoman's mission Nas partly political, partCatalogue Reiferencekviamrooartly liit. J.U. c.idnot consider ner reliable or orOIitapleTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED6o8IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958. Duc 200as a ane ws mherinee te teli s.i.S.that we did not ant her. L said that asshe had certain cover addresses L tho antit might be as vell to test them outprticilarly as she had been promisedmoney from Sritzerland. I thought toui eveven if sie Was not reliable her trgiiicmight assist us in coming to a moredefiniteconciusion. Whatever we do weshould nave to look aiter er irom thesecurity joint of vie.Marriott came to see me apouttae BrazilianIt nad apparently beeragreed that Matneis should out, over somedecestion in connection Nita toren. slehad in fct asieato oblike him-by serdine a teiegram to ais Governmentsying that all the iniormation circulatinin Fleet St. ann diplomatic cirCles aboutDakar as in ou.jective nad been put outint ention lay by the British Ovu. inorder to divert attention oi the theGermans from te real target hic: wasrance.nid been some torried about this and had gone roundto see .D. .D.M.I. M. I. (0). the latter wasembarrassed ind promised to look into it.de nor wanted to kno' wwhit reply hesound ive. He could not say that theinformation was true and if he Siid that tthe tshole ting was unauthorised ne miuatdamage Mathess relations. personallyI think the approacn, which wa.s Known toCatalogue: @eRefertencelk/,/4/19( not a very wise one.the M.A. shouid not be asked to send aTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION8813 3(4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.telegram to Goemtpeme tre contentsQeooof whic. he know to be untrue. ri: irtfrom anythingeise the inference issomesat insuiting. It LS ntamnount tosaying tat anytnine: th.ii 20es to uleBrazilian Govt. is pound to weak tothe Germans, or that we no that teBrazilian cyphers are insecure. theinformation mig.it nave peen passer in teform oi a cersenaL view by mathe:s basedon someting Cunfidential that e nadheard.October 2bthViv. telerhoned to say t.at te Latalinainvesligition iNas satisiactory from thecyoner point view in SO war as theAir Ministry ind LN.1.D. were concerned.de had ho ever since discovered that C.Cad teleyranned on te sloject, ind thisangle va.s peiny investigated. it Seestitnls got documents ro theSpsnisa Police in Madrid hicn discloseS.+.5. and: S.O.E. alente in Africa.These documents were being Crried oy iFrencman C illed Caar.iluntu.i n0 vas Nas:edup on the Soanish Sicre. ISS shosthat these documents ire in the nands ofthe Germins. GermH ilap is developing about theincident. L.i.1. is ar parent.y ratherrattled. I have asked Bevan to comeround and talk it over.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1908oThe D.G. has sent a letter to stemnensonexplaining to him his charter in theCaribbean.Lennox tells me tat our attack in Egypthicb is developins is az linst fortifiedlines o1 the 1914 pattern. The enemydelences are in death and tey siresurrounded by anli-tank mines. t vilprobably take a eek or tro t beforeye can nope to reach the stage on poenwariare.Father is now in London being coached uDin aistrailic in case he comes down in-enemy territory and aas to give inseliuo. if ne can put over a good story theGermans may allow nim to escane back tothis country.the L.G. called a meeting viti larker,myself and Tniye. de eininedTaneye that the work of the PreesSection had been revie: ed and tit hec decided tlit it MS a necessarysart of the office machinery. ietlolltht he ever thit Tiiye shcuid talestock of the position ind make UO ismind which of his avents B.F most Valuablete thoht ht that tere was a Limit beyound"hich the orginisatior could not expand.Tanave six tiit ne thoiht te exenses"rould not te SO high in future since 1e-ad now reached te Stace ere he wasbeing entertained himseif by the variouscontacts he had made. It igrieer thatCatalogueReference:k4/19o 1e shoiid the givenplosr hur2t10.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDg 5IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECOBeSdber 27th thACT 1958. 0Leoo too1 attended te D.G.S meeting. The questidor an organisation to del Nith Britishsubjects returning from abroad was aeindiscussed. Te D.G. ayreed to the--tablishment of the Reception Centre andto nlbert being employed at tae n.i.S.as a link ith iayor and the InformationIndex. He "ill in fict come under Taylorde will be responsible tor premring asfar as possible cases for interrogationat Devonsire House "ere tae ney officeis to be.the L..I. is still very sorried aboutHe says thit the matter mustsomeho'N be liquidated as far as the 1.0.is concerned. Ie thinks that iicould be induced to come upand say that te "hole thin had been amistake and that he did not ish itpursued iurter that vould be a sitis-factory conclusion. I sooke to Brig. Valeand told him that L would arrange this.The D.G. tilked to me about Stephenson'scharter on behalf of the Security servicein U.S.A. tie is quite det'inite that vemust correspond vith him in our ONNcyphers on ail matters in which re areinterested. I have explained to himthat this is very far from being viv'sidea. He maintains ho"e er that it isocvered by nis Letter to C. aind U's replyCatalogueRefefehce:Re4rgoit more or less bydefault.gezA rubber boat has bea found on theSussex coast. L gather tat it can beaccounted for. It.is from a German planewiich came do'nn in the channel, and hasevidently been in the water for aconsiderable time.curry's rerort on te German S.S. isnow printed and its distribution isbein2 considered.Gen. CRUVELL, a I/ who commanded aFanzer Division in Libya, takes a poorvie'N of Canaris. tie Says thai he was inthe habit of receiving Abwehr reportsbut that he never paid any attention tothem. At the same time ne has conveye edin one of nis letters to a friend inGermany that he would be grateful forCanaris's assistance in effecting hisrelease. de seems to nave a patheticbelief that canaris must have many men"yorkin2 tor him over here Tho could uiteeasily do the job.soger Hollis came to talk to me aboutthe Communists. e appear at themoment to be extremely well informed abouttheir activities. There is nu doubt thatthey are trying to make hay while thesun shines, and serious efforts are beingmade to penetrate the armed forces.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/190813October 2thI took the "ednesday mneetine. an Einz iTech. Left. agent, Oscar Sanchez yARClA,has been taken off at Trininad on his ayto s.aeric. It has been decided toknock off IMUEZ who ulirs to be inact.ivM.+. are asking us to let t.em ave anOfiicer at tle uondon Traisit Camp todeal with t.he security as ect of Cases ofescapees and evacers. L am proposingthat Caroe should tie this on as 3. wart-time job.an trisnman named HUMPHRIES '410 sold hispassport in Unoccupied rrance, has arrivedat Milford Haven en route lor Lire.d.0. say tat they cannot apply the D.I.3even though the body is ithin themile limit. This seems to me rater eaksince ve re constintly pulling bodiesin at Bermur and rinidad. Jim lileis trying to met te question sorted CUU.Eeriin ave been caling Dublin ali day.some reply 10aY be exreeted in theevening. I ave u-ester tnit theD.O. saouid instruct maftey to intormJre "Yalshe. SO thit if possible theycan go in and close the set don. Ifthis is dine oificiiliy t.ley vill not beable to sav tnl t.ley never herd itoperitin;. The matter is important inview of the impending Torch operition.Joe Arcler talked to me about the neiCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONou33 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSrocket tLTe ACT 1958 yte.t Od Seems 2090 developingfairly satisfactorily altnouth the teeth-ing troubles are considerable. t1 atterof 5 thousandths of an inch here or thereis sut'ficien to sake te wole placeto pieces. T'he speed is colossal, andits great point is that it rets over taeuse of a oropeiler Mlich cannot Dut 110with more t.lan a certain anount OI Ninresistence. it is thou.it that thespeed limit for propellers has a.lmostbeen reached.October 2thI had 2 meeting mrith ield nrbinson andCaroe abou the Case ofThelatter escied irom UccuLed France andis prer ired to 20 b ick to Germany. Doubtnavi arisen about usine him since neappears to have been in contact ith anumber O1 other escaued prisoners at uib.and knows good del abciit the escareroutes. Te Doition is to ce furtherexplored.ine j.Le discussed with Viv. Dic andmyself the set up in N.Africa. Viv.raid tat S. .S. were really aaitineGibbs report. it wIS agreed. that thefirst joint meeting so1d tike Sincenext eek. The D.G. mant B-i and Rans-botham to attend. this ill make itdifticutt to discss controversiil suojectof policy, unless it is anticipatedCatalogtearelerence:Rvi4igo dou in sailor unitsand DLaV 1102 andin tne894nursery "Nhile we have tea in the drawin-room.I spent the whole morning trying to getsometiny going about .Africa. Stone ancRogers, late of reetown, want to comeun and. see me.AL ne"i XX agent kno mn as LiSTiCK isarriving. e contemplated te arrestof te wireless operator from teGilleardis llavine got the crew list fromNenfoundland itwas disevered tt tewireless operater 'Mis ell-knc mn LSUDcaracter. Te F.O. were ready tolet US deal with me i1 the snip wriSstill in port but vere prinst his beingremoved on te nigh seas. the Aduiriityare taking a different view.Lennox telis me that a sgecili enuiryis being made into te vatilin incidentmita particular reference to tedocuments found on CRU.IIN. ulthonenS.U.E. soonsored C's desrture they donot appear to have censored his documents.Our vie is t.at e cannot take res-ponsibility for saying vere documents ofthis kind should or shouid not be taenout of the cointry, unless we are fuilyacnuainted write the activities of tieagents of allied Governments. A. repetiticof te atilin: incident could proBblybe nrevented it evervone carrvin. documentNere made to empty their vOCkets beforeCatalogue RetEPENCE.REH4APC Reference could be seied inTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDN DEPABTMENT UNDER SECTION3953 (4) OF The PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 Oct 20ooan envelope and placed 1n Leaoedcanister nich could be jettisoned if theplane got into diificulties.The F.W. are makin a fuse about theinterrogation of 5 SuS ects at reeto'vn.One 01 them is the barper froin ynomcorrespondence has taken au Cpe Town.Tests carried out alter the departureof the ship rom Cape Tom shoued thate letters he was carry ing containedsecret ink messages about the movementsof our convoys. It is proposed tointerrogate him and several others WOwere associited with nim and to detinanyone who is susect. The F.O. seemworried about the detention o1 SO manyPortuguese subjects. i spoke to woxleyandagreed that we would interrogite the5 suspects and report furter beforedetaining them.I had a talk with B.W and Antony abonttomorros meeting 'vith D.M.i. on theubject o1they are ratherafraid that the D.M.I. may try andrestrict our use of diplomatic per-sonnel. Personally L do not think SO.In any case L shali resist it strongiy.I put forward t suggestion that yemight consier planting a, bogus ypherto be used beteen some D. Americanattache ind his Govt. we would plintthis cy ypner on the Gernins ind then useit for deception purposes. the difii-Catalogue Catalogule-Reference:kv/1sdo ould have to takeinto our oniidence not O ly someone896here but someone in the foreign affairsdept. o1 the Govt. concerned. If this gotback to the Germans our deception wouldmerely be an indication of hat we did notintend to do. On the other hand if we usesome cypher between ourselves and theAmericans for the same purpose the prob-ability is that the contents of themessages would not be believed. Thedeception would in any case be difficultto maintain for long.October 3Uth-Harker held a meeting about the factsthat have to be published after the exe-cution of SCOTT-FORD. with the concurr-ence of S.I.S. details have been givenabout the part played by WELTZIEN'S show.It seemed a question whether this shouldbe included or not. Later in the dayL saw C. I pointed out that our onlyinterest lay in the possibility of SO muchmud being thrown back about the attemptto penetrate WELTZIEN'S office that thevalue o1 our story about SCOTT-EORDmight be diminished. It was of coursefor C. to say how far he thought the pub-lication of this information was going toreact on his own organis tion. it waseventually decided that we should omitthe passage about ELTZIEN but pass thefacts to our Minister at wisbon forcommunicatior to SALAXAR, after theexecution had taken place. Representa-tions had already been made to theCatalogue Reference:KVI4/190ca1Portuguese Govt. about WELTZLEN'S activi-ties but they had so far not seen fit totake anyaction.ISBA discloses that the Germans arewrangling a good deal about Tricycle'sexpenses and future salary.Tangye came to see me. Dy an oversightthe confidential B.M. giving Harker'sreport on his investigation of the FressSection had been sent down to him. Hehad naturally read it all from cover tocover, wed was extremely incensed, andwanted to know what he should do. i saidthat as he had seen the report, whichhad been addressed to him, there was nouse pretending that he hadnot. The bestthing that he could do was to answer it ina minute to me which i would put forwardto the D.G. Tangye seemed to think thatmost of the criticisms were unjustifiableand that his vork was not appreciated.C. told me this afternoon that the P.Mwas hopping mad about Alba who hadcommunicated a report to his Govt.on our forthcoming operations. Personal-ly 1 think it is difficult to blameAlba. People vill not realise thathowever benevolent and pro-Britisha neutral Ambassador may appear it ishis duty to report to hisyGovt. what hehea S, sees and thinks. The fault lieswith those who confide in him. He hasan immense circle ot friends in all walksCatalogue Reference.kvr4rpgo a good deal ofTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION8e 83(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958. Ol e00information goes west over the secondglass of port.le had a meeting this afternoon in theD.M.I.'S D.M. 1. room to wnich Vale, D. D. M. (0)Carlyle, M. L. l. (L) ,Bevan, the controlier,T.A.R. and I were present. The purposeeas to discussae admittedquite frankly that although it had beenagreed with the controller thlat the inform-ation should be passed toas a conscious agent, the technique wasbad since it obviously placed the 0.0.in a false position. it was suggestedtat in Future such information mightbe passed either as gossip or as a cal-culated indiscretion. In some instancesM. I. (L) might be a better channel.As Carlyle kne'N nothing about theimpending operations it was decided thathe should in the future bein the know.I then raised the uestion of leakageof information through high places,persons in the Services and in civilianDepartments. i thought that for thepurposes of deception, it would be wellworth while acquiring a list of theprincipal contacts of the Spanish Ambassa-dor and M.6 M. A., and possibly also those ofthe Turkish and Swedish Embassies. Wecould then lect those who Nould haveknowledge of op rations. They could beapproached on a personal basis and askedto notify the controller whenever theyatalogueReterehcetkvtaratoone O1 te ambassadoror m. S selected. -ne controller nouldTHIS1S COPYORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION8AA(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958. Ou 0006o 060give them tae necessary guidance both ona defensive and offensive basis. e.g.they would know how to parry awkwardquestions and how to lead the conversa-tion on to suitable lines of deception.This suggestion seemed. to find favour.Kellar Came to see me about the PasilaHe are still unable to solve thematter of nis communications. We aregetting still furtnerwhich may help. This means that anArabic translator will have to be found.October 3lstI san Rogers and asked him to considerthe jobo of Asst.D.S.0. D.S.0. in Gambia He wasreluctant to leave this country butseemed to think thit ii he accepted thejob it might help him in his futurecareer.A Dr. "ILSON has been arrested in Dublinfor assisting British F/N to escape.alshe has complained tu mafiey. aboutthe whole of the M. 1.9 set up,detailsof nich appear to be known to the EireGovt. maftey is much concerned, andseems to be making rither neavy eatherof the whole affair. de has suggestedthat tht S. of S. should go and seeDulanty. Cecil And i agreed that itwould be far better to say quite IrankiyCataloge REfererice.kV//4/igos long as they reminneutral and detil tiln our F/IS we shill of2oocourse try and get them out of internment.They should further be told that thisis a rudeness which they must exect.L gather that several others have peenarrested as well. Mailey is doing nisbest to get the proceedings damped down.It has been agreed with C. that all Axiswires emanating from Dublin shall beheld up until after Torch has started..The attemots of Berlin to get into touch"nith Dublin were eventually successfuland an en clair reply was sent: "Baldigstauf anderem Hege". This obvicusly meansthe diplomatic route. Probably theGernns have got wind of Torch and areanxious to knON about the movements ofconvoys from N.ireland.Loxley rang up to say that the actionwith regard to the SCOTT-FOID Case Nasapproved by the R.O.C. has ritten me a letter commenting onthe minutes of the R.S.S. S.meeting in con-nection With Group 7/23. die notes taitte h.S.S. S. .Committee deprecate his policyand sugsests that this is not really amatter for their concern. ile enzuireswhether the Committee was unaimous. igater that the minutes Nere t ken tohim by Cowg ll vo described them asrank mutiny on the part of 5 of hisofficers. valtby is shaking in his shoesand is saying that he is goin to repudi-ate the whole thing. i am reply ing toCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190THS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDqolIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSthe came u in theerect ACT 1958 1eordinary course of the committee's businesand tht thle fact that certin of thegroups already handed over here dead didnotiappear to be kno'Nn toandpossibly not to C. himsell. it seemedtneretore necessary to bring the matterto his attention. L nad suggested doingit cersondliy but nad decided otherisrater in deference to Ferguson'swishes. I sid however tilit the committeewas highiyqualiiied to give advice apoutISS and ISA since on it vere representedail the producers and users. ine factis 01 course that the only advice C.ever gets is from Felix who is not al-ways aware of tie full facts ind is inany case biassed against giving nybodyanything.Giliillan's monthly report has theusual characteristic opening: Despitethe commission of a number of seriousoutrages the oeice of Northern irelandhas been well naintained during the me,hof September 1y42. 167 indictableoffences were reported compire with152 for the previous month. IGeoffrey Nethered came to see me aboutthe possibility oi jop in Y.Africa.L Ssaid that the whole thing was in themelting pot but tat possibly Soineonemignt be reuired to cover te jointinterests of S. L.S. and ourselves inCatalogues atalogueReference.kv4/1got te ready to take onsome job O1 the kind.T02November IstE read an extremely interesting reportby two representatives of S.1.S. who hadmanaged to get away from Japan. One ofthem had been interrogated every day-from 9 in the morning till lunch timeand from 2 o'clock in the afternoon untilsometimes 11 at night. After being heldfor 6 months he was finally released. Hisaccusers seemed so confident that hewould get 10 years imprisonment that theywere more than usually forthcoming abouttheir methods. They shoved him a seriesof documents which they had interceptedand disclosed to him in seme detail theactivities of Dr. SORGE, a Soviet spywhom they had arrested in 1941. It ispossible that they thought that C's mannad been associated with SORGE sincehe had resided in the same block of flats.C's man did in fact knON SORGE but had al-ways regarded him as a hot Nazi. SORGEhad been operating in Japan for 10 yearsand had a fairly widespread organisationand a W/T transmitter. He was assistedby a Jugoslav called VUKULEVICH. Theorganisation had been given away by thelatter's wife. Sne was disgruntledbecause her husband had deserted her fora Japanese woman. V. had been arrestedand under great mental strain had giventhe whole party away. Dry SORGE was alsoarrested but would not have been brokendown had it not been for the factsdisclosed by V. SORGE is apparently aCatalogue Reference:KVI4/190q03German who was either born or had livedin Russia for many years. o much washe regarded as a hot Nazi by everyonthat he had succeeded in penetratingthe German Embassy where he was personagrata and shovn confidential documents.A man with whom he had relations therewas summarily executedby the Germansin the grounds of the Legation. Onlyonce did SORGE give himself away, -when he was tight he said that he couldnot stand the Nazis. His position was SOstrong however that nobody paid any at-tention to the remark. SORGE'S performan-ce is all the more incredible whenconsidered in the light oi Japanesesupervision of the alien population.Every alien has a dossier and is underconstant supervision. The Japs disclosedamount that SORGE of information had acquired regarding a consierable binga-pore and Hong Kong which had proved veryuseful to them in their attack on thoseplaces. There is no doubt that theRussians are bar better in the matter oeespionage than any other country inthe world. I am perfectly certain thatthey are well bedded.down here and thatwe should be making more active investi-gations They will be a great source oftrouble to us when the Nar is over.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/190704November 2ndI had a long talk with Stone who is quiteready to go out to Freetown. He explainedto me the workings of the I.B. staffin Sierra ueone.Viv. rang upto say that C. Nas horrifiedabout HUMF IREY S. C. had decided howeverto leave him at Gib. at any rate for thetime being. I agreed that he wouldprobably be better there than in thiscountry.The wireless operator on the uilleardishas been taken off. it was just as wellas the ship was about to run into theTorch convoy, which before turning southhad sailed three-quarters of the wayto Newfoundland in the teeth of anappalling gale.The Libyan battle is beginning to moveand xx number of Germans and Italianshave been cut off near the coast. TheGermans counterattacked. Twenty tanksgot through but the gap was closed again.It seems that the Germans may be gettingshort of armoured units and petrol. Wehave over 300 tanks knocked out but haverecovered at least 270.The American Navy in the IYacific isseriously out-numbered in battleships,cruisers and aircraft carriers, butslightly stronger in destroyers and sub-Catalogue Reference:KV/4/190qosmarines. The airfield at Guardalcanathas been recovered. Our shipping lossesare extremely heavy.I am told that Winston in discussing Torchwith the President by cable, replied tothe suggestion that the Americans shouldland first in .Africa and be followedby the British in order not to wound t esusceptibilities of the French, con-cluding his telegram by saying that thoughhis experience in these matters waslimited he had never before associatedseduction with rape.I had lunch with Isham and Buist ofM.1.9 about escaped F/Ws and evaders.I told them that I was proposing to sendCaroe down to the Transit Camp as soon ashe returned. I impressed upon them thatwe should have to rely very largely upontheir experience of escape routes. Therewas no Security Service Magic in casesof this sort. We would SO far as it waspossible identify P/IS but we should haveto rely on their knowledge and experierto say whether his story was plausible.I impressed upon them that the questionwas one of vital importance to us andthat we would only be too ready to assistin any way we possible could.I had a meeting with T.AyR. and theController when we worked out a scheme onthe lines that I had suggested to theD.M.I. Antony is going to get the listCatalogue Reference:KVI4/19006of contacts and we may later considergetting the P.M.'s support in approachingthe various highly placed individualsconcerned.I have sent a Fire aff to Gibbs askinghim to give us an estimate of thepersonnel required for W.Africa.November 3rdAt the D.G.S meeting today the questionof allowing aliens to join the army wasconsidered. it was felt th t on thewhole provided aliens were properly vettedthere might be some relaxation of theexisting procedure.Emerson, Minister of Justice from New-foundland called to see the D.G. Heseemed satisfied with our Securityofficers. He mentioned that he hada certain amount of difficulty withthe Americans who regarded the whole ofthe Western Hemisphere as their province.They were rather inclined to make enquirieon their own, without saying ything tothe local authorities.Tangye has handed his memo to the D.G.e had our first meeting with section Vat Glenalmond. Viv. made an openingspeech. I am bound to say it made me feelquite uncomfortable. He announced thenew stablishment for Section V. byCatalogue saving e Reference.KV14/19c that lor Cowgill, whom he hopedq07shortly to be able to call Ht. Col.Cowgill,but who would always be known to us asFelix, had succeeded in getting thismatter through. The D.G. made an appease-ment speech and referred to the variousmatters which he thought we could profit-ably discuss in detail. He said that inhis experience in India, it was impossibleto deal with subversive movements onprovincial basis. In the same way C.Hmust be treated as a whole. It wastherefore necessary that we should get muecloser together. He and Dufi Cooperwould have wished our organisations tobe unified but in thepresent circumstancesthis appeared to be impossible.Curry's report was discussed and it wasagreed that I should see Cavendish Bentincand draw his attention to the pointsraised by Curry regarding the operationalsignificance of integrated C.E. material.An Irish P/W named JOY CE has arrived fromMadrid. hie was interned for some time(19 months) in what is normally atransit camp somewhere near Frankfurt.He says that he succeeded in escapingand apparently got into touch with oneof ourescape onganisations. He hascreated a bad impression. The matter is Jfurther complicated by his wish to takea holiday at his home in ko.Mayo. Heis being kept on some pretext or otherin order that his story can be thoroughlyexamined. Cases of this sort are goingCatalogue Reference:KVI4/19CDgto present very serious difficuities, sincunder military law there are no Doerfor holding a main No is regarded withsusvicion.Lennox tells me tat the lUth ArmouredCorns broke right trough the Germanslines last night. Preponderance of armoulvehicles is about 2-1 in our favour. ehave some 000 tanks.November 4thI took the ednesday meeting. On 5uthact. the German i.S. in isbon reportedunder date 22. 10. 42 from Egypt that ourpresent offensive was undertake forpolitical reasons and had a limited aimof winning back Mersa. miatruh and thesurrounding ar a. the report concludeswith a description of the presentstrength in armaments of the 3th Army.On the 22nd Jctober wisbon reported thepossibility 01 an attack on Dakar byAmerics in and unglish units now stationedalong the nfriCan coast. it was thouentthat the specially stron garrison atGib. was intended for an operation aE instTangier in the immediate future. Thereport was sent on to Lerlin with reservealthcusn the Source Mas stated to oe a gocgood one. Klaus LANGHUIST,Y an Officialof the Abwehr at we llavre who nas beenresponsible for oruanising sever l smallboat expeditions, is at present paving aCataldgueReferercekv49o Canaris is insoect-ing the Aowenr titions in worway, accom-THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDq09IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958. Oupanier DY unre near rerungs L andIII.The D.G. has han a teleyram from oterh-erson sugestine t.lat Sir iiliam isemanshould stervise te work 01 the SecurityService on Stepnenson' behalf. visemanis a director of Kubn Loeb, and was overhere short time 8.20. this looksrather like another big business stintby Sternenson.the D.G. has wired Back to ss.y that hesees no useful ournose in interposingiseman. he ininks the vork of theSecurity Service can suite easily pecarried bvie nas Offered to sendoutan .I.5 representative ifisover-burdened, which in lact e is. fampressing igin that Mills sild so cut..ESON. the P who was recruited by theGermans and reoorte tu our M.. in bonehas not yot arrived. Auprertiy li. I.9do not isi nim to folio the escitteroute. it seems douotiul tlereiore metwe shall be ible to use him as a XA.The barber on the ship "Coloniai" has beentaken off at Freetovn. evidence seemsfairly conclusive tit he is the currit,He is on is may back nome.Fde Came to see me. when ne has f'inishedCatalogue ReterencekVi4/1goin to try and get the10hang of things. The D.G. has some ideaof putting him in as the co-ordinator of aintelligence received from D.S.O.SPersonally 1 cant see what he can do thatcant be done as well or better by Gibbs,unless he takes over Jelf's side of thework. There ould be every advantagein gettin rid of Self and Flowman, whoare completely dead-weight.M.S.S. shows that the Germans are in seriodifficulties.I dined with Vickery. le told me thefull story of Subhas Dose. the mas undera kind of preventive detention at Calcuttaand got two Indian Sikh Communists tosmuggle him out of his house and acrossthe irontier to habul. in order todistract the attention of his guards he anannounced that he was going into retreatfor meditation and fasting. He had himselscreened off and grew a beard. The guardsnot wishing to disturb his meditations didnot penetrate his inner chamber. One nighthe two Communists smuggled him out ofthe house. e had told the Communiststhat he wished to go and see Stalin butwhen he reached Kabul he decided, afterbeing approached by the Germins tat hewould prefer to see hitler. The twoCommunists were rather bewildered by thisbut succumnbed to the large sums of moneywhich were fortheoming. yhen Germanyattacked Russia they felt that thingswere going too far and reported themselvesto Stalin. the G.F.U. took them in handCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190quand told them to remain in the pay o1 theGermans. They were relieved of a gooddeal of the money which they had alreadyreceived. These intrigues were known tothe Indian Govt. who eventually persuadedthe Aighans to expel them. One of themwas arrested on crossing the frontierbut the other one disappered. it wasat this stage that the Russians approedill of S.0.E. in Moscow and suggestedthat ve and the Russians might run theagents together. In proof of their bonafides they supplied Hill with a great dealof interesting information about theGerman intentions at habul and theirrelations with Subhas Bose. In returnthe nussians have persistently asked forinformation about subversive movements ontheir Chinese eastern frontier. They seento have a patehtic belief in the BritishIntellig ence Service which in fact has nosuch information. This the Russiansfind it hard to believe. .I.B. are nowsending arepresentative to Moscow tocollaborate with the G.P.U. Vickerywas wondering whether to send a highofficial or a man who really knew hisstuff. I said that it might be better tosend both. The Russians seemed to befather bewildered and cannot quite under-stand why the Indian policeman is goingto Moscow.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/1909 2November 5thThere is very good news from Egypt. Itseems that we have really broken throughand got the Germans and Italians on therun.At the R.S.S. meeting we discussed theItalian groups which seem to be comingalong, particularly those which are beingrun under some kind of naval procedure.Ryle is getting down to the Kameradschaftsdienst. He is taking Leary from theCoding Section of the Censorship.Hordern and his naval brother came to seeme. The Latter is rather horrified aboutcareless talk at eymouth. L showed himthe minutes of the Security Executive onthe sub ject, and explained that only aprosecution with a heavy sentence or astatement from the P.M. was likely todo much good at this stage.Lennox tells me th t the Germins now haveonly about 100 tanks as against 670 ofours. The escarpment to the south ofFouka has been taken.Walker tells me that some pigeons havebeen seen on the South Downs. He is goingto get some hawks don there.The onesin the Scilly Isles caught several pigeonsbut they were found to be our own.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/190413D.P.P. rang me up about the case ofBOSWORTH, an M.A.P. official who seems tohave embezzled about 110,000 which hemade on contracts. He has paid large sumsinto his account in fl notes. We tookout an B0A order at the re uest o1 M. A.P.on the understanding that it was onlyfor the purpose 01 information. They nowwant to confront BOSWORTH with detailsof his account and ask for an explanation. I explained to the D.P. that wecould not feature as a Gestapo on theCivil Service and that it was quallyimportant that B0A snould not receive anypublicity.I suggested as a way roundthat the man should be questioned andtold that the authorities vere doubtfulabout some of his transactiens.Theycould then say that they were anxiousto clear the matter up ind that possiblyne would nave no b.ection to showing themhis passbook. D.P.P. thought this waspossible butfelt that if he Nere con-fronted with a statement Of his accounthe would be more likely to break down.I had a talk with Viv. about Americaand Stephenson. 1 said tat unless herefrained from running agents intoHoover's area we could never hope toget any information out of the F.B.I.Viv. seemed from doubtful about Stephen-son. He thought nowy that he was therepresentative of HDSE,S.O.E. and our-selves, S.I.S. would no longer nave anycontrol over him, and that they might beCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190914well advised to drop him altogether andstart a separate show. L said that ifhe was going to propose this I hopedne would Let us know as Ne were notparticularly keen on being landed withStephenson.Curry and I had a meeting with CavendishBentinck when we discussed the presenta-Otion of Curry's report to the J.1.C.Later after a t alk vith Dick and dartI decided to see Melland before puttingforward a paper about the operationalvalue of integrated C. E. information.Novemper othNoble came to see me about the case ofETSCHEIT and ARS. FRIEDMANN. the casehas very curious features and it isuite on the cards that Mrs. FRIEDMANNcame nere as an S.D. agent. The casehowever is SO old that I dougt whetherthere is much to be learned from it.Melland came over and Curry,Dick,Hartand I had a talk with him. He was alittle worried by certain passages inCurry's report which seemed to implythat the oper ational signitieance of ISOSwas not being presented to the Chiefsof Staff. He realised however that Currywas really tryin to get official backingfor Melland in his efforts to paint arather wider canvas. MELLLAND leftthat there ought to be regular meetingsCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190aisbetween all the users of ISOS, R.S.S, andralmer of G.C &c C.S. He is quite certainthat e should all benefit from suchdiscussions. His great difficulty isin putting the full interpretation uponISOS which necessitates his ringing upvarious people. He gets much morefrom Hartand T-R than anyone else. Hegets a certain amount from Palmer, butmighty little from Section V. of whomhe appears to have a poor opinion. Itwas agreed that we would discuss thisat our next meeting with S.I.S. and inthe meantime ve would call off the presen-tation of Curry's report to the J.I.C.I rang up Canvedish Bentinck and explainedto him that there vere certain matterswhich we wished to iron out on a loverlever before the report went for'nard.Mills came to see me about theLipstick case. bipstick is an extreme Lyinteresting character. He is a Republicanwho managed to fade into obscurityafter the.Civil War with the assistanceof a friend who was in the CivilGuard. e was closely associited withthe Catalan Movement and in particularwith Cordunella. It was thoughtdesirable that he should try and establishcontact with Roca of the Catalan Movementin this country. It occurred to Lipstickthat he might be able to pbtain his exit-permit more easily if he offered hisservices to the Germans. He made tenta-tive approaches to a German who was aCatalogue Reference:KVI4/190ibmember of the Barcelona Tennic Club,and through him eventually obtained anintroduction to members of the GermanS.S. It Nas many months before he couldget his exit permit and British visa.During this time he succeeded throughthe indiseretions of one PASHKIS inlearning a good deal about the GermanI.S. He has now rrived here with aninteresting questionnair, Secret Ink, etc.November 7thJonn Senter came to talk to me abouta Norwegian named BLIXBERG who isworking for the Russians. He went fromStockholm to Norvay and was accompaniedby a Russian to the frontier. Hereported his activities to S.0.E. inStockholm. This fact appears to havecome to the knowledge of Trygvelie who hasasked S.0.E. to lay off owing to deli-cate negotiations that he is having withMaiski. This all sounds rather mysteriousL have asked Senter to clear up a numberof points.November BthTorch began.November thI had a talk with Inspector White of MAPand Joe Archer about the BOSWORTH case.I explained our point o.f view to WhiteCatalogue Reterencervrarisopossibly the bestqi7way round was for the S. ofs. for Airto sign an 80a warrant. He said he wouldreport accordingly to Sir ArchibaldRowlands the rermanent Under Secretary.Janson and Wood of N. I.D., Dick, ArnoldFoster of S.I.S. and myself had a meetingto discuss the piper put out by theSecurity Executive on anti-sabotagemeasures. We came to the conclusion tthat the existing machinery for takingaction in specific cases was workingsatisfactorily and that all that wasreally required was proper co-ordination Cof the instructions circulated by thisoffice and by the Security Executive. itseemed to us that the latter should sendtheir instruetions here for vetting andshould confine themselves solelyprophylactic measures.Lennox tells me that the Torch operationin N. Africa seems to De going Nell. Inaddition to the landings on Casablanca,Oran and rlgiers, there nas been a landingat Philippeville. French M.T.Bsat Alexandria feeling that they ought tobe doing something, started roaringround the harbour and loosed one torpedoeinto the Mole, killing 11 people. AFrench battleship had been careullyinduced to go intondry dock. Three Frenchdestroyers were sunk off Easaolanca andthe "Jean Bart" has been torpedoed in theharbour.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/19(918November lOthAt the D.G. S meeting today the newregulations put out by the War CabinetSecurity anel were discussed. Therewas no provision for searching oficersbefore they left this country and placingtheir documents in a leaded box. I saidthat L felt therefore that the precautionswere inadequate, and would not preventa repetition of the incident they weredesigned to prevent.Peter Hope came to see me. He had heardsomething of jobs for RSLOS abroad. Heand Forrest were worried by their lack ofknowledge of the work which they felt theymight be called upon to do, L explainedto him that Ne bere starting a series oflectures on the WOrIK of the office.Joe Archer brought in chappell to see me.He has taken Blackford's plice and seemsa great improvement.lar Wilson came to talk to me about hisvisit to USA. He or rather then had app-arently a certain amount of trouble withthe FBI who were not particularly help-ful in the preparation of TricycleMacSwain in New York did his best and aman called Lanman was sent up fromWashington for to day s. y During this timenotiona informants to cover the informa-tion which Tricycle had given were dis-cussed and agreed upon. It was naturallyCatalogue Reference:KVI4/190q19assumed that MacSwain and Lanman had theauthority to go ahead on behalf of theirdepartment. When the whole scheme wassubmitted to the F.B.I. a rude lettercame back from Hoover complaining thatthe F.B.I. found Tricyele's instruetions"for the most part extremely objectionabbeA reply has been sent to Hoover pointingout that the whole matter was arrangedwith members of his department. In or or?not to exacerbate the feelings of theF.B.I. no mention was made Of their veryindifferent handing o1 the case whichwas really resonnsible for the presentdifficulties. L am Wilson did anextremely painstaking job and I am quitesure that had he not gone to the U.S.A.Tricydle would never have got away withit in Lisbon. He seems to have satis-fied von Kasthoff and Berlin are now lesssceptical th they were. He has receiveda highly interesting questionnaire and25,000 dolars.Viv. has rung up to say that Felix willnot be present at our A.C.E. meetingtomorrow as ne is "in the middle of thebattle". Viv. doubts whether he willhave the requisite knowledge to discusscertain matters that we have on the agendaI am rather afraid that Section V. willalways be in the middle of a battle,struggling to keep their he ds abovewater. The consequence Is that they neverhave time to do anything but to take adhoc measures on isolated bits of informa-tion. II they could sit back occasion-Catalogue Reference:KVI4/190920nally and take stock of what they are dointhey might get better results.Viv. has sent me a letter saying that C.has asked him to deal with the questiron the minuter of the R.S.S. Committee onthe Russian group 7/23. He says that adiscussion of the kind does not comewithin the terms of reference of theR.S.S. Committee and is a matter of highpolicy ;he hopes we shall not trespasson such ground in future. He ignoresthe fact, which was made quite clear to meby Ferguson, that C. had never beeninformed that the Russian groups alreadyhanded over were dead. am also certainthat C. had very little idea as to theextent of group 7/23 since I know that heis only shown isolated messages fromtime to time. Viv. ends by aying thatif I consider that there is any intelli-gence matter outside the seope of theCommittee which should be brought to C'snotice, it would be better if I spokepersonally to . or himself. L had thoughof sending a reply to this letter butprobably it is better to say nothing.November llthTricycle's questionnaire deals mainlywith naval and military matters. Unfor-tunately one of the Duff was folded overon itself and only a fe words of it canbe read. It contains all the coveraddresses. We hope to get over this byCatalogue Reference:KVI4/190ancorresponding to one of the old addresses.Garbo has recently proposed sending oneof his agents to N.Africa, so as toprovide us there with a non-existentXX who we could use if necessary fordeception purposes. The set-up would bethat this agent ould communicate backto Garbo in his secret ink for whichhe has no developer, and that the orig-inal repats should be forwarded to theGermans via this country.I took the Wednesday meeting. On the dayspreceeding Torch, the observation stitionsat Algeciras, on the Straits and onthe Atlantic coast of N.Africa, were keptvery busy reporting the arrival andmovements of British haval units. It seemclear that up to the last moment theGerman I.S. had no definite informationas to the purpose of the concentrationof Naval units at Gib. and thought itwas for another operation to convoywar material to Malta. When the landingshad actually taken place the Intelli-gence stations in Spanish Moroccoreceived instructions from Madrid to putall their forces to bear to investigatethe situation and report back. In order'to carry out this suggestion Tetuan headstation of German I.S. in Spanish Moroccoinstructed Mellila to bring into forceimmediately all its intelligence and re-porting services with Algeria. Directcommunication with the German station atCatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/190922Casablanca ceased during the afternoon of8th November and after that the Germanshad to depend as far as we know on theinformation received from vichy andthrough the Spaniards for its situationreports.On 6th November the German IntelligenceH. Q. at Berlin informed Madrid thatthey were to discover the address of afirm of oriental arpet dealers E. PEREZ&c Co. The proprietor of this firm wassaid to be living in England, and wadridwas asked to find out. He is likelyto be at his business address, SO thatan agent could get into toucn with himIt is probable from the form of therequest that the proprietor is approachedand sounded. He has not necessarilyeen in touch with the Abwehr in thepast. It would also appear that thecontact is to be established in thiscountry. We already have a certainamount of information about PEREZ butenquiries are proceeding.One of the earliest intimations that weknow of as having been received by theGerman I.S. that landings were to be madeat Casablanca was obtained through anagent from the Marine Section in aristhrough a former member of the 2eme bureauon the 4th iovember. According to thssource an American landing was anticipatedin Casablanca within a short time andserious French resistance was only toCatalogue Reference:KVI4/190gasbe expected if Wey gand took command, whichit was thought that he was prepared to do.Milmo gave an interesting accou t of thecase of PRY, a Belgian who fought at thebeginning of the war in the Belgian forcesAfter the Armistice he went back to hisinsurance company Constantin and Laterhe went for his company to Hamburg, wherehe met a Dr. FRANKE, a friend of Dr.ey. According to his own account nedeliberately worked up a friendship withFranke. After 3 months in iamburg hereutnred to his business in Brusselsbut as it was not functioning well heoffered his services to the Germans asa means of escape. He was given amission to the Belgian Congo to reporton the presence of American troops,especially Air Force personnel andair Fields. He was then to be in touchwith a Mrs. DINGS, the mistress of aBelgian known to the Belgian authoritieshere as one who had been ying topenetrate escape routes on benali of theGermans. He was introduced by DINGSto a man called GILSON, as a represen-tative of the British S.S. going to LisbonGILSON was induced to hand him a numberof ineriminating documents. he was thentold by DINGS to get the names and addres-ses of people on the escape route. Heooks bad, because (a) ney was in Hamburgfor 5 months here his career as an S.S.agent probably began (b) he consented tobe an agent and never warned Gi SONCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190Seeter24(c) he had a book with markings whichsuggested that the book was the basisofsome code. (d) the plain language codehe was to use in the Belgian vongo wassingularly inadequate for the purposeof reporting on the lines laid down bythe German I.S. Cases of this sortpresent us with considerable difficulties.A somewhat similar one is that of PeerreMORREL who has been sent here to enlistin the British S.S. by joining the R.A.F.and fly a plane back. He says that heworked in the German S.S. for 6 monthsbut seems quite unable to give us anyinformation of real value. His salary wasraised from 1700 francs per months to2,00 and then to 3,000. One imaginestherefore that the Germans must have beensatisfied with his work. he was told tomake a tour of aerodromes in order thathe could see which one would be themost suitable on which to land the Britishpiane. He only visited one. If he hadreally been out to help the allies hemight have taken the opportunity of makinga detailed inspection of a large number.There are also other unsatisfactory pointsin this case. The difficulty is thatMOREL could be a German agent and yet notbe forced to depart from the truth inany of the detailed ifrromation he givesunder interrogation.I raised the question of ythe censorshipof P/W mail, and urged Grogan to getthings moving.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/190q2uAt the A.C.E. meeting today Ne discussedfirst of all .Africa and decided that -we should have to wait for Gibbs' returnbefore the S.1.S. aspect of the problemcould be settled. Ne then came to thequestion of Research. It was agreed thatthe next report should be written up toNovember 8th and that the contributionsshould reach Curry on Jan. lst.I reported that L had seen CavendishBentinck and also Melland who was veryanxious to have some regular meetingof ISOS users which would include arepresentative of R.S.S.,S.I.S. and G C &cC.S. Viv. poured cold water on thisand said he saw no use in having anothercommittee and when I told him howanxious Melland nas to get something ofthe kind going he replied that it wasfor Melland to put forward his reasons.The D.G. hurried over this aspect ofthe question and we then proceeded tovet the list of those who Nere toreceived Curry's report. I am glad tosay that to copies are going tothe F.B.I. Lastly we discussed america.The D.G. said that he proposed tocommunicate with Stephenson direct on allmatters in which his department wasinterested. Viv. I think took this tomean that ne would only be comnunicatingon matters affecting the MCaribbean.therefore asked him point blank whether hehe was in agreement with the proposalthat we should in future correspond directCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190428with Stephenson on German espionage casesin the U.S.A. sending a copy of ourletters and telegrams to him and in certaincases consulting with them on the telephonebefore the despatch of the telegram. Viv.said that this was not what he nad under-stood and that it was contrary to C's wish.D.H. then went over him like a 1000 tontank and viv. remained protesting to theend. AS I went out of the room with himne said "This is S eer piracy". L saidthat I did not think it was as bad as thatand that frankly L could not see thatGlenalmond was performing any usefulfunction as regards our liaison with theF.B.I.I saw a man called Jones who is a candidatfor the post of enterrogator at theReception Centre in London for Britishsubjects. He has been repatriated fromShanghai recently, where he was secretaryto the Municipal Council. He is obviouslya man of considerable knowledge andex erience and should I think do the jobquite well.The Germans have entered Unoccupied FranceNovember 12thI discussed yesterday' A.C.E. meeting witCurry and decided before proceedingfurther with the sug: ggested Committee ofISOS users, to consult Melland.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/190aalI had a meeting with ViV.,A.D.N.I.,Wood Woodand Arnold roster on the Security Executivanti-sabotage paper. All were agreed onopposing this paper on the lines previous-ly discussed. I undertook to speak toLoxley and obtain his support.The D.G. is extremely annoyed aboutyesterday's A.C.E. meeting. He is par-ticularly annoyed about Viv's reluctanto accept his generous offer of 6 indivdwho could take part under anybody'colours in a future Second Front. Viv.said that S.I.S. had planned not onlyto send people out to operate with theI.B. staff in the indtiatestages but otherwho would take up jobs in the back areaswhen the situation became stabilised.Iasked him who these people were going tobe. He said that they had not yet beenfound but when they did get them theywould be trained and go out "thoroughlysoaked in C.E. How exactly this isgoing to be achieved in the time I donot know it is extremely difficultto get people and more diificult tosoak them in C.E. in a matter of a fewweeks or months. All our RSLOS and theirsubordinatesare very good ground workand would be much more suitable materialThe four people who have been sent outto N.Africa are not OI very high cualithyand certainly of little experience. Theleader was a manager of a provincial bankin 1941. Probably an excellent iellow butnot one of any very great experience.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/190927The D.G. has now drafted a telegram toStephenson informing him that in futurewe are going to correspond with himdirect en dall matters in which we areinterested in the western hemisphere.In this he includes cases oi enemyespionage, sabotage, subversive movements,alien control etc. etc. He does notintend to submit this telegram to Viv.before it is despatched but will sendhim a copy. He says that ne cannot goon arg uing any more.We have just had a wire to say that 10saboteurs have landed in Canada, andVictor is going to have a look at tham.I have just seena report from India onthe infiltration of Jap agents. 45genuine agents have been caught, 24 were 1from the Indian ation l Army and 10 werelanded in to parties by submarine.The remainder are civilians of variouscategories probably introduced into thestream of refugees from Burma. A numberof others have become agents in order toescape and give themselves up on arrival.There is no evidence of Japanese connec-tion with the Congreee Party. The DurmeSEfrontier is now to be closely controlled.Herbert of Censorshiprang me up to say thaDuff had now started again in Bermuda.A letter had been intercepted going fromMexico with 40 duff.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/190Alba has addressed a note to the F.O.on behalf of his Govt. with a tentativeand veiled offer of mediation. He hasreceived a pretty stiff reply from Edenmaking it clear that we intend to fightthis war to the finish.Father is in the process of applyingfor a transfer to high altitude flying.Balloon has received an interestingquestionnaire In this the Germans ha1at last replied to nis proposal that heshould visit Lisbon. They say thit theywill require at least 4 weeks notice ofiny such message and ask him to explainhis plan more fully. Since he has alreadygiven full details making it clear thatthe next move is with the Germand andsince it has taken them 7 weeks to thinkout this extremely unsatisiactory reply itlooks as if Berlin has instructed Lisbonto stall Balloon off at any rate forthe time being.November 13thA wire has been sent to Gibbs urgingnim to press the Resident Minister toreconsider his decision about our havingan Asst.D.S.0. at Freetown.The D.G.S wire to Stephenson has gone.I spent the afternoon at The n.P.S. andwas extremely impressed by what had beendone since my last visit more than ayear ago.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/190929The place seems to be well organisedand the conditions for the guests aremuch improved. Miss Wadeson's indexshould be extremely valuable. I suggestedthat possibly more use might be made of itby members of this office,020, S.I.S.and S.0.E. there was a lot of valuableinformation about controls abroad whichshould be extremely useful to an agentvisiting the continent. There is alsoinformation which could act as a checkagainst the statements of the prisonersat 020. I addressed the interrogatorsand gave them a brief survey rather onthe lines of the one i gave the RSLOs Daeorecently.November 14thA message has come through to say thata VHF set O1 German make has been foundin a tree by the i.A.F. at lesteliff.I had a talk with Dingham of M.S. on theMANEZES case. He has been in personaltouch with MANEZES for some time. Hedoubts whether he is doing very much.Women appear to be his main preoccupation.He is extremely eautious and suspicious.Teresa Clay tells me that Marita hadchallenged "Jack" about his name. Sheasked him if he was called Roberts. "Jackmerely went on eating and said "Yes".He is inclined to think that Marita doesCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190asonot really believe that this is his name.We do not know at present what lead Maritato ask this question. T have asked fora shott note on the Marita case whichI may want at any future discussion on5th column.rulford talked to me about the de Courcycase. He says that there nave beenfurther indiseretions and that there ievidence that de Courcy has recorded agreat deal in his confidential diary.Fulford thinks that his premises shouldbe searched and the diary confiscated.De Lourcy has a long story about HESSwhich he has obtained frmn Loftus M. F.who obtained it from nis son who was oneof the guards at HESS'S place ofinternment. The trouble is that all thisinformation is handed in the first instanby D.D.G. and not 1.D.T.The circulation of the Daily worker isnow 75%. The Caledonian Fress is beingpurchased for the sum of 145,000. Therehave been private donations of $8,000,14,500 and 13,000. the.present policyis a campaign against certain members ofthe Cabinet but not a ainst the P.M.There is also a campaign against theLabour Movement.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/190731Noverber i5thGrassby rane 10 aout the aliezed VHF set,He said tat tere yrere no to, ind t.latthey "ere efinitely met. instruments.They bear the stam of 8 firm in berlinand one of them had the remnants oi aballoon atta.ched. Five of tese instru-ments save already peen found at vrY ingtimes and miive been sent Lo the suut.QI Ar Ubservatory. T.e probsbility isthat they proke Lore irom someere onthe French coast.nad a. tir With T...i. about man-1o er.ile can share wyril Mills and could possibisoare one other, out porsonilLy L thinkhe should have some Free iinces inreserve. de should ge getting wllke bckbefore iong. lle has high opinion ofMarriott, armer, Miils and Ian iison.Cyril arvey is not an unmaliiied S ceessacCordin: to in announcement made to dayago "e have sent to tlussi during tenast 12 months, 3,00 piines, 1,0U0 tiinks,10,:00 motorisei venicles nd 851, JJO tonsof other equipment. e have also sent40,000 tons of petrol and OU, JOU tonsof diesel oil. These deiiveries do notinclude th..se sent by the southern routeor the americin deliveries.Victor LIS Mired to SaV that reintionsbeteer Security Co-Ordinuion and theCatalogue.Referencekv/a/9oa and dii-icult, nesays action been tken linst oneTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOOUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION923 (4 OF THE PUBLIO RECORDSACT 1958- ct 0member by t.ie f.b.i. and is cohtemlatedeainst t t. Le ead of bection V Ne Yorkpresumablyiie recommends delay ingte estion rerresenttion untii heretirns. de says that aurston of theI.B.I. is bringing confiential letterfrom victor to me. He himseif is gointo Montreal to look into t e cise of VeiJANO'SKY, the win7, write acent Thorecently rrived. H co not Know wet:this is A ney arent or ether he isincluded 3monE te LO saboteurs reviouslyreported. Victor wants 15 to treatT'ourston on the Sime lines as Kino ill.ieanwhile ren nas telezra hed urineis to send a wire tro Duci U.oper UOwacbon pressin: that n publicitysho:la be iven to the Cise O1 JANU SKYas he may prove to be useril AX."e h ye vired to victor C/O F.C.W.F.authorisin him to liporeach ssadDonloin Luf'f's name.ovember 15411Col.Edeverth Jo son 0: D..R. R. rins eabout HILLSON, "mho has considerableoressement hackeround and wrote a book crGermany in 1337, nd wants to OUL tow. HfriC aAS a neursp:per corresnondent torthe iily Skretch. at G. t'ime when hetaaS particllirly hirn up in warch 1927ne received i payment of 5:0 maps irothe yoran Eabass, according to UJ. 25. leCatalogueReferente:kv4figo: nat pltoret lerSiltabie for jo1rneli etic "rs in . efrIca933here he would be nedeavouring to collectinformation from the armed forces. Ido not think that he is a spy, but hisheart was not in the right place in 1937.At the moment he was on the Inaldn RevenueStop List. Edgworth-Johnson said hewould report this to his chief who wasgoing to interview the editor of the paperI had a talk with max Knight about Iangyeand his future relations with M.S.Knight agreed with me about Tangye andhis organisation and said that he wouldbe very pleased to co-operate with him.I have put forard a recommend tion to theD.G. in this sense ind suggested thatthe D.G. should have a talk with Tangyein order to liquidate the unfortunateincident of the erroneous passing to himof the personal B.M.Lt.ol.Acland of Canadian M.I. same into see me. I saw him in Col.Murray'soffice in Ottawa. He wanted to know abouta number of Security matters to L have puthim on to Harry allan. He seemed con-fused about the organisation of thisoffice. He is not the only one.MacIver came to see me about J on Mairand Geoffrey Wethered who would do exactlyas they were told but had a feeling thattheir gualificat tions foryjobs abroad weremore suited to Lurope than Africa.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/190asuCurry and L went over to see Melland.he was immersed in ISOS, ISK,MSS andother kindred services. amongst otherthings he is compiling a list basedon the Gestapo Services of members 01that organisatior Who were committingatrocities all over burope. He hopesthat somebody will have the pleasureof dealing with them in due course.In one camp alone 0 or 7,000 womenhave died of typhus. in other campssterilisation is going on by means ofRontgen rays. We discussed at some lengt ththe proposal that regular meetings shouldtake place between the users of ISOS,R.SS and G C c C S. it was decided thatwe should in forwarding Curry's reportto Melland, write him a letter makingsome suggestion of the kind and tating threasons. Melland would then pass thison with a hot minute to his colonel.Melland told me that Gen. von Thoma intalking to Montgomery had su gested thatnow would be the moment to make a Irontalattack on rrance since all the Germanshad probably been drawn off to thesouth. He said emphatically that hewas no Nazi. This is interesting ascoming from the Commende of the PanzerCorps in Africa.Last week D.G.,T. R. Jim Hle and B.W.had dinner with reppermint ending itabout 1.30 a.m. The ideawas to givePeppermint conidence and to m ke himfeel that he was doing a good job o1 workCatalogue The Reference:KV14/190 evening have been in unquali935fied success.November 17thAt the D.G.S meeting today Harry announcedthat we had been asked to send an officerto Madegascar. The D.G. said that he feltthis was an M.I.6 commitment. Col.Vivianhad made it very clear that ve did notfunction on foreign territory. Harrypointed out that this was perhaps a liitleinconsistent on our part seeing that wehad volunteered to produce six officers fora Second Front which would be prepared tooperate under anybody's colours and that ththe experience re quired in Madegascarwas clearly that of a Security Serviceofficer. The D.G. said that he wouldspeak to Col.Vivian.Mills talked to me about a plan he hadon foot for getting money for Garbo.Apparently some fruit merchant here who isknown to MUNOZ, the Spanish Asst.M.A.wishes to transfer money from thiscountry to Spain. It is suggested there-fore that this money should be handed overto Garbo and that the Berman S.S. shouldcredit the fruit merchant with pesetas.Quite a large sum of money is likely tobe involved. This is no In as Plan Dream.SIMOEZ has been knocked off. Accordingto plan a search was maderin his roomsand revealed certain chemicals for thedevelopment of secret ink ind an innocentCatalogue ReferENCe:KVI4/190a3bletter on which he was probably preparingto "rite in secret writing. He wasimprisoned with our informant Eggs inorder that the latter right attempt to gethim into the proper frame of mind formaking a confession. SIMOEZ seemed to besingularly indifferent as regards his fire.When Eggs endeavoured to bring home thim the seriousness of his position, hemerely said "Something the police indsomething the military", turned over 11and went to sleep. In the morning he saidthat he was hungry ind wanted a good breakfast He then proceeded to mike a complete.confession.Victor has telegraphed about von JANOWSKI,the German spy who has arrived in Canada.This man had been told to carry outreconnaissance in Canada with a view toassisting 6 saboteurs who vere to landin 1943. He has a 40 watt set and isscheduled to come up on the air aboutDecember lst. He landed in civilianclothes at 2 a.m. on November 9th, nearNew Carlisle,Quebec. He is an EinzMarine agent, althoughhe is in fact aLieutenant in the Germ n army. He nas3 cover addresses. On landin he buiredhis naval lieutenant'e uniform, with helater stated he was to wear when sendingmessages. He was formerly in the AfrikaCorps with Rommel and then in Brusselsrecruiting agents for Abteilungs i and 2.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1909137He carried identity documents taken fromCanadian prisoners at Dieppe, altered tothe name under which he vas to live inCanada. He had previously lived inCanada from 1930-1933 and married aCanadian Noman who is still living intoronto. He ca ried $1,000 in U.S. u.S.gol goldpieces and $5,000 in Canadian notes. Hehad a code Within his code which wouldindicate to the Germans if he was undercontrol. He was to introduce three U'sinto the 5th Group. He is now beginningto talk.I lunched with Robertson MacDonald andthanked him for all the Nork he had doneon the Kamerndschaftdienst. He told methat he had had eards on the table withFrost whom he had alnays regarded as anobstructionist.I nad a talk with Viv. about America.He is much disturbed about the D.G.S cable.I said that I thought that some changevas inveitable in view oi the projectedvisit of Thurston of the F.B.I.In the afternoon L s w Duff-Cooper in orderto explain to him that I had taken hisname in vain on Sunday night by gettingRothschild to convey a message from himto Malcolm MacDonald about the publicityin the JANOWSKI case. Bias quite satis-fied that this was the right course.I attended the anti-sabotage meeting atCatalogue Reference:KVI4/19093%Kinnaird House. Diplock's memo was gradual.pulled to pieces brick by brick:Irather doubt hether he ever intended to domore than get the position clarified. Infuture any agreements that are reachedat the Executive meeting involving actionthrough consuls or navalaathorities willbe drafted by the Executive but sent outthrough and in the name of the depart-ment concerned. Diplock explained thatin the past the signature of SecurityExecutive had only been intended to implythe combined views of all the departmentsconcerned. Confusion had occurred throughthe Security Executive being therebyregarded as an executive body which infact it was not. The Chairman deploredthis name but said that it was not ofhis choice. The other points were thatthere was no intention to interfere inany way with the existing machinery indealing with ad hoc cases, and thatthe Security Executive will not send outanti-sabotage circulars without priorreference to ourselves. the SecurityExecutive memo is to be amended accord-ingly.Dick and Hart have returned from Glenalmonewhere they have been studying the activitieof the Middle East Sections. Their viewis that. Section V. act mainly as a conduitpipe about ISOS and thataunsell clearlyhas nobody to give him a general apprecia-tion of this information in the way thatHart provides it for us. This probablyCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190939accounts for Maunsell's rather indifferentaction in the Ostro case. We shall haveto consider seriously the question ofgiving him reinforcements, and a visit byDick to the Middle East seems essential.WALENTI, the Polish spy who Nas roundedup by the Germans has been allowed bythem to escape and to return to thiscountry. We are not yet at all convincedas to his bona fides. He says, and thisis confirmed from other sources, that theGermans have been making overtures to thePoles and that his escape was connivedat as a gesture to the Polish authoritiesin this country. This seems rather hardto believe.November l8thtook the Wednesday meeting and had adiscussion about searching at the RPS.in the light of the SIMOEZ case. It isclear that owing to the use of Duff andof secret ink in the form Of small piecesof cotton wool dipped in some solution,nothing but a very thorough and completesearch can be of the slightest use.Duff is now concealed on passports, ties,bi S of paper, finger nails, cigarettecases etc. etc. and bits of cotton woolare senn into the clothing orstuck intothe ear. In another case they verecarried in a shoe-tree. It would bepossible to neutralise duff by the processof disinfecting everyone's clothes but itCatalogueReference.K4/1go to take way theupclothes of every man entering the RPSand put him into something which wouldimmediately be dubbed as prison dress.Equally it would not be possible toselect certain individuals for treatmentof this kind without incurring endlesscomplaints from allied governments. Theproblem is a very ifficult one and willneed further discussion.Grogan announced that H/W mail wasnoNbeing dealt with fairly extensively.Dick,Curry and went to Glenalmond.We discussed the Gough case. It wasdecided to accept binclairis report, butask the Americans for all the evidence intheir possession about the British subjectsand about the case generally, to call ameeting with Lincolm of the C.O. and totell him that from the purely securitypoint of view we recommend the releaseof the British prisoners at Jamaica.We do not feel tht itiisofor us to say whe-ther there has been any infringementof the local regulations in BritishHonduras.Me then discussed the KOBBE case. Viv.thought that the action we suggestedmight prejudice the security of the B.J.but he had a more cogent re son inrthefact that KOBBE had confided in an agentof O.S.S. and SISLSwho was travelling onthe boat with nim to America. this fact hadnever been made known to us.It trans-Catalogue Reference:KV/4/19041pired also that the F.B.I. had been givena paraphrase version of the B.J. by G. 2.It was therefore necessary to fnd outwhat action the F.B.I. were taking. e inthe meantime agreed to find out hiw muchthe Canadian Police knew. It seems firlyclear now that we shall haave to let KOBBEgo through to Vancouver and then try andmake some approach there through theCanadians.Ielix said tat a number of the membersoi the Armistice commission nd Been can-tured in N. Africa. Three Germans of someimportance ere on their Nay to this countrTwo from the Abwehr and one from Gestapo.It aopears from ISUS sources that someonein the Portuguese F.0. is sellinginatpurport to be decodes of Portuguese oificidtelegrams. These bear hittie or no rela-tion to the actual telegrams from thecountries concerned. Thevhole thing isclearly a racket.The ao Ambassador in Berlin is of teopinion that peace between the Germansand Russians can be excluded from practicalpolitics unless the Russians agree tocede the Ukraine, and tae eaucasus, andto a limitation of armaments. This isregarded as most unlikely. y Germany intendsto concentrate on the Wir with Engiand andthe U.S.A. and has no intention of makingpeace with ngland. This is resumablyCatalogueRefeence.Ke4rooe on by the GermanF.0.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENI UNDER SECTIONaury3 OF THEPUBLIO RECORDSACT 1958. O oeoJapan is being warned to guard againstattempts to drive 3 wedge betveen, Japan,italy and Germany. The King OI Bulgariaapparentiy has information that he hasgiven to the Gernans about a plot amongItalian aficers to make peace with Britainand the J.S.A. in the spring of 1943.November 19thI was unable to a.ttend the R.SS. meetingtoday. L understand that the proceedingsere somehat lively owind to a suiestionby Page and Twin that the committee shouldreview its terns ot reference. There Nisa suggestion that te Services should becalled in for this purpose. This wasobjected to byon the grounds thatonly Felix could co-opt the Services.A document was produced novever underFelix's signature clearly shoving thatthis was not the Case.i went over ith the D.G. to see C.and vIV.on the question of America. Viv. indC. are making a last bid to get us torout our correspondence to Stephensonthrough Glenalmond. Logic is of course tosome extent on their side. The troubleis that the present system does not ork.L said that I thought the discussionmight, be somevhi t academic since arthurThurston ot the F.B.I. was now on his wayand was to establish himself here as LegalCatatoguerReterenqe:kMlesriga Embassy. ve either143had tocarry on a liaison with him or showhim the door. Since we could not do thelatter it seemed that the logical equencewould be for us to send someone to Washing-ton This would automatically cut outSecurity o-O0rdination. Viv. was ratherinclined to insinuate that 1 had been insome may responsible for this manoeuvre.L told him that L had discouraged as faras it was possible to do SO and that L haddone SO solely in C's interests. It seemedclear now however that Security C o)rdina-tion would n ver be able to clear itseliof the stigma of working under wonovan inHoover's areas. I wondered thereforewhether both our interests and S.1.S.interests would not be better servedby out setting up: a separate office inWashington, leaving the F..D.I. liaisonto us. The D.G. was quite determinedfor the time being in any case tocommunicate on all matters of interest tothe Security Service direct to Stephensonand on this note he pansered his waythrough the meeting.November 20thI had a talk with Mills about the U.S.A.since it had been agreed at yesterday'meeting that on any account his presencethere would be of value. Thereswas alsothe question of his goingyover to run theJANOWSKI case in Canada, but thought wecould not come to any final conclusion abouthis charter until we had seen Thurston andCatalogue Reference:KVI4/190944Rothschild.I lunched with the Belgian Crime MinisterPierlot, Minister of Justice Delfosse andmapage of the Belgian Surete. The lunchwas geing given by Delfosse who wished tomeet the D.G. Brook Booth was also present.Our relations with the Belgians areexcellent. Brook Booth says he Can getany co-operation from Lapage that heDrequires. Delfosse has only been herethree months. He was formerly in Liegewhere he says that conditions are prettybad. The German troopsare either veryyoung or very old. There appears to bea good deal of sabotage going on. Delfossementioned the case of Henri LEVI, a Jewwho had been imprisoned in the fortressand ill-treated. When the facts werebroadcast he was immediately released.Delfosse succeeded in getting him out ofthe country. He is now employed at theB.B.C. on Belgian broadcasting. Somepeople appear to be suspicious of himbut Delfosse was convinced that he wasall right.Dan has arrived from Ireland.There is a saying going round that Swintonis returning shortly suffering frombackwater fever, owing to the operationsin N. Africa which may leave him high anddry.A careful analysis has been made of theCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190usmet reports and after a meeting with Dr.MacVitie, the met expert at G.C. &c C.S.a definite conclusion is t at the informa-tion in Zodiac's can be attributed to Tateand Dragonfly. The salient point is thatreports from their areas have neverappeared at a date when they did nottransmit. The other discrepancies canbe accounted for by cryptographic errorsand computations and mistakes inconverting readings from one scale toanother. It nO'N remains to analyse the1941 reports which appear to be comingfrom other areas in the north of England.I had a look at the HOUSE case. House hasa curious background. He Nas at one timesecretary to the Deutsche Verein in South-ampton which must have brought him intotouch with SCHARPFF. He visited Germanysome yeanss ago and also had a tour in theMiddle East. This all seems rather extra-ordinary since he is the son of a carpentarHe has since married a rich wife. He hascome to notice recently owing to the pur-chase of certain wireless equipment whichaccording to Frost can only be used forpurposes of transmitting. When in Germanyhe appears to ave been the guest of Col.Lehr. He was also no to the Baronessvan der OSTEN. The case does not seemto be making much progress and I aminclined to think that our best coursewill be to interview HOUSE and ask himthe purpose for which he required thewireless equipment.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/190aubLoxley sent over a Cabinet paper aboutRudolf HESS. When he saw the Duke of Hamiltom on llth May 1941 he said he was on amission of humanity and that the Fuhrerdid not want to destroy England, he onlywanted to stop fighting. He suggested thathis presence shpwed his sincerity and theGerman willingness for peace. His maintheme was that the Fuhrer was convincedthat Germany would win sooner or later,that he (Hess) wanted to stop unnecessaryslaughter. He asked Hamilton to gettogether the leading members of his party tetake over things with a view to makingpeace proposals. He then stated that he COrcould tell him what the tunrer's peaceproposals would be. Kirkpatrick saw Hesson the 13th, 14th and 15th of May. Hess saidthat he had come without the nowledge ofthe Fuhrer to convince responsible personsthat since England could not win the wisestcourse was to make peace at once. He gavehis word of honour that the Fuhrer hadnever entertained any designs against theBritish Empire, nor had he ever aspired toworld domination. The Tuhrer wouldsincerely regret the collapse of theBritish Empire. The solution which Hessput forward was: (1) that Germany shouldbe given a free hand in Eurppe; (2) thatEngland should have a free hand in theBritish Empire, except that the ex-Germancolonies should be returned to Germany (3)that Russia should be included in Asia, butthat Germany had certain demands to makeon Russia which would have to be satisfieeither by negotiation or as the result ofCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190947war. There was however no truth in therumours that the Fuhrer contemplated anearly attack on Russia. (4) that Germanycould not leave the Iraquis in the lurch.They had fought for Germany and Iraa wouldtherefore have to be evacuated. (5) thepeace agreement would have to contain aprovision for the reciprocal indemnificatioof British and German nationals whoseproperty had been expropriated as theresult of war, and (6) that the pro, osalcould only be considered on the understandithat it was negotiated by Germany witha British Government other than the presentBritish Government. Mr hurchill, who hadplanned war since 1936, and his colleagieswho had lent themselves to his war policy,were not persons with whom the ruhrerwould negotiate. Hess concluded byemphasising that the Fuhrer really wanteda permanent understanding with Gt.Britainon a basis which preserved the BritishEmpire intact. His own flight was intendedto give Gt-Britain a chance of openingconversations withoutloss of prestige.If this chance were to be rejected itwould be the Fuhrer's duty to destroy Gt.Britain utterly and to keep the countryafter the war in a state of permanentsubjugation. The conclusions drawn byothers interviewing Hess were (a) that hewas under the impression that he wasengaged on a mission that had aconsiderableprospect of success (b) tht he came onhis own initiative, (c) that he bellevedthere was a strong opposition party inCatalogue Reference:KV/4/190austhis country which wanted to end the warand that he could get into contact with it(d) that Hess's plan was an attempt toreproduce Hitler's frame of mind asexpressed in many conversations and (e)that Hess had contemplated carryin outhis mission ever since the fall of France.A medical report on Hess is that he isa man of good intelligence but of poorcharacter and personality. He nad cer-tainly been over-anxious and neuroticearlier in life. Whilst under observatiohere he had shown definite delusions andfor more than half his time had heen-unable to control them and had in factbeen suffering from a paranoid psy chosis.This unsoundness of mind mignt very weilbe hidden if he had to take the le d ina party once more but his personal rela-tionships and his judgment would howeverbe destroyed by it. The fluctuations inthe severity of his symptoms would recurand there was a perpetual risk of anothersuicidal attempt without much warning. forthat reason he must he under constantpsychiatric and nursing supervision.less has one throu h periods of deepdepression and has already made one attemptat suicide. He has at times refused to goout of doors. He has been suspiciousabout his guards and about poisoning.in his food.Balloon has received a payment of L725through the overseas branen of the Midl ndBank. This payment is said to be by orderof Mr. Arthur CANLHO. I1 this should beCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1909y9be Arthur CARVALHO it appears to be thesame channel of payment as has been usedfor Careless, whic indicates a linkbetween the Abwehrstellen n Madrid andLisbon.I spoke to the D.G. about W.Africa. Heagrees to wait about Stone until Gibbsreturns. Luke is to go as Dixon'sNo.2. He will be replaced by Michael RoydeNovember 2lstI spent the ay at the S.C.0s conference.I gave them a short time (a) on the GermanIntelligence Service, (b) pre-war situation(c) post-war situation and (d) the assis-tance we might be able to give them. ASregards the latter I said that bey onddirections about specific individuals, clas-ses of individuals and a few things tolook for, there was very little that wecould do. The fact was that C.E. workwas now nighly centralised and that methodso1 communication nad been much improved.This affected the c rrying of secret ink,instructions etc. and meant tt shortof putting a man un ler a microscope andtaking his clothes to pieces, there wasvery little to be done. It was necess ryto act targely on intuition. Was the man'sstory a plausile one and if so, dit itfit in with any documents that he mightbe carrying?I had a talk with Jock whyte ind arrangedCatalogue Reference:KVI4/190with him that. should go to the RISsoat the end of next week. lie talked to me-about the Newvitt case. It appeas thatMrs. NEITT is suing for the return ofher property and also for the good willof her business. Jim lale has the matterin hand, but I gather that it does notpresent any very great difficulty.A.D.N.I.,Byron of the Air Ministry,Abbottof G. 2 Americ n Forces and Aclandof G.2 Canadian Forces attended the s.0.0smeeting.November 30thReturned from leave.Mills is to go to Canada.I s1W Arthur Thurston the F.B.1. represen-tative. He was formerly rorkin for Fox-forth of the New York Office on SouthAmerican affairs. He is to retain hisentity as 1 representitiv of the F.B.I.but ill be camouflaced at the Embissy Das a Legal Attache. is purpose in cominghere is to liaise with this department.He said however that he Touid be pleasedto visit S.I.S. if they wanted to see him.If they did not that would be just too bad.He was quite frank in his views aboutD.S.C. Hoover took the view that liaisonthrough that body was unsatisfactory forseveral reasons. Firstly there was noproper flow of information. He had theCatalogue Reference:KVI4/190ISIimpression that reports reaching New Yorkwere not passed on. I said that I did notthink he could blame Sterhenson for this.The fact maS that Stephenson had neverbeen Very well briefed. The second andprihcipal reason was that Stephensoncontinued to run agents in Hoover'sterritory. I told Thurston that so far asthis office was concerned it vas the D.G.SDwish that he should have all the informa-tion at our disposal. I explained to himhowever that our work was very closelyrelated to th t of the foreign service,since we were interested in manifest itionsof the German S.S. all over the world,although our charter only ran to the 3 milelimit and to British possessions. Itfolloed thereforp.t there was certaininforation in our possession which we counot tr nsmit to him Without authority ofanother department. 1 wished him tounderstand this thoroughly since L feltthat it might laz possibly lead him toduppose that we were trying to hold thingsback. He said thit he perfedtly understoodDthe position. He himself was similarlyplaced since information reached the F.B.I.from all departments of State and couldnot be tr nsmit ted without prior reerenceto the department concerned.I asked Thurston tent tively whether theF.B.I. would Welcome the appointinent ofan officer from this department in Mashing.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/190a5?ton. He said that in his view Mr. Hooverwould be very pleased to receive one ofour officers ind to give him room inthe Bureau. I then explained to tnurstonthe difficulty of our office vis a visD.S.C. and asked whether if our represen-tative had a room in the office of D.S.C.either in New York or Washington thatwould in any way prejudice his position,He replied "I voulan't go so far asto say that it ould", but took this tobe a polite way of saying that Mills woulddo much bet er if he had an office ofhis own.Viv. called to see the D.G. firstly aboutAmerica and secondly about the R.S.S.Committee. E was not present at themeeting although I believe Viv. ugresteoi should be. As regards America Viv.thou ht that in view of recent develop-ments S.I.S. might be well advised to handover the liaison in .Americd to ourselves.This would mean the sending of Milesto ashington either under his own coloursor under D.S.C. in his capacity oi M. I.representative.Viv. then apparently talked about the K. S.SCommittee and suggested that it should gointo liquidation, its deliberations beingtransferred to the veekly meeting withsuch members co-opted as Yere necessary.Viv. expressed the view that the ordinarybusiness of the committee on prioritiescould be conducted on the telephone, thatCatalogue Reference:KVI4/1903the committee had little business to dis-cusS and therefore gossiped about otherpeople's business. this was ooviouslya reference to the nussian Group incident.I dined with Victor who has just returnedfrom the U.S.A., after a somewnat adven-turous passage on the Queen ElizabethThey had 12, 000 troops on board and theUtaccommodation was 0 in conse uence somewhameagre. The sea was rough and infestedwith submarines.End O1 vol. 6CCatalogue Reference:KVI4/190