The Nationa Archives(c) crown copyrightCatalogue Reference:kV/4/188Image Reference:45137territory. He has got hold of a wealthyCzech from whom he requires a sum of112,000 to carry out the preliminarynegotiations with the parties concerned.If he is successful he wants a further sum.The Czech does net mind what he pays aslong as he can get his relatives over tothis country. I have suggested that heshould deposit a credit in a bank whichwould be payable on production of thegoods. C.1.D. are going to try this onand see what happens.I talked to the D.G. about Neville Dland'srequest to take the Dutch foreign Ministerover the RPS' D.6. S did he would give thimatter his consideration. He did not seeany bjection in principle provided suchvisits were considered as a privilegerather than a right. He thought that suchforeigners should be in cognito in orderavoid any requests from their nationalsfor assistance which might be embarrassingHerbert of the Censorship called abouthis visit to America. While in Stephen-son's office in New York he had beenshown a number of ISOS messages whichhad been picked up locally which containera certain amount of information aboutthe use of the DOT and secret inks, alsoa number of names and addresses whichhe thought should have been in thepossession of Bermuda. He accordinglymade a list of these names and addressesand with Stephenson's approval wired thenhis censorshi point.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/18836He was rather annoyed about not havingbeen given this information before. Hesaid it would have made a good deal ofdifference to his work e.g. had he knownthat the DOT XXS onypoperating on west-bound mails he ould have concentratedall his secret ink testing efforts onthe eastbound mail. As regards S. Americahe had discovered that the DOT was operat-ing in both directions. While L thinkHerbert's complaint is justifiable upto a point, do not think he takes enoughtrouble in analysing the position withinhis own show. By a simple mathematicalcalculation it should be quite easy forhim to estimate what his chances ar oficking upu a letter, a.lmost regardlessof what we tell him.October 27thI had a talk ith Grogan about secretinks. He is arranging with Herbertto proceed with t he scheme for gettinganother 40 or 50 testers and severalchemists. We also discussed thequestion of radiotelephony between thiscountry, Lisbon, Switzerland and Sweden.It has now been disclosed that during thelast month there has only been one callon tee radiotelephone to Lisbon. PostOffice are therefore reluctant to goahead with any further schemes withregard to Switzerland or Seden untilthey cin get some kind of assurance th tthe service is really going to be used.Our point of view is that we prefer inCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188139principle not to have these services, butthat if any other dept. can put forward afairly good case and adequate securitymeasures are devised we would not raiseany violent objection. In the light ofrecent disclosures about Lisbon it seemspossible that the desirability of continu-ing the service will now become a matterof serious discussion.I had a talk with Acworth about hisagency. He is SO bitten with the bug ofsecrecy and to some extent with the senseof his own importance that I am ratherapprehensive about getting him intoline. I told him that while I fullyrealised that either his departure or thatof van der Willik would for a timeseriously dislocate the machine I did notregard either of them as indespensible.I have told him to put forward 1 memoon the agency for discussion.Orr has written a memo on the positionof Room 055 and Harker,utler and Horrockshave produced another on its back history.Both these memos have gone forward toD.G. who is passing them to Harry Allenfor his comments.The D.N.I. kxshas got a resolutionpassed by the ISSB in which the view isexpressed that communication.betweenol.Stanley Xhxx and the XX Committeeshould be via the ISSB.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188uoOctober 28thD.G. meeting. I raised the subject ofBritish subjects in Occupied Territory.A number of thesepeople have been arrivingfrom French occupied territory via Spainand Portugal. Some of them can hardlyspeak any English. In one case a manleft Paris, went to Brittany, andreturned to Paris after the occupation.It was only when he heard that thepolice were rounding up Englishmen thathe tried to make his way out. One ratherwonders what degree ofloyalty to thiscountry such people have. In some casesthey have no papers to prove theiridentity. Personally I think that thesecases want following up fairly closely.It would be an easy matter for the Germansto plant someone on us in the guise ofa British subject.I had a discussionwith Victor and D.Iabout Worthy Down. It was dedcded tointerrogate Rayner and CARRICK immediate-ly afterwards. CARRICK would then betaken to his home where a search wouldbe made.R.U.v. are to be warned that they may becalled upon to arrange for the raidingof O'CONNOR'S house in Dublin they arenot to do anything however till theyreceive further information from us.I had a word with Stewart about tomorrowsCatalogueRererence.ki4/188 is in agreement with14us about the line to be adopted, andthinks that we should make it quiteclear that the organisation of specialagents is under our control.The D.N.. is being very troublesomeabout RUTLAND. Having pinned his faithon him and found that he had made amistake he is now trying to say that wehave made a bungle of the case.October 29thI attended the W.Board meeting. the D.M.I.opened the proceedings by saying thatas Col.Stanley had no wish to pry intothe mechanics of the XX Committee or theW.Board there was no particular objectin his becoming a member of the latter.This seemed to be the view of the D.N.I.and Findlater Stewart who I think hadbeen lobbied. Charles Medhurst did notdissent. D.M.I. suggested that Col.Stanleyshould obtain anything he wanted fromthe XX Committee via the ISSB on whom theSecurity Service had their representative.I suggested that that procedure mightperhaps be rath r cumbersome and thatthere might be an advantage in Col.Stanleyhaving direct contact with us. None ofthe Ds of I and I got no support from anyother quarter. I then submitted my notewhich made it quite clear that whateverthe decision was about Col. Stanley thecontrol of the special agent system mustremain in the hands of ourselves and SISand that we must be the final judgesCatalogue ReferenCce:KV/4/188(47as to whether Col.Stanley's or any otherdepts. requirements could be met. L saidthat the organis tion had been set up bythe Security Service as an insurance againGerman espionage in this country. Thiswas its primary purpose. We were howeverquite ready to have it made use of inother ways provided its existence was notplaced in jeopardy. The D.N.I. at firstdissented and finally agreed and mymemo was accepted and embodied in theminutes. indlater Stewart spoke aboutPlan Guy Fawkes and said that thearrangements made had his full support.The other members of the Board agreedthat the plan should go forward. Beforethe meeting the D.N.I. asked me whetherI was in on the RUTLAND case. I saidthat I ad.been connected at one timeor another with the case for a good manyyears. He then asked me what IL thoughtabout RUTLAND. I said that as RUTLANDhad visited both the Air Ministry andN.I.D. and in neither case disclosed whathe had been doing for the Japs we regardedhim as unreliable. Moreover at themeeting which had subsequently beenarranged for his interrogation e hadagain failed to disclose that he hadworked for the Jap Secretservice untilcertain letters which he had written in1935 were produced for his inspection.Even then he did not come entirely clean.Finally it was quite clear fromtheinformation in our possession that althougRUTLAND had directed most 01 his energiesCatalogue been ferehce:RYi418sk aganst us had thehe had at one time(uJaps thought he could have done SO moreprofitably than themselves. for the abovereasons I did not think he was a suitableman for employment as a double agentsOctober 30thHad a discussion with J.C. and T.A.R aboutthe N.Board meeting. While I think theywere a little disappointed with he resultwe all agreed that the matter wouldprobably solve itself in the and througha clash between the Ds. of I and Col. Stan-ley. We thought it was important thatthey should not become invoked in thedispute.I saw Medlam for a moment before hisdeparture. I showed him Maunsell's letterto the D.G. about his positior in Egypt.As far as possible Maunsell has wriggleout of the military heirarchy which hasbeen nothing butan empediment to him inhis work. While he is still nominallyaG.S.O.lIb. he in fact has a largemeasure of independence. In his viewhowever his organisation should be con-stituted as an outpost of the SecurityService. Medlam has almost succeeded inreaching a similar position. In his letteMaunsell had disclosed that he came backhere in April 1940 in order to get oursupport for his semi-independent state.He apparently got no encouragement. Weagreed with Medlam that if POGO arrivedin Gib. he should be put back across theCatalogue leReference:KV/4/188Lennox has come in with a further changeof plans in the Middle East. The S.Planhas been abandoned and the cover plan inthe north is to take its place. There isso much deception and counter-deceptiongoing on that it l1 not be surprisingif our troops land up in the Arcticdressed in crepe-de-chine. It is difficulto know what is going on by way of decep-tion in the Middle East; while wewere given to understand that the impres-sion should.be created that we are notin a position to attack, the Times andother papers publish long articles showingour stength and active preparations.D.i.i. has telegraphed to Auchenleck buthas got no satisfactory reply.We are having difficulty about the constitltion of the RPS. Dick and I think thatHaylor should be he head of the whole showand that we should appoint somebody elsefrom our own staff to deal with the intell:gence side. This would ensure that intelli.gence would not become the slave of admin-istration. I gather however that theD.G. and Swinton think otherwise, andthat a Commandant is to be appointed whowill be responsible to a kind of committeeconsisting of the H.O.,Swinton Executiveand ourselves. I cannot feel that this isgoing to be a very satisfactory arrangementI gather that the D.G. is writing an longmemo about our relations with Section V.Harker,Charles and Horrocks have seen itbut I have not. As I ahall have to workCatalogue the Reference:KVaits her nt. feel that I shehld(45I'm told that the D.G. has absoluteconfidence in my judgment and in the workwhich I am doing. When these sort ofthings occur I rather begin to wonder.XX CtteeThe XxR&X seem to think that Montagueshould go to America in order to instructthe local JIC about vetting traffic.October 31s6I had a long session with Acworth andvery much hope that I have non got himinto the right frame of mind. He triesmy patience pretty high. I talked withhim about the Liberty Restoration League,Hisuncle and Capt.ogers - He says thatit is wrong to say that the League isanti-Jewish or pro-Fascist. He agreesthat it has a strong flabour of I9thcentury Liberalism and says that itsfundamental basis is religion. He saysthat his uncle would do any ything if hethought it was for the good of thiscountry and would place its interestsbefore anything else. He did not howeverfeel inclined to speak with such certaintyabout Capt.Rogers. He admitted that theLeague was violently anti-Churchill andanti the conduct of the war. I asked himwhether he thought that the vilificationof the P.M. was really in the nationalinterest, and whether if the P.M. went hehad any suitable substitute. He had noanswer to either of these questions.I do not think he agreed with the policyCatalogue Reference:RV4/t88 P.M. but he wasubto agreeinclined/with his uncle's view that weshould concentrate on busilding shipsand stop bombing on the continent.Acworth said he had known Ramsay and likedhim personally. He could not elieve thathe would do anything deliberately to harmthis country. I told him that if he knewthe full facts he would quite probablythink otherwise. I gather that theLiberty Restoration League has practicallyno members It publishes a good many leafletsand is I understand financed by the Dukeof Wellington.I had a talk with Machell about InsideInformation. Some form of censorshiphad been suggested. I have asked Machellto anayse the information in the columnover a period in order to establish whichof them are true and which are not. IfThemajority of the information isfalse ormore or less a matter of public knowledgeit ill not be of much use to the enemyand therefore not worth censoring.Censorship might in fact enhance itsimportance in the eyes of the Germansif by any chance they Nere in touch withany employee of the Daily Sketch. Itwould follow that if a particular item wascensored that it was probably true.The same arguments apply if it were thoughtpossible or desirable to u'se Inside Informa-tion indirectly as a means of mis sleadingthe enemy.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION1473 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958o0oAccording to the J.Lt. the Germans had260 Divisions including those in noumaniaHungary etc. on the eastern front;upto about a month ago there was an estimatwastage of 10%. It is thougnt that if thefront is stabilised, 50 divisions could bturned to the west, and that i theRussians are defeated not more than 100could be turned. The remainder wouldhave to remain as troops of occupation.Some time in 1942 we hope to have 99divisions in the field, not includingAmericans.Stewart spoke to me about the Pyrene Co.with which I believe W.B.PHILLIPS was atone time connected. It was alvays thoughtthat Phillips's news service acted in someway as a cover for a mild form of Americarespionage organisation in this country.Fellner, an American who is representingDonovon over here, let slip that he wasvisiting one Christie at the Pyrene Co.Stewart thinks it might be worth whilelooking into this matter. A furtherpoint of interest in this connection isthat while coming out of Claridges witha representativ of S.I.S. .S. , Fellner metwho rolled up in a largelimousine.who was formerly anS.1.S. representative in U.S.A. during thelast war ind subsequently associated withPhillips, gave Fellner some form O1 recog-nition. rellner seems to be in charge ofa section of Donovon's co-ordination dept.Cataloguehreferenceikva4iresrmation from the F.B.I I.the Immigration authorities, theFB..1uthe Treasury and the 3 Services. Theyhave more or less taken over the functionsof the Dies committee and are beaveringinto the origin and activities of allsocieties which may be engaged in un-American activities. Fellner, who wasformerly an American consul in thiscountry, is quite pleasant but gives theimpression of being a litile bit shiity.We had heard about him through ouragent who is in touch with CALVO, TheSpanish agent who is working under Alcazar.It seems that Calvo and Fellner both havethe same mistress in the person of aRussian girl called Natasha Anton. Felinerhas evidently told Natasha that he is agreat spy catcher. She knowing that he isa man who always blo's his on trumpet,does not believe him. Perhas this isjust as well.Cecil has discovered a nun in this countrywho is writing in secret ink to a pririn Ireland. It seems to be a love aflar.The correspondence is merely obscene.There have been a very large number ofarrests of members of the I.R.4. inIreland. This is probably due to theprevious arrests of Hayes and McCaughey.November lstSpent the whole morning dictating andCatalogue then ueReference:KVi4/f88 went to tae weekend with U. .55.THIS THISSACAYORIGINAL ETAININN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTICNovember 3rd3,(4) OF TME RECPROoo0I saw Major Peirse who is going as ourrepresentative to Colombo. i put him inthe picture as far as possible L do notthink he will have much to do with Germansbut possibly quite a lot with Japs.I had a talk with Jock hyte about theJACKSON case. One Gunner JACKSON wrotea letter to the Spanish Embassy which wesucceeded in getting out through a friendof Major Rawlinson. JACKSON said thathe was fed un with the war and every thingelse and wanted assistance to get to Ger-many in order that he could broadcast.After clearing the ground with Rawlinsonwe decided to write Gunner JACKSON aletter saying that nis request had gonethrough and that we had been advised tomake contact with him. He has repliedsuggesting a meeting.I talked to M. about Mr. Heron and LonsdaleI said I thought it would be a good thingCto let Burt look through the whole caseand advise how to extract the informationfrom Lonsdale. Lonsdale and Heron havea story that a great deal of piliering ofarms is going on, but they give us absolu-tely nothing to bite on. Heron has writtento some secretiry in Cabinet Oifices, Whohe has Once met proiessionally, and evi-dently ants to et himself taken on as akind of govt. invesitgator. As he is him-self little removed from a crook I thinkthe less we have to do with him and Lonsda.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188sothe better. have suggestea to Burt thebest course may be to give Lonsdale athorough grilling.I went over to see Viv. and found him withwho had just flown over fromNew York at 26,000 ft. in an atmosphereof 60 degrees below zero. He hadeaten alarge meal and drunk half a bottle of bndybefore starting since he could not getany food on account of having to wearan oxygen mask the whole way. The journeytook 8 hours, starting from some desolatespot in Newfoundlandsaid that Stephenson was Avery hetup about the criticisms that he had receivedover the Joe K. case.thinks thatwhat is really wanted is somebody who hasmore knowledge of what we are doing overhere. He feels that our side of the workhas to a considerable extentheglected,owing to the enormous amount that is beingdone on security co-ordination lines.He says that Sincliir has been doing vergood work and cannot understand whywe have not heard more about it. To givehim his due Sinclair did write to me suggest-ing closer co-operation on our lines. Theonly result was that Stephenson and SectionV took Violent exception to what he saidand insisted on having tae letter withdrawn.was all in favour of my going out withCowgill.I had a word with Stewart, who told me thatCataloguevReference:ks//4stos going on at the Embassyin Ankara since it had been discovered that181a blue print of one of our guns was'missingfrom the M.A.S office. We knew this infact from ISOS, but it was only aftertelegrams had been sent out from the W.O.suggesting that something was wrong thatthe facts became clear. There is obviouslysomebody purloining documents in theEmbassy. The bag to which the Germans hadaccess according to ISOS was one broughtfrom Cairo to Ankara by our assistant AirAttache. In addition to a certain amountof information about C's activities inIstanboul it contained re-cyphering tablesHad the M. A reported about his blue printit would have been known that probably thestables were compromised at a much earlierdate. Luckily they have not yet been putinto operation and the necessary actionhas been taken.Stewart also talked to me about PLUGGEwho has been talking ina very defeatistmanner to the Pasha. Eden has got veryexcited about this and wishes to knowwhat is being done. Stewart has calmedhim dow n. In point of fact there is verylittle that can be done unless the Govt.are prepared to put Plugge inside, whichhe righly deserves. He doesn't care adamn about this country and is merelyconcerned with filling his pockets.November 4thWe had a D.G.meeting this morning. Thequestion of the internment of the houmaniarCatalogueeferencerkv/4rnssrians Catalogue is being consid-S2red in view of a possible declaration ofwar by us on these countries. PersonallI cannot see that a declaration of war inany way alters the present situation.All of these people must be regarded asenemy aliens unless they prove themselveswell-disposed towards this country.As we have been forced to treat everyGerman on his merits, ve shall be forcedto treat these nationals on their meritand general internment is a waste of time.Our only course is to review each caseand if necessary submit certain namesfor internment on a declaration of war.Swinton rang me up about a company known asW.A.F. The principals in this firm area. man called BERGL and another calledWARSCHAUER, both Germans and at one timemembers of the German Intelligence Service.WARSCHAUER is interned for good and properreasons. It had beenproposed to place arather confidential wireless contr ct withthis firm. The Chairman is Sir HerbertWilliams who is also Chairman of a selectcommittee for investigating expenditureby contracts depts. We advised againstthe employment of W.A.F. and it had beendecided to give the contract to theBritish Acoustic Co. They could if theySO desired call in a representative ofW.A.F. for technical advice. They wouldin any case have made the recording setas W.A.F. are merely a skeleton withouta factory. This action had apparentlycaused a certain amount of trouble poli-Catalogue Catalogue-Referece:kVarf8sisk whether theposition would in any way b changed ifcertain members of W.A.F. were got rid of.Swinton wanted me to see Burton of theMin. of Supply.S.I.S. have information that the Eire Govt.have discovered codes and cyphers and awireless set at Brittas Bay.At Bennett's request I spoke to A.D.N.I.about the RUTLAND case. Apparently the D.N.Ilegal advisers after scrutinising the casehad come to the following conclusion(a) that the interrogation failed to showthat thearrest of RUTLAND was desirable ornecessary.(b) that there was no guidance to theAdmiralty as to whether RUTLAND should beused as A XX agent(c) that the interrogation disclosed thesecret workings of the Security Service.A.D.N.I' who is clearly on our side wantedto know the answer.. I told him that theinterrogation was not held for the expresspurpose of deciding whether RUTLAND shouldbe arrested or not. We wished to obtain frorhim any information that we could about theJap Intelligence Service and to arrive atsome conclusion as to his reliability orotherwise. We were quite convinced thatR. was not suitable as a XX,agent,fi firstlybecause he was clearly thoroughly unreliableand secondly because,havi refused to go toMexico and having returned to this country,it was extremely unlikely that he had theCatalogueirelerence:kVi4r188.s4As regards the workings of the SecurityService I said that nothing of the slightestimportance had been disclosed.. Everybody kIknew that correspondence was intercepted andthe let letters which had been shown to Ii. dateback to 1935. In any case we played ourcards when we thought they were going tobe most effective. Otherwise it was no goodhaving them.I had a long talk with T..A.R. and B-Wabout the CALVO case. B-" is very anxioustoarest CALVO and possibly a number ofotherSpaniards who have been working herefor some time. T.A T.A.R R. S contention is thatif CALVO is arrested there will be a seriousreaction on G.W. and that in view of theslightly dicky position at the moment ofthe B.lA organisation it would be undesirablto throw an spanner into the works.J.C. had made a special appeal on behalf ofG.W.November 5thSaw Maxwell today about SEMMELBAUER andMAASS. I explained to him our difficultyabout moving them as long as the repatriatioof internees was in the air. It was essen-tial that they should go to some Camp fromwhich there would be no repatriation.Both Maxwell and Hutchinson appreciated thedifficulty. They seemed doubtful about givingany guarantee against release but felt thatpossibly a guarantee might be obtained againsCataloguetreterence:kvg4/is8th it what we wanted toguard against was pressure at some futuredate by the F.O. to release a man on theexchange basis and that for this reasonwe hoped it would be possible to reachsome degree of finality. I suggested thatwe should comb through the Nazi emp Xand divide the internees into Partyorganisers, Party members and people withtechnical knowledge. Hutchinson seemed todoubt whether mere membership of the Partywould constitute grounds for repatriation,if a suitable exchange could be effected.In the meantime I am afraid SEMMELBAUERand MASS will have to remain where theyare.I had a hasty talk with V.V. about thepossibility of my going to America, andabout our diificurties with Felix. Itseemed fairly cle r to me that Felix didnot wish me to go to America since as Iunderstood he had already made his arrange-ments,. If that was the atmosphere I wouldinfinitely prefer not to go at all or togo by myself rather later.. I said thit inthe old days visits abroad had been welcomedby S.i.S. representatives since anybodycoming from our dept. had something to giveand therefore it improved the relations ofthe P.C.O. with the local authorities.I therefore felt I could have been some use.I did not hwever intend to travel roundwithFelix with the feeling that all thetime I was not wanted. V.V said a littleLinconvincingly I think that that was notthe case but that owing to a letter thathe had receivedfrom C., Stephenson wasCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188156extremely nettled at the criticisms whichhad been levelled at his organisation fornot keeping us informed about the Noe K.case. Stephenson had sent a rather hotreply concluding with a statement to the-effect that he would be glad to know whothis paragon was who was coming out toshow him how to run his business. Itseemed therefore to V.V. that nythingin the nature f a mission would belikely to put Stephenson's back up stillfurther. I told V.V that our relationswith Felix were anything but satisfactoryand that I e arnestly wished to havea longtalk with him about the whole position. Hesaid he would arrange for me to spend thenight with him.We had a meeting to discuss Acworth'sagency. Dick, 1.,Dixon, Acworth and van derWillik were present. I had previouslyseen Acworth andtold him that he had tomake up his mind whether he was going towork in this office or not, and if he wasthat he would carry out the work in theway that we thought best. He said thathe wisked to stay and was prepared to actunder our instruction. I then called thegeneral meeting and we went through Acworthsmemo point by point. In the end he acceptedall my criticisms and it was left to M. towork out the details.T.A.R. is worried about the execution ofRICHTER, as he thinks it may place Tate indifficulties. He is putting up a note.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188ISyI went to a cocktail party which was afarewell to Herschel Johnson. He is goingto Sweden as Minister and his departureis regretted by all. We are I fear losinga very good friend.I had a talk with Borum and asked him toraise with Herschel two questions: firstlydid the Embassy get any interesting reportson the situation on Ireland and if so,would it be possible to pass the informationin the strictest confidence to ourselves?Secondly, would it be possible for theEmbassy to give us a fair wind with someof the more important American journalistswho visit the continent and come back tothis country. Borum said he would take upboth these points and let me know theanswers.The Advisory Cttee. have recommended therelease of Ger ld HAMILTON. Their reportis really rather a staggering one. Theytake the view that there is no very strongevidence that HAMILTON wished to go toEire by clandestine means and that if hehad gone with the intention of startingpeace negotiations through the Vatican andthe German Legation there is no evidenceto show that he would necessarily have beenadvocating a peace in Germany' favour.They took no account of HAMILTON'S pastrecord. It was quite clear that HAMILTONhad intended to go to Lire by clandestinemeans and he admitted that he wished toCatalogue get Reference:KV/4/188 in touch with the Vatican to discusspeace proposals and that he might havevisited the German Legation. Our evidenceshowed that he thought the Vatican wouldbe favourable to the Nazi cause and thathe would be acceptable to the German Lega-tion in view of his previous record andassociation with CASEMENT. It seemstherefore that he committed an act prepara-tory to ciontraveneD.R. 14November 6thCraufurd and I saw Burton of the Min. ofSupply about N.A.F. Major-Gen.Butler wasalso present. I think we persuaded Burtonthat W.A.F. was of no consequence whateveras a company,that its directors wereundesirable; and its chairman was trying togrind his own axe,andits financierSVARVASY was a shady alien finaneier witha bad reputation in the city. Burton whoseemed O accept our view said that hethought the present arrangement shouldstand and that the W.A.F. should not begiven the contract.V.V. attended the XX Committee in theabsence of Felix who has been showingSwinton round Section V. There was onerather controversial issue.G mgithpossibly be conpromised if CALVo werearrested. Montagu took the view that theD.N.I. would be extremely annoyed if hewas not previously consulted. The viewtaken was that as CALVO and G.W. had beenCatalogue used Reference:kV/47188 as. a transmitting false1879information to the enemy bhe services werenaturally concerned if the enemy was nowto discover the truth. V.V. V. V. took a veryuseful hand in the argument. He thoughtthat the services had a case for requestingconsultation but that teir point of viewmight be carried too far. In puttinginformation through these channels theyhad to realise that they took a sertainrisk since any agent was liable to becompromised at any moment through no faultof his oranybody else's. They could nottherefore claim priority rights over thehandling of an agent merely because hehad been used as a channel for transmittingtheir information. on the other hand theSecurity Service and S.I.S. should doeverything in their power to meet thewishes of the services.I spent the night with V.V. in the country.and had a very long talk which reallycentred round Felix. I said that I couldnot see why we should not get togetherand thrash out our difficulties. Thecomplaint of all my people was that theycould not reason with Felix, that he merelydug his toes in and witheld information.When they asked for things they were giventhe impression that they were interferingin matters which were not their concern.If one person had come and told me this,I mighthave been disinclined to believeit but since every body told me the same thirand I had to some extent experienced itmyself it was impossible for me to ignoreCatalogue Peferehce:KV/4/188(bDI said that I particularly resented theview that had been going about That I wasbeing pushed by a number of hotheads.Isaid that nothing culd be further removedfrom the facts since I was wholeheartedlyassociated with their views. I asked V.Vabout the .G.smemO and told him that altho/Harker,Butler and Horrocks had seen it I hadnot. He seemed to think that this was agreat pity. The memo had been sent tohim in order that he might say whether hethought it was acceptable as abasis fordiscussion. He said that it was on verybroad lines but that whatever was decidedbetween the D.G. and C.S.S., the reallyimportant thing was that the liaison betweerSection .and ourselves should be ascomplete as possible. He did not intendthat the twenty years of intimate cooperatibetween ourselves should not continue inthe frankest possible way. The idea thatFelix should hold back anything from Dickor other senior members of this dept. seemedto him quite ridiculous. He told me inthe morning thathe had been thinking alot about what I had said during thenig t. I am afraid therefore that what Isaid must have worried him considerably.I am sure that he will do his utmost toput things right. V.V said that C.S.S. hadsuggested that I should not go to Americaat the moment owing to thergeneral atmos-phere that prevailed in New York. I toldV.V. that there were moments when Iwondered how Felix would be received, andthat although it was not my business I didCatalogue Reference:KV/4/18816/feel that if I went alone I could probablycarry both Stephenson and the F.B..I.It is obviously difficult for V.V. toagree to anything of the kind whateverhe thinks, and it is obviously that Felix.would be mortally offended.November 7thWe had a meeting with Collins and SirRobert Robinson whose advice was askedregarding suitable chemists for work onsecret ink. It was suggested that wherewe had special problems to solve we mightfarm these out to suitable laboratories.In addition we might procure the servicesof an expert in dye stuffs and of severaljuniors who were suitable for training andpossibly for sending abroad to Censorshippoints throughout the Empire.At the R.S.S. meeting we raised the guestiorof the inception of German radio in thewestern hemisphere, Herbert having. showna number of messages in New York whichnever reached us. It seems that thepresent rocedure isna little cumbersome.Messages come over by mail and are thenpassed through the machinery of G.C. &c C.S.They emerge finally in the form of ISOS.I gather that GPGR went into the wholequestion when he was in America and thatsome improvement may be expected.Swinton came over to discuss the case ofRICHTER. He read my minute in which ICatalogue Reterencekt/4n8s more the undesirability162of the present procedure. I had suggestedthat in future the matter should be dealtwith by a statement in the House to theeffect that it was not the intention ofthe Govt. to publish details regarding theapprehension and execution of spies, andthat the House should not assume thatbecause no details were published spieswere not being caught and executed.This wouldleave our hands free.Swinton said that he would have toconsider this matter rather carefully.As regards the particular case of RICHTERhe thought that it would be unwise topress for a reprieve since the informationwould undoubtedly leak out with resultswhich Nould be detrimental to B.lA'sorganisation There were two alternatives,either to proceed as usual, or to suppressthe notice of the execution and make aspecial appeal to editors. My fear wasthat the bare mention of RICHTER'S namein the press might cause the Germans tomake a thorough enuiry into our traffic,possibly with disastrous results, sinceRICHTER was linked with Tate, and Tatewith Tricycle and Rainbow, and Tricyclewith Balloon and Gelatine. There was inaddition the legal difficulty since RICHTERhad mde an appeal in which he statedthathe knew that Tate was under Govt.control.Cookie has got RICHTER oywithdraw thisstatement which is in no way relevant tothe normal legal appeal. He has told himthat he can put this in with his appealto the Home Secretary if his appeal fails.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188163T.A.R. and I had a consultation about thecase afterwards an decided that it wasbest to let it takeits norm 1 course.After the meeting I told Swinton aboutmy visit to Burton on the previous day.He seemed satisfied. He then talked tome about his visit to Section V. Hethought itwas a jolly good show, andexpressed gre t pleasure in having askedFelix a number of questions which couldnot answer. He said that this was justwhat he had hoped for as it showed thatFelix had started to decentralise.I think Swinton was angling to know vhatE thought, but i said nothing.I attended a meeting of the L.I.C. atwhich it was decided that in the event ofwar with Japan there should be an all forall exchange of internees with the exceptionof EGUCHI who is already interned. Itwas pointed out however that if negotiationsregarding this matter were started nowit would be tantamount to giving the Japsa free run. in putting spies into Britishterritory.. This should be a matter forconsideration at the highest level.Dragonfly has received a message instructinghim to write a letter to Father which wasto be signed in the name of a Belgian whohas passed through the Patriotic Schoolsand been absorbed in the Belgian army. Theletter asks for a meeting. It is not clearhowever whether the Belgian or Dragonly isCatalogue Reference:KV74/188to meet Father is prob ably a reply1bu-to Father's urgent request that somebodyshould establish contact with him.. Thematter is interesting as an indication thatif the Germans wish to conduct urgentbusiness they have to do it through one ofthe family.V.V. rang me uo about Victor's sabotagerequirements which Section V. find some-what onerous. I told V.V. that wererely got adequate reports on sabotagematters from the U.S. - If we felt thatthese matters were really being lookedafter we should not ask for reports onincidents of which we read in the apers.Our confidence had been considerablyshaken, by the fact that we have heardnothing from America about quite an impor-tant case of incendiarism in the mailsbetween New York and Glasgow. Eventuallywe had succeeded in getting particulars ofquite a thorough investigation which hadbeen carried out by the F.B.I. This hadreached us through Warnock who had writtendirect to Hoover.November BthCARRICK, the man at worthy Down, has beenarrested and has conEssed that he was thewriter of the letter to O'CONNOR in Lublin.He said that he had heard of O'CONNORthrough a case in Liverpool which wasreported in the press. He thought O'CONNORhad got off very lightly and had conceivedthe idea of planting the letter on him.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188This idea did not sound very plausiblesince a plan of another secret aerodrome wasfound amongst CARRICK'S belongings. He alsohad the name and address of another Irishmarwho had been proeecuted in Liverpool. HeNas trying to destroy this when the policeprevented him.I lunched with the D.G. Theo and Fellner.November thPlan buy Fawkes went off at 4 a.m. thismorning. The bombs were suceessfullyplaced but while the Superintendent waskeeping watch a War Reserve Policemanappeared on a bicycle. He saw Harmerwaiting in the car and asked him what hewas doing. Harmer said he was waiting forsomebody. The constable then becameinquisitive and Harmer was obliged torefer him to the Buperibtendent. Theconstable was threatened with every possiblpenalty if he said anything about what hehad seen. Unfortunately hofjever he was nottold to leave the site. As soon as thefire started he raised the alarm and onebomb was extinguished before it had reallytaken lfold. A portion of it and also ofthe suitcase have been discovered andenguiries are being made. The two nightwatchmen were obviously fast asleep. Oneof them said that he could not imagine howthe fire could have started since he hadvisited the site only 10 minutes previous LyIn actual fact he had never moved from hishut. Press and Censorsip Bureau have beenCatalogue ReferenCe:KV/4/188Ibbasked to issue the necessary D.Notice.November l0thDiscussed with the D.G. cases of RUTLANDand HAMILTON. It was decided that a lettershould be written to RUTLAND saying that inall the circumstances we had no use forhis services. It was felt that no usefulpurpose would be served by interning himas he would in all probability bereleased. If however war breaks outbetween this country and Japan the mattercould be reconsidered on the grounds thathe was of hostile association. RUTLANDhas been thoroughly scared nd L do notthink he is likely to do anything. TheD.4. has decided to write to Maxwell aboutthe case of HAMILTON expressing his disap-proval of the findings of the AdvisoryCommittee.Dan Bryan turned up today. He has givenus some interesting details aboutGOERTZ.It appears that hue and cry after GOERTZhas nothing to do with the cases of HAYESand MeCAUGHEY, the to members of theI.R.A. recently arrested. Bryan says thadthe police got on to some woman calledHelena MALONE and that through her theywere led to a Mrs. MeCAUGHEY who had aboarding house at Dunleary where GOERTZhas apparently been a lodger for somemonths. GOERTZ had been brought to thisboarding house by some peopl calledFARRELL Just before the house was raidedGOERTZ seems to have escaped to theFARRELL'S house and then got away to someCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188bungalow at Brittas Bay the people withwhom he wasstaying had a rubber boat whichhad been bought in Dublin. There wouldseem therefore to be some possibility thatGOERTZ has been picked up either by a shipplying between Eire and the Iberian Peninsuaor by a seaplane. Bryan says however thatas far as the Eire authorities know therehas been no seaplane in the vicinity ofBrit as Bay,neither have their been anysubmarines inthe Irish Channel. It ispossible that GOERTZ may have boarded somevessel making for Lisbon butthis could haveonly been done by means of a prearrangedplan. The hunt for GOERTZ is still goingon, While at Dunloghaire GOERTZ had anH.M.V. radio receiving set. This set wasone of two purchased by a man named REDMONDin bublin. GOERTZ took the set with himand it is possible therefore that it mayhave been converted into a transmitter,It is not quite clear to me how the Germansknew of the existence of GOERTZ but Idaresay we shall find this out in due course.Victor has seen Wood of S.O.E. in connectionwith Plan Guy Fawkes. Inspector Greeno ofC.I.D. has discovered a part of the bomb.The C.I.D. made enquiries some time ago atthe request of S.0.2. about the loss of asimilar part and therefore recognised it.Wood appears to have fenced quite quite welland suggested to Greeno that he shouldconsult Victor.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188November llthWe have an extremely interesting casewhich centres round Stella LONSDALE, thewife of John LONSDALE the Mayfair Boy.Stella who was in France appears to havebeen caught by the Germans. She was atliberty for some time but was eventuallyarrested when in possession of a diagramshowing the location of a petrol dump.According to her own account it had beenher intention to pass this information onto the British through the American Consulat Nantes. She was imprisoned and threat-ened with the death penalty, but accordingto her account she was reprieved owing tothe intervention of one Rene whose identityshe refused to disclose. Rene she saysis working for the British although in theemploy of the Abwehrh Stelle at Anger.The head of the German organisation atAnger was MEISSNER who subsequently wentto Paris. Rene had sent Stella intoFrench unoccupied territory, and she hadapparently beeome acquainted with certainfacts relating to the Britishsecret Britist SecretService activities in France. She knewthe history of a man called GESSLER whoh had d in faet been sent over to France witha transmitter. Stella said that he hadoffered his services to the Germans buthad eventually been imprisoned. She gavea number of other details which accordingto S.I.S. are substantially correct. Itwill I think be necessary for us to obtainthe fullest possible facts from S.I.S.Catalogue before Reference:kV/4/188 to establish how169far Stella can be regarded as genuine. Onpresent f rm we are inclined to the viewthat Rene, if he exists at all, has beenrunning Stella and that he is in fact aGerman agent. His technique in posingas one who is pro-British would be quitesound. He might expect that Stella wouldwork more rapidly for him and wouldcommunicate more facts to him about theBritish organisation than she wouldother-wise do. It is quite possible of coursethat Stella's story has been entirelyinvented and that she is in fact collabora-ting with Rene, and there are many pointsin her story which struck us as extremelyweak. On the other hand her informationabout S.I.S. agents is substantially true,though most if not all of it was know toSI.S. already. Stella herself ants togo back to France where she says she hasc ntact with the 2eme Bureau. e proposeto discuss this proposition with her solelyin the hope that she will in this mannerultimately disclose her hand.Burt is taking over the case of WorthyDown atathe request of the D.P.P.At the D.G.S meeting today Toby raised thecase of HICKSON and Ben GREENE. HICKSONis to give evidence before the AdvisoryCommittee and also M's agent. HICKSON wantsa transcript of the notes'and Maxwellagreed to his having these. We feel thatthis may create an awkward precedent andthat the official notes of the AdvisoryCatalogue uRefefence:k\4/f8e be allowed to passinto the hands of a private individual.This seemed to us to be particularlyimportant in the light of the coming debateon 10B. The D.G. asked Toby to consultMaxwell.T.A.R. has seen the Commissioner about PlanGuy Fawkes. The Commissioner knows thatthe C.I.D. are working on the case but hehas not told Kendal about the plan.I forgot to mention that Dudley Clarkewas released about 3 weeks ago. Thecircumstances of hisrelease were to saythe least of it peculiar. At the time hewas dressed as a woman complete withbrassiere etc. Why he wore this disguisenobody quite knows. He seems however tohave played his cards fairly weil, sincehis speedy release can only be explainedby the Germans having intervened on hisbehalf. It will be remembered that hemade contact with a man he believed to bea German agent in Lisbon. This man was inSpain at the time and believing DudleyClarke to be an important agent who asready to assist the Germans, intervenedwith the Spanish police. Dudley-Clarke isnow on his way home. Nobody can understandwhy it was necessaryfor him to go to Spain.Before he is allowed to go back to theMiddle East he will have to give a satisfac-tory account of himself. It may be thathe is just the type who imagines himself asthe super secret service agent.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188I7|ovember 12thCecil and I lunched with Dan Bryan. Hisvisit has I think been very successful.He is to let us know when the wirelessexperts are to go over with a view tolocating the station which is in commnunica-tion ith Nauen.I had a word with Toby and Hart about asuggestion that those wishing to visitprotected areas should carry a specialpass. This is a re-hash of the old schemewhich broke down since hobody would takethe opportunity of imposing sanctions.The present proposal cannot be very effec-tive in keeping a spy out of the area butit will fulfil its primary purpose,name]that of keeping the enemy in a state ofsuspense in regard to the documents ofidentity in protected areas. It will alsogive the Registrar General an opportunityfor checking up on registration cards andputting his index to some use.We had another abortive conference withAdam about the running of agents on ships.T.A.R. is reconsidering the position.Victor has seen Inspector Greeno of theC.I.D. who has asked him some searchingquestions about Plan Guy Fawkes. Victoris trying to shepherd as much of theenquiry as possible into his own hands.Catalogue ReferenCe:KV/4/18812November 13thI had a fairly long discussion with Arnoldabout the security of RDF. I said that as.I sav the position at the moment he wasobtaining information from the AirMinistryabout the security of certain aspects ofR.D.F. particularly in Service establishmentVictor on the other hand was rying tosurvey the whole field of R.D.F. andArcher was concerned with the security infactories where RDF material was beingmade. At the moment nobody seemed to bemaking a very thorough job of it. It isquite clear that we shall have to have ameeting. The danger of Arnold's show isthat Blackford regards it as a kind of AirMinistry Gestapo within the SecurityService. There ought really to be a properR.A.F. section under Archer which wouidcorrespond to the Air Ministry section inS. S.I.S. The Section would be under theD.G. but seconded from its Ministry. Itsenquiries would all take place underthe D.G.S direction.I had a word with Curry about the case ofLENIHAN. He seemed to think the case wasan extremely difficult one and was on thewhole sympathetic. The difficulty is toknow how LENIHAN can profitably be used.November 14thI saw Bingham and Younger about theCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188THISSACOLIN ORIGINAT DOCUMENT RETAINED3 DEPARTMENT (4) OF THE PUBLIS UNDER SECTIOAACT 195801958prt5 RECORDSSTAPLETON case, and gave them instructionsabout their meeting this evening. I donet wish them to press the matter too faruntil we ive ve been able to extract as muchinformation as possible about STAPLETON'connections if any. The D.G. approvesof our line o1 action.The Stella LONSDALE case has been handed OVto T.A.R. He is rather keen to use heras a XX but before doing SO wishes to knowmuch more about her character. it is alsoessential tat we sould have the fullestpossible particulars from S.I.S.Gen. Gifford, G. 0. C. West Africa, called tosee the D.G. They seem-to have sufferedconsiderably from the activities O1 theFranck Mission of which he had a very lowopinion. There is a fight going on at themoment. It seems that Wyngate was takenover from Franck and wishes to CO trolS.I.S. Gifford did na know haigh-ood butfrom what he had heard wondered a littlewhether he would. carry sufficient seight.Ihad a long talk withat theTravellers. He told me all about theRutland case. It seems that his organisa-tionsent several telegrams and letters fromNe York and fcund it extremely diliicuitto get any answer. The full facts of talecase were kno in to them 4 or 5 weeks beforeRutland left the U.S.A. He could notunderstand why the first intimation to usCatalogue Reference.k4/rggiv within 40 hoursof Rutland' arrivil at Foynes.Itseemsthat Rutland was definitely implicatedin the case of the Japanese language Officerat Los Angeles who was arrested some monthsa.go. Rutland, realisin tile delicacy ofhis position, nad offered his services tothe American authorities, saying that hehad extremely good commercid connectionswith the Japanese ind that ne would berypleased to cork them. His suiggestiorwas turred down ind he next appeared inashington were he visited our Air Attachedu Bouiay. John Miude got hold of himand thought that it would be a grand ideato use him as a XX. John never consultedanybody and it was only by accident thatheard about the case. KnowingRutland's record he warned John to lay off.Rutland had in the meantime gone back toLos Angeles. Finally Foxworth of the FBItoldthat the Americans proposed toarresthutlind They did nut however ishto have the scandal of bringing to trialan ex-member the British Air Force. Theythought therefore it ould be better ifwe made arrangements te send Rutiandback to Englerd forta'ith. He was summonedto fasnington "here John Maude suggestedto him that it wvould be a good thine if hewent back to Engl na uu discuss his project.Rutland seems to have jurnped at this.Several days iter Rutlind had arrived hereSterherson EOt a telezram fron S.I.S.asking who he "aS and all about him. AShe had already sent teiesrams and one ifCatalogue Reference:kV/47188t.e vondered whatwas going on. Ine americirs nave evidentlyTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(8314 OF THE PUBLICRECORDSACT /958a00dbeen tcint rtland for several years.They al"aye vionderec "vhy we had never rutour cards on the table. They thouenterli.s that. he as one 01 ou agentsand they hid bean witing for us to teilthem. I anticibite Some sort of siluationlike this arisin- hen wen some years 3a0suggested that we should give fulldetails of Ritland's Case to the Americans.The objection at iie ime was that nutland1a.9 tied Us vith an S.I.S. agent and it"as thouini that there miat be ak arddisclosures if the Americins started t.omake enuiries. Te services ot the agentwere eventually dispensed ith mure or lessat our request. "C" agreed with us thatany form Ci espionie in the U.S.A. W.Sa mistake ind likely to jeopardise goodrelatiins. There Nas nothing that thisneent mas inding out that could net befound out by skin.seemed terv anxiois that I snouid gout to the U.S.November 15th.T. T..n. n. nd 1 had lunch Withde toldT T..R. R. site lot ab ut Tricycle. Tri-cle has noA made contact with the enemy.He MBS rither resentiul at first about histreatment, but e nw seems to have hit it,of ith the F.R.I. ana also wwit.h theS..S. ror resent tivo. iie hc been givenintroductions which have even him theCatalogdeiReference:k1ti4st8e He was very anxiusto know about the fate Balloon and7bGela tine since if anything had happenedto them he thought his position mignt notce very secure. These arc the kind ofmatiers on high Section V. evidentiy donot consider it necessary t.o keep usinformed.I had a talk with Burt wno had Crime backfrom Worthy Down. He has obtinedevidence to the effect tit CAIRHICKhas been talking in a very yro-Nazi andanti-British way. This should drive anasty hole in CARRICK'S case. He is tryingto contend that he sent the aerodrome plansto the individuals whose names he got fromthe Press in order that they should receiveheavier sentences. Both of taen hadreceived rather mild sentences for I.R.A.activities. CARRICK'S story seems a badone to me.November l/thI had a long discussion over the weekewith Hart about our functions vis a visSection V. and S.I.S. Both sick and Ihave orerared notes which we discussedtoday with thd D.G. The D.G. 1 thinkaccepts the view that the should be keptinformed aocut the activities OI the GermanS.S. all over te world. and I think enave convinced him that from the point ofview of secrecy we are not sorresposiblas Felix Cowgill ould have him believe.Catalpgue Reference;ky(4/is8 about in hisFelix has really been putting some singu-ownorganisation and curs. His outlock is SO127narrow that unless somebody pulls him upit is going to be very difficult to cooperateQuite briefly our point of view is thatwehave to take the executive action againstthe German S.S. whenever it attempts topenetrate British territory. We must be inpossession ofall its workings and agents freomwhatever part of the world they may beactive. We realise tha S.I.S. obtainedinformation affecting British territoryand that eobtains information affectingforeign territory. In fact if ISOS isexcluded. we are obt ining very nearly 75%.This illustrates the futility of tryin tomake any hard and fast dividing line.All that is necessary is close and unrestricted collaboration between the officersof all br nches of Seetion V. with theirop osite numbers in the Security Service.Jock Why te is moaning about the case.oGunner JACKSON. I have put it up to Cookiein order to get Judge Advocate's decision.Jock however had the files sent to the coun-try before anything could be done,hence nodecision. I have seen Cookie who thinksthat there should be a meeting. This hasbeen arra ged for next Saturday.Frost tells me that the B.B.C. are askingfor his return. He proposes that he shouldput in a certain amount of ytime at Barnetin order to put Slater in the picture.He imagines this may take some months. Healso proposes that he should still beresponsible for security matters in theCatalogueRetererce.kvy4/18a event of invasion1%his services should again be made availableto this department. D.G. takes the viewthat he should hand over his duties assoon as possible but is quite prepared toaccept his offer of service in time ofinvasion. In the meantime Frost is anxiousto get our position vis a vis R.S.S. quiteclear. He thinks that the terms ofreference of the .S.S.Committee should beextended to enable us to enquire aboutmeasures taken from time to time by R.S.S.to intercept illicit communications fromthis country. The present understanding isthat we place ourselves unreservedly inthe hands of Messrs.Gambia-Parry and Maltoy.This should be perfectly.ail right butthere is some reason for the emphasis istoo much on the side of the group trafficand that the original purpose for whichR.S.S. was set up is to some extent beinglost sight of.A suggestion has been made that we shouldemploy LENIHAN as an agent on a boat beteenthis country and S. America. I have lookedthrough his file. I do not believe hisstory about his escape from the ChannelIslands. I think he was anxious to get awayand conceived the idea of offering hisservices to the Germans partly as a meansto this end and partly in a spirit ofadventure. If we are going to make any useof him it seems to me that we shall haveto wipe out his past completely and give hima fresh identity. He could give away acertain amount of information about Ham etc.but it would be di ficult for him to talk toCatalogue Reference:KV/4/18879the Germans without disclosing his identity,but if he did he WO ld have to explainhow he came into the hands of the Britishauthorities.I had lunch with Fulford. He is ratherconcerned about the Duke of Bedford. Thereis a movement to have him arrested becauseit isthought that his propag nda will doOa lot of harm in the U.S.A. Fulford Ithink rather wisely onsiders that hisarrest would do more harm than good sinceit would give the Duke an enhancedimportance. At the moment is is like avoice crying in the wilderness. Swinton'sview and I understand Morrison's is thatif the Duke is not dealt with there will bea cry of one law for the rich and anotherfor the poor.November l8thWe had a director's meeting and I raisedthe question of Irma STAPLETON. From thetranscript notes taken by mike of her lastinterview with Bingham posing as a repre-sentative of the German S.S. there seemedno doubt that she was prepared to go to anylengths and that she could quite easilybring out a whole shell from the factorywhere she works. She has swalloved ourbait hook, line and sinker. If we went onwith the case there seemed' little doubtthat we could get her 7 years at the OldBailey. We wereto some extent forced toadopt these methods because if we internedpeople under 18B because we felt they wereCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188a potential danger they were almost invari-ably released. I rather wondered how farit would be worth the expense and troubleof trying to get a oman of this typesentenced to 7 years, particularly sincethe case could not be held in an open court.D.G. said he would give this matter hisconsideration. various other arguments,namely that it has in the past been saidabout people that we intern under LOBthat if our facts were as stated we shouldhave prosecuted. It is also for considera-tion whether some use could not be made ofthis case in the coming debate in theHouse on L8B. The publi and M.P.S aregenerally rather reluctant to believe thatsuch people as Irma STAPLETON exist.We had the famous meeting with S.I.S.Stewart,V.V.,Harker,Dick and myself, withthe D.G. in the chair. D.G. made a fewintroductory remarks and the rest of themeeting,which lasted 13 hours, was taken upwith a discussion bet een ,Dick andmyself. D.G. asked me for my views and Itabled them in the form of a short memowhich was read by all present. I saidbriefly that it was the responsibilit ofthe Security Service to combat the activi-ties of the German Intelligence Servicewherever it was directed against thiscountry or British possessions, includingEgypt and Palestine. It was for this pur-pose that it was essential that we shouldmake a. comprehensive study of the form, work-ings and agents of the German IntelligenceService. The collection of such informationCatalogue Reference:KV/4/18818|from foreign territory was the responsibil-ity of S.I.S. and from British territoryincluding Egypt and Palestine of ourselves.In each of these territories the Servicesmust of necessity overlap. I felt that i -the best of worlds we should both be housedin the same office bt that since for avariety of reasons this had not been con-sidered possible, we had to strive for thenext best thing,namely complete and frankinterchange of information on all questionsaffecting the German Intelligence Service.I did not think it would be sufficient toconfine this to nything in the nature ofan exchange of periodical memoranda. We coucould only do it by the closest collabora-tion even on matters of detail. I hadnever wished to suggest that every thingthat S.I.S. obtained should be thrown tous to digest and assimilate. We had alway sregarded it as their function to pass onina palatable form information after it hadbeen co-related with any other factsalready in their possession, but we didfeel that as the executive responsibilitywas in our hands we should receive allrelevant material in order that our picturemight be as complete as possible. V.V.did not dissent from these views in generalbut said that he did not quite see howto define the limits of our interests. Hethought that if we had everything relatingto the German Intelligence Service from allparts of the world we should be duplicitingthe functions of S.I.S. I said that I didnot see that this was necessary. We hadtaloguEReference:kv4/tsgult about it in thepast when he himself had been in controlof Section V. and that provided Felixwould allow his subordinates to collaboratein a perfectly free and friendly manner Idid not see why there should be any diffi-culty. V.V. then passed on to our stan-dards of secrecy. Felix was apparentlyhorrified because so many people knew aboutISOS. Dick replied that at least 50people knew about it in Section V. andI asked how many people knew about it onthe G.side. Stewart said only 4 or 5. Ifound this difficult to elieve. I should 1be surprised if it were not known to agreat many more on the .side. I then askedwhy it should be considered that our officewere in any way less reliable than thoseemployed by S.I.S. There did not seem tobe any answer to this question. V.V. thenquestioned the carding of ISOS. We saidthat we had to card it because we wereworking on it every single day, that wecarded it in a limited way,i.e. we coveredthose areas to which we attached themostimportance. V.V. suggested that this wasduplication of the work being done bySection V. I said that if he carried hisargument to its logical conclusion therewould be no point in our having ISOS atall. V.V. then produced the RUTLAND casewhich he said had come as a great shock toFelix. A comparative table had beenprepared showing the information given tothe D.N.I. by S.I.S. and by ourselves.Felix held that the RUTLAND case had nothingto do with the D.N.I. and that there foreCatalogue Reference:kV14/188 Werefused to him.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL IGINAL DOGUMENTRETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 All Doohaa on the contrary sent him a very fullstatement of the case including referencestocertain information obtained from B.J.S.I said that while I quite agreed that theD.N.I. was interfering in a matter whichwas not nis concern, I could see no harmin the action we had taken since the B.J.Swere already in the D.N.I.S possession andthe remainder of the information was oldand was in fact made use of by us in break-ing RUTLAND down. We had lost nothing inthe process since the letters which wereshown to him were dated 1935, and themethods for intercepting correspondencewere known to all. We had to work with theD.N.I and if by peaceful means we couldsatisfy him that he had made a fool ofhimself we were quite prepared to do SO.I then referred to another aspect of theRUTLAND case,namely that although the fullfacts of this case had been known inAmerica for 5 weeks we were only given 48hours notice of his arrival at Foyhes,and heard nothing of any consequence untilarrival. This was just the kindof thing we wanted to have the full factsabout. Before the meeting broke up Ireferred to the Stella LONSDALE case.Itwas essential that in a case of this sortwe should be given the fullest possibleinformation. It was only by the mostdetailed collaboration that we could reallyget at the facts. Stewart said he wouldbe only too pleased to let us have anyinformation about thiscase that weCatalogueReterence:kv/4188b Catalogue iellx. thought that ne ought totook a strong view1ube sent away for a long period. He hadgrossly overinorked himself and had inconsequence taken up a very narrow bigotedattitude. I think all present agreedthat the real difficulty was Felix(s personality.I went to a meeting at the WarCabinetpresided over by Gen.Dewing. The jobthe meeting Was to place itself in theposition of the Germans General Staff andwith the knowledge at its disposal considerthe best methods of setting about aninvasion of this country. I was asked togive some sort of picture of the potential-ities of the 5th column in this country.I began by explaining what the pre-warset up had been in this country and howthe main effort had been concentrated (a) O1propaganda through various organisationsand societies to keep us out of the warand (b) on estimating our industrialmobilisation capacity through the machinetool industry and other similar means.Since all these activities hed been perfectly legal it had not been necessaryfor the Germans to establish any verydeep-seated underground organisation. Itseems probably tat they did not seriouslycontemplate invasion until they reachedthe Low Countries, and it was then thatthey began to take stock of the positionhere. They probably found themselvesrather badly equipped and there followeda number of hastily improvised and crudeperformances in the shape of parachutistsCatalogueereference:KA/188y rubber boat. Whilewe thought it possible that we had missedsome of these people we did not thinkthat we had missed very many. Simultan-eously with these efforts attem ts weremade to penetra e this country by peoplewho posed as escapeese Some of these hadbeen caught but theyAmuch more difficultproposition since without previous know-ledge it was not easy to get at the truthof their story. We knew that seamen werebeing employed as agents and communicatingin secret ink. Some of these had beencaught but there might well be others.Unfriendly neutral embassies and consulateswere a constant source of danger sinceth ir representatives had complete freedomof movement, particularly within the dockareas and had all the facilities fortransmitting the information by bag orcypher telegram. We knew for a fact thatactivities of this kind were going on.Lastly there was the 5th column field.We did not think that the Germans had any rereal grip on the B.U.F. although there nodoubt that certain connections existed.It was for this reason that the mostprominent members and particularly thosewho were active after the invasion of theLow Countries, were interned. A good manyof these had since been released. Fromtime to time we came across isolated casesor small groups of th columnists who wereundoubtedly prepared to assist the enemybut never seemed to have any real plan ormeans of doing so. We felt fairly confidentthat there was no organised body of theCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188kind which iras receiving direction from theI made it quite clear that I did not wishto be complacent about the position butas far as we could see, if the GermanGeneral Staff decided to invade thiscountry they would not have many organiseestarting points. The question of propa-ganda was next considered. It was generall;agreed that the German Freedom Station,the N.B.B.S., Workers Challenge,CaledonianStation etc. had failed, although itwas true to say that the N.B.B.S. hadcaused a lot of trouble in May 1940.Mr. Warburton Minister of Home Securitythought that we should not under-rate thepotentialities of the German propagandamachine and that there should be some verydefinite counter-plan. Mr. Wells said thathe thought the Ministry of Informationand the B.B.C. had machinery both forjamming and for counter-propaganda. Mr.Warburton said that the Ministry of HomeSecurity had made a rather careful analysisof the effact of German bombing raids lastyear. In the light of their experiencethey thought that the most effective actionthat the Germans could take would beto select a certain important town likeTyneside, Merseyside, Southampton,Bristoletc. and bomb it continuously for a fort-night or more. He would drop 300 tonsof bombs each night for 3 nights andcontinue for a week or 10 days with 5 tons anight and then step up again for anothertwo days at 300 tons a night. He wouldalso drop occasional bombs during the dayif this were possible. He thought that ifthis were done propaganda of the type ofCatalogue Reference:KV/4/18817the NBBS would become more effective. AirCommodore Slesser doubted very much whetherthe German Air Force could possibly carryout such a task. Firstly the number ofmachines required would be too big and thelosses perhaps too heavy and secondly theywould be dependent upon weather conditions.What r.Warburton was suggesting wasexactly what Bomber Command were tryingto do now in Germany. They were findingit extremely difficult mainly on accountof weather conditions. They realised thatif they Let up for 2 or 3 nights the effectof the previous bombing was considerablydiminished. Ir.Warburton agreed with thispoint. He thought it would be extremelydifficult to destroy morale here unless theaerial bombardment could be sustained nightlyand daily for a considerable period.Mr. Warburton eriticised the policy of"stay put" which was now being changed to"stand firm". He did not think it would bemuch use telling people to stand firm unlessthey had something to st nd firm with. Hethought that the momen should be betterorganised and that if they had a definitejob to do they would go to their posts anddo it. If they were left as at presentthey would probab ly get on the roads and nam-per the movements of troops. Col.Hill-Dillondid not agree. He thought that the Germanswould either shoot up any unarmed civilianswho resisted or drive them in front of theGerman forces as they had done in Hoilandand Belgium. Provision had been made by -Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188Home Forces for such a contingency and thepolice had instructions to shepherd thesepeople on to roads which would not be usedby the military. Mr. Warburton evidentlythought that the military and the HomeGuard and the women would be better organ-ised on a defence area basis. He thoughtthat as things were at present the taskof the civilian population was notsufficiently co-ordinated with thatof the military. It was generally agreedthat the most effective action that theGermans could take would be to drop largenumbers of parachutists No would cutcommunications wherever this Nas possible.There was no doubt that this would presenta very se i us problem since we were stillvery much dependent upon telephone communi-cation. Gen. Dewing said that he might ata later date want some further particularsfrom the Security Service particularlywith regard to sabotage, and that he wouldlet me know when his committee hadroceeded further with their deliberations.November 19thV.V. rang me up. He was rather apologeticabout the attitude he had taken up atyesterday's meeting. He said that he hadfelt bound to fight Felix's case and hehoped that some of the things ne had saidwould not be resented. He rather wonderedwhat the next move was. I said that Ithought he had felt somewhat embarrassed inthe past by my suggestion that he shouldCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188have personal contact with a good manyof our officers here whom he had never met.He had doubtless felt that this would berather going behind Felix's back. I thoughttherefore that when Felix went to Americaand he took ever it would go a long way tosolving our difficulties ii we could gettogether on these lines.H entirely agreedwith this.D.G. considered my minute on the IrmaSTAPLETON case. He agreed that before themeeting which had been arranged for thisevening it would be as well for somebodyto see the D.P.P. and get his views.Harker took the case over and the D.P.P.decided that if STAPLETON brought out ashell or other information of a confiden-tial nature she would be apprehended.He thought that at the conclusion of thetrial the press should be let him and thecase should be given a certain amountof publicity. I explained the positionto Bingham and he is making the necessaryarrangement With S.B.I had a talk with Ward of F.0. and theoturner about the position of alliednationals and their governments. I saidthat although it was not my direct respon-sibility I had felt concern about ourduties. As the position stood at presentwe relied upon the 2ieme bureaux of theallied governments to keep their house inorder and to seek our assistance in anyenquiries which they wished to make. IfCatalogue le Reference:kV/4/188 date it was discoverthat a serious leakage of information hadbeen going on for some considerable timethrough a member of one of these governmentwould the Security Service be held res-ponsible? If it was held that we should bedoing something the authorities would haveto take the responsibility of their beinga slip-up and this would be almost inevit-able sooner or later if we tried to runagents, which was the onlyppesibleomethod to obtain positive information.From time to tiem we obtained rathervague statements about the unreliabilityof certain people. Such information wasof little use unless we could probe itthoroughly. I thought that it wasnecessary that we should either haveofficial backing for such activity or thatit should be properly uderstood by allconcerned that these matters were beingleft to themselves. Ward took the viewthat it was far better to risk somethinggoing wrong than jeopardise our relationswith allied governments, who as a tokenforce represented our sole raison d'etrefor fighting on the continent. If wehad not got these allied governmentshere there would be many people who wouldargue that if the Germans came to termswith the Dutch,Belgians, Be Danes etc. itwas not our business to interfere. Theohad previously discussed with Ward variouspoints which had arisen in connection withthe arrival of diplomats or semi-diplomatsfrom abroad. There had been a complaintby the allied governments of these peopleCatalogue ReferenCeRV4/8g unnecessary inconveni-ence by their interrogation at the RFS.We feel that these people should haveproper credentials if they were to beexempted from examination.Frost came to tell me that Gambier-Parryand Maltby strongly deprecate his depar-ture to the B.B.C. they did not see nowSlater could take over his work, at any ratefor some considerable time. Frost said thatthere were certain jobs which the B.B.C.wanted him to do, one of which was consider.ed urgent. He did not know that hisdecision should be but preferred to leaveit in the hands of the D.G.November 20thIrma STAPLETON was arrested last night.She had brought an empty shell out ofthe factory, and a ote in her own hand-writing giving the position of Wade'sgarages. She also gave Bingham fullproduction figuees for Wade's garage.He reaction was immediately to denounceBingham as a Gestapoagent who she wasintending to hand over to the police atthe earliest opportunity. She insistedon making a statement which is said tobe a tissue of lies. Dingham was arrestedat the same time and carried away strugglingand handcuffed. She was remanded at BowSt. for 14 days this morning.D.G. asked me to come down and see WilliamDwight WHITNEY, who is Bill Donovon'srepresentative over here and will have aCatalogue-Reference.kV14/88in Catalogue him. He is toavhave an office somewhere in Bush Housewhich ill be for press and propaganda.This will act as a cover. His mainpurpose is to collect as much vitalinformation as he can which has any bearingon the part being played by the U.S.A.and the possibility of her entering thewar. This information will go direct toBill Donovon in special cy her for thePresident. Lastly he is to try andlay the foundations of some organisationfor penetrating the continent both onS.I.S. and S.0.E. lines. It seems to methat this is going to complicate lifeconsiderably for .I.S. It is b ad enoughhaving an English S.0.E. but if there isto be an American one as well I fear theremay be a major disaster.The news from Libya is quite good.Theoffensive started on the l6th. Weapr parently made a feint frontal attackand sent our main forces round the desert.The Germans it is thought were alsocontemplating offensive action since theyhad brought up a whole tank divisionwhich was operating in the coastal area.A large number of these tanks have beenbogged owing to very heavy rain and wehave been dive-bombing them for the last24 hours. The convoy interception hasapparently failed in its job of bringingout the Italians. It was duly reportedthrough the Straits but was also reportedgoing back. It is said that some of ourlight tank units have been within about 20miles of Benghazi to the south, but thisCatalogue Reference:KV/4/18893is unconfirmed. We seem to have airsuperiority,probabl due to the factthat the large convoys which were sunka few weeks ago contained Me. 109Fs andtechnical personnel. I am told thatprior to this operation some of our patrolspenetrated without opposition to within40 miles of Tripoli.November 2lstI saw Marriott's brother and >hanklandfrom the B.B.C. They came to discuss thevarious German broadcasts which they havebeen monit ring since about May 1940.These broadcasts were originally taken byM.I.8 and I gather at the request of theW.O. they were taken over by the B.B.C.Marriott said that they were costing aboutE10,000 a year and that he was ratheranxious to know how we regarded them.It seems that they have been monitoredalmost exclusively for our purposes butthat nobody here has taken any very greatinterest in them or given any directionsto the B.B.C. I told Marriott that I hadonly learned that we were receiving thesebroadcasts about 10 day s. go that I hadthen discussed them with those concerned.From what I had been told about them itseemed that the obscure references whichhad the appearance of code could not bedealt with by any code section except inthe light oi other information available.In the case of Anna WOLKOFF it had beenvery valuable to us to produce in courtthe code messages from Haw Haw implyingCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188the receipt of Anna WOLKOFF'S message.It was possible at some time or anotherthat we might arrest a man and find inhis possession certain notes from thesebroadcasts but that thiswas a fairlyremote possibility. I doubted thereforewhether we could justify the ex enditureof E10,000 a year unless some therdept. was interested in the broadcastsfrom another point of view. Beforemaking a final dedision I said that Iwould be very grateful to see any speciallysignificant passages a out he might know.He promised to send me these.We had a meeting with D.G.,1.D.G. Dick andmy self about the B.1.a(l) seamen's organ-isation. D.G. was rather horrified bythe possible number of agents which wehope to employ. He thought it would bemuch better to start with a very few high-grade people. I explained that our objectwas three-fold: (1) to collect data aboutconditions and individuals in foreignports (2) to detect any possible enemyagents an board ship, and (3) to recruita few suitable XX agents for ourselveIn order to arrive at (3) it was necessaryto put agents through a test of reliabilityand a period of observation. We felt thatmany of the 40 or 50 we had selected sofar would fall by the sayside. If weselected only half a dozen'we shouldprobably not hear of them agiin for 3 monthsand if none of them were suitable we shouldstillbe no further than we are now. D.G.Catalogue nReterence.RV/4/18f organisation and said(95that he would like to see Wilkie, Lovelland Jones who he thought would be ableto give him first-nind information aboutthe kind of people they verehandling.L am told on good authority that theGerman reserves on the Russian frontare getting extremely low.Noveinber 22ndI had a talk with Burt and Cecil on theorthy Down care. It had been suggest thBurt S2 uld go to NV. Irelind with teihensonand ther on to Lublin, where he wouldcollaborate with the Garda. Burt hadpreviously been to Dublin and made certaincontacts there in connection ith anothercase. I feel tnt while it, vas a goodthing for Burt to yo IV.ireland itmightbe dangerous for him to go to bublinin view of the fact tht his connectionwith our office had been ublished inthe press. II it, became known to DanBryan that ve vere establishing a directcontact "vith the Garda there might bea great deil of trouble. There WNas alsoa possibility that the R. U.C. mignt notapprove. It waS agreed therefore thatBurt ind Sterhenson should go to Beifastand that if possible the .I.0. should ceoersuaded to collect the necessaryevidence about O'CONNOR. Paling of theD.P.P.S Office thinks that if we do notshow in court that ve have made some attemto Cie r up the bublin endit will be assum-CatalogueReference,KV/4r18gte whole case to beinsigniiicant.aTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4 OF THE PUBLICRECORDS PUBLICACT 1958ooNovember 25rdThe Dorothy case has opened u: a nev!line Contact has been made with Dorothy'friend Mrs. Roy JOHNS whose husband isinterned. There seems quite a possiblitythat he is in reality a German. He hastalked rather mysteriously to a number ofpeople about his activities prior to hisinternment. His wife now says that hewas in toucn with an oldish man who washis paymaster and died some time ago offood poisoning. The paymasters place wastaken by a younger man. Mrs. JOHNS isalso in touch with certain Italian circles.On the evening o1 her arrest Mrs. STAPLE-TON produced 22 mm. Oerlikon shell,unloaded but apparently passed by0inspectors, a. tw-pound anti-aircrait snelligniter and a 22 mm. shell base plug.She also gave in her on handwriting theaddress of the R.O.F. at Stone,Staffs. andthe production figures of Wade's ChainGarages which are stated to be accurate,as well as the addresses of the other unitsof Wade's factory organisation. N. ..D. I. D.say that the production figures are confi-talogueketerence:kv4/t8g do not reard the197shell as such. Mrs. STAPLETON is provisi-onally charged under DR. 2A in that sheobtained certain articles of ammunitionand information concerning the same andendeavoured to dispose of them to theenemy.I have read through the evidence givenby HIRSCH who with Oscar GILINSKY wasarrested at Trinidad en route to SouthAmerica. HIRSCH, a banker was arrestedby the French and given a sentence of 10years because of a scandal about theFigaro ind his connection with Baronessvon EINEM. The Germans released himalmost immediately after they reachedParis and he was taken on by them as anagent of the Sonderkommando. The Sonderkommando protects the interest of the stateand party in France, Spain and Portugal,and furthers the interests of collaborationwith France, without however any mandateto interfere in French politics or indeedto do nything other thanreport on thesituation. The executive of thisorganisation is the Sicherhitsdienst.Later HIRSCH got taken on by the ParisAbwehrstelle, the executive of which isthe Geheime Feldpolizei. He eventuallysucceeded in getting sent to South Americawith Oscar GILINSKY on some mission forthe German S.S. the nature, of which is notyet disclosed. He has given a good dealof information about French collaboration-ists. We have just discovered that oneof GILINSKI'S trunks had a falst bottomCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188containing $41,500 and roughly 5,000 escudcOscarGILINSKI has told us very little sofar. He is of course identical with aman of this name who was at one time actingfor the Soviet Govt. in the purchase ofarms for Spanish republicans. There is nodoubt that both HIRSCH and GILINSKY hada mission from the German S.S. but itsnotclear how far they intended to carry itout. They are both to a large extentcrooks and it may be that they were mainlyguided by self-interest, but were glad toget out of the country on any pretext withas much money as they could take with them.E12,000 has already been found on HIRSCH.Interesting information has come fromMedlam about MUNOZ DOMINGUEZ. He hasproduced a specimen of the floating mineand has clearly been in touch with theGerman S.S. in Madrid. It is not yet clearhow far he is genuine. It seems likelythat ve shall have to send somebody toGib.Macheil told me about 4 cases of leakwhich have occurred in connection withthe movements of H.M.ships. It seems thatinformation reaching Gib. becomes known tothe Italians within a matter of about 40hours. TheAdmiralty do not think thattheir cyphers are being broken since 3 ofthe incidents were in different cy phersand one of them was a tear-off and wouldbe almost impossible to crack. One isdriven to the conclusion that somebody inCatalogue Reference:KV14/188the in C's must have gone wrong.1a9We have suggested sending over some bogusmessages in order that we can vatch thereaction.November 24thJock Whyte tells me that Gunner JACKSONnever turned up at the meeting. It sub-seguently transpired that his battery nadbeen on the move and another rendezvouswill be arranged.I had a long talk with Arnold and nothschibArnold performs two functions on the intel-ligence side. He keeps Lennox informedof any special air operations and Lennoxtakes certain security measures in orderto ascertain hether there are anysuspicious persons in the vicinity of theseoperations or trials. For this purposeLennox works in close touch with theRSLO, local police and censorship. SecondlyArnold keeps us informed about suspicioustracks of enemy aircraft and obtains forus certain information that we may equirefrom time to time from the Air Ministry.Arnold has come into c nflict with B. Icon account of the case o1 Sir DennistonBurney. Arnold was asked to look intothe security of an invention known as theToroplane. In so doing he discovered thatthe invention had been to a large extentcompromised by the action'of Sir DennistonBurney in passing particulars about it tothe Americans. The fact that Sir DennistonBurney had done this was of interest toCatalogue REference:KV/4A88 any other enquiriesor precautions more or less useless. SirDenniston Burney has for some time been thesubject of attention by B.l who regard himas a phoney inventor and a crook. Withoutreference to B.lc Grimston of Air Ops. hadmade enquiries about Burney and came tothe conclusion that he had infringed theDefence Regulations, and put his case up toPilcher for a legal opinion. In all thishe appears to have been acting underthe instructions of Blackford who regardsAir Ops. as an Air Ministry organisationsituated for convenience in the middle ofthe Security Service and under Blackford'sorders. This seems to be an unsatisfactorystate of affirs. It is I think part of ageneral scheme of Blackford's to get con-trol of all Air Ministry Security work.My own view is that if it is accepted thatsecurity is complementary to counter-esp-ionage work it should be under the controlof the Security Service. At present thereis not much continuity or cohesion in thehandling of these matters. It is thebusiness of M. .P. to look after securityin Service Establishments, D.3 the ssecurity of the same article in the f icuoryand the Air Ministry when it is being usedon the aerodrome for experimental purposes.Archer is known as A.I.1.d. in the AirMinistry and isat the same time a memberof the Security Service working underD.O &c D. In any case he feels that hisresponsibilityto the D.G.Arnold feelsthat his position should be the Same.Blackford evidently thinks that bothArcher's and Arnoids sections are part ofCatalogue Reference:KV/4/18820(the security organisation which he candirect from the Air Ministry. He has nowtaken to giving Archer's section instruc-tions to put on a telephone check and Ar-nold's section instructions to look into -matters which in some instances should becarried out by the Provost Marshal'sdepartment. In neither case did Blackfordconsider that he should put his wishesthrough the D.G. in the form of a request.I visited Tangye's office. He seems to bedoing quite a useful job of work. I wentthrough his files. He gets a number ofenquiries from a variety of sections andseems to put up uite useful replies.He is very keen that all requests aboutjournalists should pass through his handssince in a recent case where en quiries weremade by a section through S.B. the reactionwas rather bad. I am tryingto get thisput right.November 25thI gave a lecture to the RSLOS in answer toa request from Baxter that they should begiven a genera picture of the B.Divisionangle. I divided the talk into four parts:(l)An account of the German activitiesprior to the war and up to the time of theinvasion of the Low Countries. I took theview that as their main effort had beendoncentrated on propaganda and capacity tomake war, it seemed that they had not foundit necessary for this purpose to establishCatalogue Reference:KV/4/18807any deep seated organisation. They probab.Lyhae not contemplated invasion till theyreached the Low Countries. It was for thisreason that their early attempts to put inagents by parachute and rubber boat had beenof a rather erude nature.(2). I dealt with the illegal landings byrubber boat and parachute. The first arrivalshad one-way sets and instructions to fall backat the time of invasion with the British Forcesgiving particulars by wireless of move-ments of troops and morale. Later arrivalshad two-way sets and were given very wideinstructions to report on almostevery aspectof life in this country. The scene of theiroperations was the east coast of Scotland andan area covered by a triangle London-Oxford-Birminghan-The Wash-Cambridge-London. FromA ugust to December 1940 the question theyhad been asked were mainly of a generalnature, i.e. military and civilian. Fromthen onwards they were mainly military untilM ay 1941 when they again became general, withan emphasis on food prices, morale, etc. Theemphasis on mi litary activities up to May 1941may have been due either to possibility ofinvasion or to a desire to know ourmilitary strength and the chances ofputting an army on the Continent.if The Germansdecided to start a war on the Eastern Front.I then dealt with legal landings, both byescapees and by seamen. I said that the morerecent escapee cases had shown attempts topenetrate our Services. The idea was thatcertain Norwegians should get themselvesNorway with a wireless set, where theytaken on by the British Service and, return toCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188203would work under German control.Therewasa possibility that one of them might havebeen sent over to start 5th Column activi-ties in the Lorwegian forces. As regardsseamen I quoted the cases of LAUREYSSENSand TIMMERMAN. The latter was interestingas he had evidently received very carefulinstructions from the Army, Navy and AirForce over a period of about 6 months. Hehad questionnaires from all theee Servicesand had been told how to identify variousforms of armament. He had also receivedinstructions in the uses of secret ink. Hehad been detected through an examination ofhis kit. I then gave a short talk aboutillegal landings in Ireland, with particularreference to the case of GOERTZ and PlanKathleen. Other subjects I dealt with wereNeutral Embassies and Legations, 5th Columnand sabotage. The principal NeutralEmbassies and Legations were the Japaneseand Spanish in a lesser degree the BrazilianChilean and Swedish, all of which neededwatching. We knew that throughout theworld Japanese Consuls had been reportingon shipping. We also knew that theS paniards had been reporting both onshipping, air raid damage and morale throughtheir Consuls and had in addition a smallnetwork of journalists working under thedirection of Alcazar de VELASCO, a prominentmember of the Falange, who was here for ashort time as Press Attache. In the 5thColumn people the general indication wasthat while there were a number of isolatedCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188individuals, Germans, people of Germanextraction and members of the B.U.F. whowere ready to assist the enemy in any waythey could, there was no widespread organisa-tion working under direct German control.Thoserhad been apprehended had collectedinformation but did not know how to transmitit to the enemy. I mentioned the cases ofHISCOX, DOROTHY? STAPLETON, and GunnerJACKSON. As regards aabotage I said therewas no evidence that the enemy had anywidespread organisation, although he hadattempted to send saboteurs to thiscountry. Most of the cases investigated,and there were hundreds of them, showed thatthe damage was due to carelessness, ignoranceor bloody-mindedness. On the other nandthere had been attempts to place bombs inships coming to this country from thePeninsula. It was perhaps reassuring thatthere had been no serious outbreaks ofsabortage during August and September of lastyear 2 but we must expect that the enemy hadimproved his organisation and that membersof the I.R.A. may have had instructions tolie dormant until an invasion period.In part (3) of the lecture I tried to givesome idea of QOT far we had been successfulin countering enemy activities. againstthis country. I said that we had in allaapprenended 47 individuals who wereundoubtedly German agents operating againstthis country and others who had been takeroff the high seas and Nere intending tooperate in other spheres. In Lire 0 spieshad been apprehended and another wasbelieved to be at large. In the field ofspecial agents Ne had found that wheneverCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188the enemy was -pressed to get funds to205this country or to communicate instructionsrapidly he seemed to be forced to seek ourassistance. We could not say positivelythat there were any illegal tr nsmissionshere, but the ituationin'at resteetwaseimproving. We still had the difficultyof possible ground-to-air transmissionsby VHF. Perhaps our greatest anxiety werethe people who came to join the allied forces since without prior knowledge theywere diificult to pick up. Seamen presentedsimilar difficulties. In Ireland we thoughtthe authrities were extremely vigilentand that it Nas difficult for aliens tomove about undetected. On the other handif there ware in influx of renegade Ireshmenthe situation presentalgreat difficulties.With regard to Emb bassies and Consulateswe were fairly well inormed about the Japsand spaniards but ve could not escape theconclusion that a considerable amount ofinformation passed through these channelsalthough it might not be of a very highquality. In the 5th column field, whilewe did not think there was any videspreadorganisation we did think tht there migntbe a onsiderable number of people bothBritish and alen who in time of invasionswould be seriously considering where theirpersonal interests lay. In part (4) of mytalk I tried to explain the action we weretaking in all the various fields whichhad been reviewed. B.lA were rying (1) tosatisfy the enemy that the Germans had anadequate organisation here both for thepurpose of espionage and sabotage. (2) weCatalogue were Reference:kV/4/188 att as much as possibleyoabout the enemy's organisation, methods andagents, in close collaboration with SectionV. (3) (3)'that that we were endeavouring to inducethe enemy to send further gents to thiscountry whose identity would be known, to(4) we were operating through R.S.S. thedetection of possible transmissions fromthiscountry. For illegal landings werelied large ly on tne vigilance of the H meGuard,Police and Military. We also madea study of the tracks of enemy aircraft.In the matter of legal landings we vere tryiing to penetrate tae enemy'sespionage systemin the hope of getting prior kno vledge ofarrivals, but we had to rely to a largeextent on the vigilance of the S.C.Os andthe crosS-examination at the RPS. Wehoped to improve matters by recruitingagents on ships for a 3-fold purpose,firstly to collect data about individualscafes rendezvous and foreign ports inenemy control, secondly to detect membersof crews who benaved in a suspicious mannerand thirdly to make approaches to the enemyin foreign ports on XX lines. In irelandwe had to rely very largely on our liaiswithxiki the R'Y.C. and Eire authorities.In the field of Embassies and Consulateswe had made great efforts at penetrationand had achieved a considerable measure ofsuccess. We had done our best to restrictas far as possible the movevrents of foreignattaches, and in the case of the Japs hadpersuaded the authorities t close downtheir consulates in India. We shoud haveliked to have taken similar action here andCatalogue in Rangoonsir Reference.KV4/1881d Reference Cape Town but inTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SCTO314 OF THE UBLICRECOHUSview of the possibility of recifpeeat actionin Shanghai and elsewhere this had not beenthougnt desirable. In the 5th column fieldwe hore to give assistance to the RS. RS.L.O. O. Sbv sendin round suitable B. 2. officerswho would give suggestions about theintroduction of agents and then report toheadquarters. B. 4a were also going taronghold files ostensibly to see hether therewene any roots which had not SO far beenpulled up. I red t the meeting the D.G.Sminutes about so-called "agent provocateur'methods. I explained that while he wasnot averse to such methods being employehe thought that each case should be considered very carefully and that actin shouldbe very closely direc ed from headquarters.Lastly I gave the meeting some account ofthe way we were trying to handle the analysiof censorship material and increase ourchance of picking uo correspondence insecret ink. I also told them about theDOT and the microscope in case these mightbe of use to them in carrying out searces.D.B. Came to see me about George KNUPFERwho is associated with a young WhiteRussian organistior known as MLADOROSS.KNUPFER is bringing an action against theDaily Express who said that his organisa-ticn was working for the Mazis. Brackenwants to support te D.E. if they are on agood wicket, and has asked C. for hisassistance. C. nas told him that he thinksMLADOROSS is suspect and Brakcen now wantsCatalogue Reference.kV4n88icitors in touch withV.1.5.In view of the representations of G-P andMaitby, the D.G. has decided to retain theservices of Frost.I had lunch with borum. In answer toTangye's request about nmerican journalistshe said that if Ne liked to notify namat any time oi the arrival of any Ameriuhe would do his best either to extract toinformation ve required or to put usinto direct touch through the AmericanPress officer. With regard to Eire hesaid that all informition from ivir .Grey, theAmerican Minister, went direct to washingtonThe Embassy in London was in ne way respon-sible for Grey' aotivitkes. Any attemptto get information from hiwould probiblylead to difficulties since his wife wasrelated to the President and Gre wastherefore inclined to regard himself asbeing in a specially privileged position.Borum thought this matter could be tackiedbetter in Washington.The Bank of pain,aresending 12,000 in Lloo Australian notesto spain. It looks as if this was arequest from the Germans or Jis who areprob.b trying to place an agent inAustralia or Singapore. Ned is mkingenquiries about the supplyyo notes by theBank of Lngiand and the Dig Five to theBank of Spain, on similar lines to theenquiries he is making in regard to theYokohama Specie Bank.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1882092November 26thAs L rather anticipated a question has beenput down on the order paper about KURTZ.It is to the effect that since the informa-.-tion he gave to the Advisory Citee in thecase of Ben Green has been admitted by theChairman to be false, will the . of D. saywhat action ale proposes to take. As far aswe know the Chairman expressed no such view,and we strongly ob ject to KURTZ'S namebeing placed on the order paper. Toby isgoing to see Maxwell and say tht if thequestion has to be allowed KURTZ'S nameshould be omitted. He should merely bereferred to as "the material witness".The D.G. considers that this incidentamply justifies his contention that in-formants and agents should on no accountbe forced to appear before the committee.Curry has had a word with the D.G. who wishegto talk to him about his workD.G.wantshim to write up the early history ofGerman activities ere,particularly inregard to the penetration of industry.This is not quite what he had in mind.He has in the past been occupying himselfwith the postwar work of B.1 and the co-ordination of the work of the varioussections which are trying tobuild up apicture of the German espipnage organisatioIt is to be hoped that he will be allowedto continue this work which is of greatvalue to us.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188November 27th.There is a suggestion that we should estab-lish 4 secret transmitting stations in Lirewhich would be able to give time Ly warning:to BTNI in the event of an invasion. Igather that there is already one transmitterin operation. From our point of view weshould deprecate any action of this kindsince if anything comes out our relatiorwith the Min. of Defence are likely tobe jeopardised. We are therefore advisingagainst this action. If however theauthorities insist. on having these setsinstalled without prior consultation wethink that they should not carry out anytests at least until an invasion is consid-ered imminent.I forgot to mention that HARRISON, whoattempted to sell plans to the Swedishattache as sentenced to 18 monthsimprison-ment. He admitted subsequently that he hadalso tried to sell plans to the SpanishEmb assy.-November 23thCraufurd came to see me about Deny s BOYD-CARPENTER, who nad informed us that he wasreceiving correspondence from a Germanofficer named Karl BRUCKNEB, who was employedon intelligence matters in France. Theseletters were said to readh B-C via SpainB-C had said that he last met Bruckner inFranch in 1937 but we were inclined to dis-believe this since his passport which wasCatalogae Befenenceklil4/tssir in 1934 and9/1had not been renewed. Craufurd went tosee him with an 80a order and asked himto produce the letter. He found B-C in bedand with a certain amount of difficultygot from him a letter authorising Craufurdto obtain the correspondence from Bruckerfrom Vemn Bartlett to whom it had beensent. Our files showed that Vernon Bartletthad been interested and that Isobel Cripps,Stafford Cripps's wife, had also had copieswhich she had sent to some high-up in ahish-hush dept. We have now had a letterfrom B-C's solicitors a propos of Craufurd'svisit. The soliditors explained that, theirclient periodically went into a trance,when interesting 1 acts were revealed to him.He attached great importance to theinformation he received but knowing thatthe authorities would not be likely to payany attention to psychic transmissionshe had felt bound to invent the story aboutreceiving the information by correspondencefrom enemy occupied territory. The solici-tors had realised that their client hadcommitted a breach of the regulations andhoped that we would take a lenient view ofhis conduct. We have now got to concernourselves with finding out what circulationhas been given to B-C's letters and towarning those concerned that they are wastintheir time.I had a talk today with Kellar aboutGeorge KNUPFER and the Young Russia organ-isation known as Mladoross. There do notappear to be any grounds of a substantialkind for saying that this organisation isCatalogHe-Reterence:kyt4/i88t of our evidence isin the contrary sense. I saw D.B. laterand gave him the facts. He is going todraft a letter for C's signature to BrendonBracken telling him that the Daily Expressseem to be on rather a bad wicket.Burt and Joe Stephenson have just returnedfrom N. Ireland. Gilfillan did not thinkthat the R.U.C. could obtain the necess ryevidence from Dublin and they did notthink it advisable that Burt should make theapproach. Perhaps more c rrectly i shouldsay that the information might be obtainedbut the R.U.C. would be unable to giveevidence about information which they hadreceived by courtesy of the Dublin police.Burt was rather horrified both by Gilfillanand Roger Moore. He also learned duringconversations with some of the inspectorsthat.they had doubts about the R.U.C.'scontact in the Garda. IWADKER whether thesedoubts are altogether justifiable since Lthink that the R.U.C. have reaped onsiderabbenefits from their liaison. the worst ofUlster is that they can only think nutermsof Orange and Green. Other matters donot really interest them and they havelittle or no understanding of Luropearpolitics. Cecil has just had a messagefrom Dan passed through Joe Walsh and bulan-ty to the effect that the gentleman whowas the subject of discussion between onthe occasion of Dan's visit is now in Dan'shouse. This must I think refer to thearrest of GOERTZ. It is a good sign thattne information has been transmitted to usin this way.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1882S.I.S. have heard through Holt's Bankthat one Man Mohan Singh, Sikh, who isattached to the Air Force, has paid intothe bank since August about 25,600 innotes. Prior to August his account wasonly a small one.S.0.2 have got a couple of tame Russianswho are to be dropped in Germany. I pre-dume this means that they are collaboratingwith the 4th dept. I am going to try andfind out since there may possibly be anopening for obtaining Russian informationabout the German intelligence organisation.Novemoer 29thI had a meeting with Dick,T.A.R and Victorabout sending someone out to Gib. to handlethe DOMINGUEZ case which has reached aninteresting stage. It was agreed to recom-mend that Marriott and Harris should go.They may I think find it necessary to navesomeone permanently in Gib. In any case itwill be useful to have two people in theoffice with an intimate knowledge of localconditions.I lunched with Eddie Grant and discussedwith him his various difficulties. He hasthe feeling that his attempts to penetratethe Spanish colony in his area have not sofar been very effective. He does not thinkthat ARTAZA is doing anything very serous.le is however going to explore the possib-ilities of a mike.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188MODE OF ARRIVAL OF GERMAN AGENTS(Saboteurs underlined in red)A. ILLEGAL ARRIVALS i.e by other than recognised and approved channels.1.Surreptitious Arrivals(a) By rowing boat ex trawler towed across Channel by minesweeper:1. MEIER2. KIEBOOM)3.9.40Nr. Dymchurch, Kent3. WALDBERG4. FONS3.9.40Lydd-on-Sea, Kent(b) Parachute1. SUMMEOR6.9.40Denton, Northants.2. TATE19.9.40Willinghamn, Cambs.3. GANDER3.10.40Wellingborough, Northants.4. 1/2.10.40TER BRAAKHaversham, Bucks.5. JACOBS31.1.40Ramsey, Hunts.6. RICHTER12.5.41.London Colney, Herts.(c) Rubber boat ex seaplane1. WALTI2. DE DEEKER30.9.40South of Moray Firth.3. V. ERICKSEN)4. LUND5. JOOST25.10.40South of Moray Firth6. EDNARDSEN)7. MUTT)7.4.418. JEFF)South of Moray Firth2.Refugee parties from Norway(a) M.V. "VOLGA"(HANSSON(OIEN6.3.41Shetland(4 innocent passengersCatalogue Reference:KV/4/188/OVER(b) M.V. "TAANEVIK"(B. HANSEN27.4.41Wick(TORGERSEN(STRANDMOEN(H. HANSENPawth(c)M.V "HERNIE"(WALLEM8.7.41Shetland(2 innocent Norwegians(d) M.V. "HORNFJELL"(SAETRANG13.9.41Iceland (c)(7 others3. Other illegal arrivals(a) "LA PART BIEN"(JONASSEN23.9.40Put into Plymouth(DE LEEwhen proceeding(LIBOTfrom Brest to LeTouquet(b) "JOSEPHINE"(ROBLESIntended to land(HECHEVERIAsaboteurssaboteurs in(PAZOSBristol Channel -(EVERTSEN)12.11.40put into Fishguard(KRAGas one of saboteusVANDAMcrewwas ill.(MARTINEZ)(JEZEQUEL)B.LEGAL ARRIVALS1.By air from Lisbon1. GIRAFFE28.9.402. DOOLITTLE11.10.403. TRICYCLE10.12.404.GERTH VAN WIJK5.4.412.By ship from Lisbon1.FATHER20.6.412.CARELESS15.7.41Catalogue Rieference:KV/4/1887.4/OVER3.Seamen1. DE JAEGAR4.10.40Newport ex Lisbon2. LAUREYSSENS6.12.40Workington ex Lisbon3. TIMMERMAN1.9.41Glasgow ex Seville.C.AGENTS SENT TO IRELANDThe following agents all landed or descended surreptitiously:(a) By rowing boat ex trawler:1.OBEDJuly 19402. TRIBUTHJuly 19403.GARTNERJuly 1940(b) Parachute1.GOERTZMay 1940 (uncertain)2.MARSCHNER 9SCHUTZMarch 19413.LENIHANJuly 1941(c) Rubber boat ex submarine1. FREETZJune 19402.ANDERSONSIMONJune 1940CAFTURED ON HIGH SEASa)"VESLE KARI"(HOELcaptured 18.8.40in Kong Oscar's FJordGIAEVERwhere they were about(HANNESTADto set up a(COLLMeteorological Station(b) "FREESE"(FINCKENSTEINcaptured ofr Jan(HANSENMayen Island where(5 othersthey were about toset un a Meteorolog-ical Station.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/188Die3iB.Ask