The National Archives(c) crown copyrightCatalogue Reference:k :KV/4/191Image Reference:56(97because a suspicion would always remainthat what he got from the FBI he mightwell pass on to OSS,G2 or ONI. For thisreason I thought it better that we shouldhave our own representtive with the FBIand that if S.I.S. felt they still wantedto maintain liaison with that body theyshould continue to do SO. Our representativewould keep in unofficial touch with theirsbut thereuwould be no outward organicconnection. I think Duff more or lessagreed with this view.April 3rdDuff has. returned our report for the P.M.with a letter saying that the P.M. wouldlike to have further details about WURMANN.The PP.M. has minuted the report in redink: "Seen. Deeply interesting.W.C. Duffseems to think it has been a great success.The Germans are still trying to devise somemeans of paying Dragonfly who in the interimhas dried up in a huffSpringbok is attempting to set up wirelesscommuni ations between Canada and Germany.He has sent off a letter announcing thisto his Losbon cover address.The Watchdog case has been further jeopardiseby a reference to his arrest by a member ofthe Quebec Parliament and references in theFrench language papers in Canada.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1911aZigZag has gone on from raris to Berlin.I talked with Courtney about the case ofDONALD. I am rather wOrried about thewhole position We are still by no meanssatisfied that he is not the person whowrote the postcard to I.YAMAMOTO inSwitzerland, and I do not like the idea ofhis being still in Censorship. On theother hand we have tried every possible CJclcheck on him but without result. havesuggested that we should send him to theJaps at Lisbon and then watch reactions onthe B.J.S. Before he goes he would haveto be very carefully watched in Censorship.We have just had a Lourenco Marques B.J.indicating the identity of "Felix" withSITTIG. Webster has telegraphed expressinga certain mount of anxiety about theappointment of an S.I.S. representative inS.Africa. Meanwhile a telegram has beenreceived from the High Commissioner to theD.O. suggesting that this representativeshould be attached to the M. I.5.Mission.Curry has written an extremely good memoon penetration of S.O.E. and S.I.S. org in-ixations. What emerges more than any thingis that lack of unity as between ourselves,S.I.S. and S.0.E. is a serious menace.Curry thinks it uite likelyytha a largenumber of organisations in Belgium ane proba-bly affected and that they only decideto strike at the last moment such actionmight have a serious effect on militaryCatalogue Reference:KV/4/19199operations. Equally serious is the lack ofco-ordination between S. I.S.,S.0.E. S.O.E S. andth Belgian authorities. It happens onoccasion that the Belgians give last minuteand contradictory nstructions to one oftheir nationals working for S.0.E.April 5thI gave a talk to the course on variousloop-holes in our preeent C.E. network,and then laid the meeting open to questions.I concluded, with the assistance of Rams-botham, by giving a short talk on theAmerican set-up, F.B.I.,0.S.S.,G.2 and ONI.FANTO arrived yesterday and is beinginterrogated today. It is difficult to knowexactly what has happened since KOESSLERappears to have been in Lisbon for thelast fortnight. He shall probably getsome reaction to FANTO'S departure on specialsources, which may clarify the position.D.G. has written to Goodacre telling himthat he is anxious for him to go to Trini-dad as soon as he returns.Cecil returned last Thursday from Dublinafter a most successful visit. He wasaccompanied by Dennis Page. The work onthe HELD eypher was done by Dr. Hayes, curatoof the National Library, who appears to havedone an extremely good job. The cypher isa very difficult and complicated one.Messages which refer to the bringing of anCataloguretreference:KV14/191 to the planning of200the escape of GOERTZ are of considerableinterest. They are written by ANDREWS,the son of the Butcher in Rush whose fatherbuys his sheep on Lambay. His father onceasked me to find his son a job in thepolice. YOungANDRETS was in touch withGOERTZ before the latter was in pirsonand in fact was mainly responsible forthe information given to the Eire authori-ties for GOERTE'S arrest. It ispresumed that through this association nebecame acquainted with GOERTZ'S cypher.How far he is using it on his own or incollaboration with GOERTZ is not yet clear.He is in any case somewhat of a double-crosser. EASTWOOD, the cook on board the"Edenvale" is equally doubtful since heevidently does not think that he is gettingenough pay for the job he is doing He hasnot carried it out very efficiently sincehe was quite ready to hand the letter forthe OKWI over to Granger THOMAS in Lisbon,who was merely a Portuguese in the habitof hanging round ships in harbour in orderto get food from the ships! cook. Eastwoodbegan by asking him if he knew where theGerman Legation was. When he replied inthe affirmative, he was given the letter todeliver. He had a friend in our PressAttaches Office and very wisely took theletter to him. it was photographed andreturned to him for deliveryy. The replypassed through his hands in a similarmanner. We had a little trouble the otherday with Eastwood, who frequently getstight. The master had had about enoughCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1912Dof this and sacked him.ortunatelyhowever the crew protested and Eastwood wasreinstated. Eastwood is now on his wayback to Lisbon, presumably with anothermessage.Isaw Maxwell about Willi LORENZ. Milmo andI emphasised very strongly that we did notwish to give the slightest encouragement tothose wishing to institute habeas corpusproceedings. If LORENZ thought that hisapplication might ead to a jaunt up toLondon and the pay ing of his expenses, theother inmates at Dartmoor would undoubtedlytry to do the same thing. It was agreedthat the Red Cross were unsuitable as inter-mediaries and th t Maxwell would try andfind a solicitor in Tavistock who couldhandle the business, and who could beimpressed with the necessity for secrecy.Diplock and Wells came to see Dick and.myself about America. In their view Steph-enson had no intention of resigning. Theythought therefore it was necessary to presentsome plan to the inevitable meeting atKinnaird House which would probably takeplace next week. They suggested as apossibility that our represent itive inthe FBI should work to ConnopGuthrie, andthat the latter should take over the MI5representation. Dick thought this wouldprobably be regarded by S.I.S. as a furtherencroachment of MI5 on their preserves sinceConnop Guthrie operated in S,America. Therewas an additional difficulty in that Guthriework to some extent tied up with the up-tonCatalogue Reference:KV/4/191office and that if the connection there wasmaintained the F.B.I. would not play. Isaid that de facto the position as I saw itwas was that we wanted someone on the spotto pour oil into the EBI, and that if wewere going to get the 20% that reallymattered this could only be done by someonewho was not organic lly connected with DSC.It is inevitable in the present situationthat Stepnenson will be by-passed since nL Inmuch of Thurston's work here is verbaland cont ainedin his personal etters to theBureau. By putting a man in the FBI weshould be increasing the flow in the oppositedirection but we might of course be cuttingoff certain sources from DSC. I think thatto get over this difficulty ve should havean understanding ith Hoover that if wesent a man to the Bureau it must be under-stood that such information given to uswhihch relates to the work Of SIS shouldbe passed to them by us or by the Bureauthemsleves if they so wish, but that we shalltake no such action on any particular infor-mation without first obtaining their per-mission. It must however be acceptedthat our representativ ill be in touchwith though not subordinate to the DSC.Diplock and Wells thought that Stephensonwould object to any such rrangement and mighsay that if we propose to proceed on these lilines we should take over Guthrie ind thedown-ton office. Another altern tive wouldbe to hand Guthrieback to the HDSE,bo forobvious reasons this would not be very satis-factory. We agree to think the matter overCatalogueeRefereneekvt4/19ills know our solution.93April 6thAt the D.G.s meeting today the question ofthe admission of enemy aliens into the HomeGuard was discussed. The A.G. is apparentlyvery anxious to take them in provided theC.0. in each case is agreeable. E said thatanybody who served in the Home Guard Nouldeventually become a British subject. It wastherefore necessary to consider each C asefrom the point of view 01 naturalisation,and to conduct positive enquiries intoeach man's reliability. I doubted Whetherif vetting was done on this basis andeach application approved by the C.0., thelabour involved would really be worth While.The argument had been put forward that asenemy aliens were non admitted into theregular army they should also be admittedto the H.G. There is however a considerab] ledifference. An enemy alien in the regulararmy is under a fir amount of supervision,whereas those in the H.G. only give 40hours a month of their time to militarymatters. They have access to a certainamount of information and are virtuallyunder no supervision, since all restrictionsare removed. Th there was a crisis theywould only be a source of embarrassmentsince everyone would be suspecting themof being spies.I lunched with Farrer and Farquhar, whenwe discussed the case of BIRKIGT. Farquharhas undertaken that if any member ofBIRKIGT'S firm visits him in Spain as aCatafogue-Referehce:kV4/igelr Catafogue to the chair-yumanship, he will shepherd any such individulduring his visit and see that he does nottalk out of turn. L said thit th t i thoughtKENDALL would probab ably want to go out andthat he was rather notoriously indiscreet.MENEZES has been condemned to death onFriday last at the old B ailey. B.J.Sindicate that the Portuguese Ambassadorhas been instructed to put in a specialplea on the highest possible level forthe man's reprieve. There is no deathpenalty in Portugal.CRAVEN, an ex-Fascist who wrote to theGerman Legation in Dublin, mentioning thathe had formerly done work for the GermanConsul in biverpool ete., has been given alife sentence under the .R.S.by r.JusticeSingleton. The first I heard of this casewas when I sa it in the papers. Theletter had been intercepted by censorshipand sent to the H.0. who on the instructionsof the Home Secretary sent it to the D.P.P.,and it was not until proceedings had actuallyopened in court that the matter wasbrought to our notice.Masterman has had- a long talk with F INTO.It does not appear that any attempt was madeto stop him from coming here by .O.Portugal.This may be due to the fact tnit he Wasbeing run from Brussels. KOESSLER appearsto have t Ken the offensive. There was aconference in Madrid on the subject ofKOESSLER'S organisation. N. Portuga evi-Catalogue Reference:KVI4/191osdently resented the interference fromBrussels and were in favour of its liqui-dation. KOESSLER said that he was quiteindiffe ent but that if Berlin thought thathis organisation was no good he wouldliouidate his company provided they wouldpay off his shareholders. On the otherhand if they had confidence in him andished him to continue he desired as a signof their confidence that his wife should besent to Lisbon. As his wife is a Jewess,this could not be done vithout the.consentof the Gestapo in Berlin. Brussels senta man specially to Berlin nd obtained thenecessary permission. KOESSLER'S wife isnow in Lisbon and presumably his wholeorganisation has Berlin's confidence. Itis difficult to understand therefore whyBerlin sent the last-minute instructions to.0.Portugal to stop FANTO's eparture.April 7thAt the Nednesday meeting I raised the questioof SZCZUPAL and BAUDE, a Pole and a Beigian,who had passed through the LRC. Brook-Booth said th t in the case of the Belgiansthere would be very little supervision,particularly if the man were taken intothe Army. From the investigation point ofview it was generally better to have adoubtful case drafted into indsutry, sincethere would be better facilities for con-tinuing investigation. He agreed that bothCatalogue Reference:KV/4/191aobcases were unsatisfactory. It is to be hopedthat when we get the new intermediary campit will be possible to carry out moreintensive interrogations.In the afternnon I took Viv. down to theLRC. I think he was quite impressed withthe general set-up and with the efficiencywith which the work was done.There has been another move to amalgamateall three services. Duff apparently putup a memo to the P.M. sending copies toC. and Selborne. the P.M. thought that anysuchmove ould be too dislocating andSelborne clearly wants to h nd on to hisown show. It was thereore decided that ameeting should t ke place once monthbetween D.G.,C. Selborne, Loxley and DesmondMorton. Clearly this will be just one morecommittee which vill decide nothing andeventually peter out. It is to hold itsfirst meeting on Friday to discuss theAmerican situation.April 8thI drafted a memo for the D.G. as a brief fortomorrow's meeting on America. E am suggest-ing that if the presence of Mills at theFBI office in ashington in direct touch withourselves is unacceptable to S.I.S. whichI gather it is, Ne should press for Millsto be appointed as our representative inCanada with facilities for visiting the FBIwhenever the occasion demands, and that ourCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1912oTLondon office should be allowed to sendexperts to the F.B.I. wheneverrwe wish.Quite clearly Stephenson does not intend toresign and the farce of Security Co-Ordina-tion will continue. It would be far betterif they wiped the whole lot out and startedagain.Melland gave an excellent lecture thisafternoon to the Course on herGerman policesystem both in Germany and in occupiedterritory.Amongsthgtr things he said thatrat themoment/cream of the S.S. were fighting inRussia. There were in conse uence only avery small nucleus in Germany to deal Nithany serious trouble. Any signs of the S.S.being withdraw from the Russian frontwould be highly significant. Meland alsostressed the brutality of the Oranungs-polizei, whose excesses had gone beyondalmost nything committed by the S.S.Burt tells me that the D.P.P. has turneddown the suggested prosecution of HOYSE.Our letter to the D.M.I. on the Second Frontgiving details O1 the officers whoseservices are available h has been sent oftoday.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/191April thAs a result o1 the MENEZES case there havebeen 23 arrests in Lisbon ineluding thehead of the S.D. Meanwhile Montero has wiredto the F.0. with a plea for MENEZES'Sreprieve. Loxley was anxious tht weshould consider our attitude. Malkin, theF.O. legal adviser is definitely ofopinion that a reprieve should not beranted on the grounds that there is nodeath penalty in Portugal, since this migntcreate an extremely awkward precedent. TheF.0. think however that a reprieve should begranted owing to the extremely co-operativeattitude of the Portuguese, the insignifi-cance of the information actually tr nsmittedand the way MMENEZES assisted the authoritiesafter his arrest. MENEZES! solicitor haswritten to Montero and taken pains to impressupon the latter that he personally will beresponsible for the execution since it wason his recommendation that MENEZES wasdismissed from the Portuguese Embassy anddeprived of diplomatic privilege.Ben GREENE has withdrawn his case againstthe Home Secretary. KURTZ made an extremelygood impression in the box, and evidentlyGREENE could not face up to an examinationof KURTZ on the interview that he had ithGREENE which led to the matters arrest. GREEdid in fact compromise himself very serious-ly. It appears to be the opinion of allCatalogue Reference:KV/4/191waconcerned in thiscase, including the A.G.,that Birkett's handling of it in the Advis-ory Committee was beneath contempt. Heinterrogated KURTZ like a pick-pocket, andSO far from interrogating GREENE, placedhimself in the position of an advocate forhis defense. I only nope that steps illbe taken to see th t our critics inthe 1.0.are made aware of the condemnation in highlegal circles of the proceedings beforethe Advisory Committee. In the CRAVEN easecriticisms were also made by the 11.0.CR VEN'S release was strongly opposed byourselves, and Maxnell minuted the file tothe effect that it NaS a pity. that M. I.5took such an unbalanced view, and had notgot a liber l outlook. the effect onCRAVEN of the H.O's liberal outlook has beentoget him a life sentence inste d of merelyinternment for the duration of the war.The case of one STEINER has turned out to beof interest. A Belgian, he escaped fromBeigium by offering hisservices to theGermans. His ife ane children are held ashostages. He arrived at Lisbon and as togo either to the Congo or the U.K. He wasinterrogated by S.I.S. in Lisbon who regardedhim as low-grade ind unreliable. They didnot considerhim any use as a double-cross,as they thought he Nould probably be blown.He had refused to talk to the Belgians inLisbon as he did not trust them. It wasthought better that he should come here thanbe allowed to proceed to the Belgian Congo.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/191aloHe duly arrived and was sent to 920. Heis based on Ast Brussels and nis cover nameis Jacques. he seems to be a mine ofinformation and of quite a hi h grade.We know from special sources that he gotinto touch with the Germans two or three daysbefore be left. it will be some test ofhis reliability if he comes clean.The D.G attended the high level meetingtoday-on the sub.ject of A erica. Stephensonis to drop the MI5 representation. Denhamis togo out on our behalf to see how an MI5office can best be organised and exactlyshat is required. There is some possibilitythat Denham might stay there himself. TheG. thinks that Mills' presence in the FBIwill also be necessary. Stephenson may fadeout in due course if his job is whittledaway too far. Viv. will probably go outwith Denham in order to establish a smallseparate CE office which will work apartfrom Security- Co-ordination.Ede came to talk to me about the future of OvOverseas Control. He seens to be gettingthings in hand. He thinks, rightly in myview that all information coming and goingbetieen DSOs and this office should assthrough his hands, since only thus can heget a real grip of the job and give usefuladvice to the sections corresponding withthe Dominioas and colonies. he will makeit his business to build up a fund ofknowledge through interviews with all thosereturning from dominions and colonies,Catalogue Reference:KVI4/191aiwhether they are civilian or military. Heregards it as an open point whether or not itwould be desirable to have an overseas sectionin B.division._April 10thI attended the SCOs conference at Blenheimwhen Milmo delivered a most interestinglecture on the handling of agents and interro.gation. I said a few words afteraras aboutour recent discovery through WURMANN of thelack of Signal Security in this country andon our misgivings about certain cases whichfor lack of evidence had to be passedthrough the LRC.Adam raised the question of property sentup to the LRC. It seems that the arrange-ments for sending up property were still ashaphazard as they were months ago when Ispoke on the subject at the DGS meeting.Ab-bott was supposed to h ive taken up therunning but apparently nothing has happened.I raised the point because i felt that if aproper check was not made and receipts giventhe peisoner might deny ownership of incrim-inating property. I took the opportunity oftelling the SCOs the possibility of communi-cation in duff. While we did not expectthem to look for duff I thought it was as wellthat they should know of its existence andthe possibility of its being on any pieceof paper or other object carried on a man'sperson, SO that they might send up suchobjects however innocent they might appear.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/191I thought it ould be a waste of time togive them a list of places where dufi couldbe concealed. We have come across it on aman's tie, on his wrist-atch, his letters andhis passport, and this was sufficientindication to show that it might be concealedalmost anywhere.April llthWe have now received the minutes of themeeting held on the 9th at which Duff Cooperwas in the chair, With Selborne, Hambro, CSS,DG, Loxley and Morton present. This was thefirst meeting of the Secret Service Co-Ordin-ating Committee established as a result ofDuff's memo advoctir the amalgamation ofall three Services the committee discussedthe position of British Security o-rdina-tion. It was agreed (a) that the Directorof Security Co)Ordination should cease torepresent the Security Service in the USA,Canada and the WestIndies. ; (b) that theSecurity Service should make their ownarrangements for their presentation in thesecountries and should send Denham to reviewtheir requirements there and to makerecommendations. They thought as regardsthe USA a representative in direct contactwith the FBI appeared to be required. Thestatus and terms of reference of thisrepresentative would have toybe decided bythe Security Service in consultation with SIS.(c) Col. .Vivian should visit the USA toreview theorganisatio of SIS activitiesthere and in particular to set up a sectionCatalogue Reference:KV/4/191213to handle matters of common interest toSIS and OSS and to decide whether anyreduction in SIS personnel was desirable.(d) If, as a result of these changes, theposition of the Director of BSC ceased tooffer full scope for Ar.Stephenson's capa-bilities, the possibility would arise ofhis leaving the service of SIS. In thatcase it would be necessary to considerwhether the title British Security Co-Ordina-tion and the position of its director shouldcontinue and whether SOE should continueto use the person l services of Stephensonfor liaisn with OSS.April 12thDick,Baxter,Butle and I had a talk with theD.G. about the LRC.. The D.G. was ratherinclined to take the view that as there hadnever been any genuine complaints eitherfrom the public or the Allied Governmentsabout delays in getting people through theLRC, an increase in staff would not bejustifiable. The fact is that the H.0.and in particular Moylan and Kirk are reallyresponsible for the complaints about the LRC.Presumably they anticipate they may navetrouble if things are not speeded up.Baxter said that the last week the averagetime for people passing through was 6 days.This did not of course include the time theyspent at Camberwell. We were all agreed thatthe establishment of another LRC for speciallyCatalogue Reference:KV/4/191suspect cases would meet nobody's point of viview. It would be pure eye-wash to say that5people were passing through the LRC morerapidly if the difficult cases were merelydetained elsewhere. It seemed to us thatthree things were necessary: an increase ofstaff, an extended use of 12(5)A, and someadditional place for interrogation wheresegregation was possible. The OratorySchools have been suggested. Our onlyreason for these suggestions is that weare convinced that a certain number ofunsatisia ictory cases are getting throughthe LRE and that supervision wen they getinto the Allied Forces is bound to beinadequate. The D.G. eventually agreed toan increase of 6 at the LRC and that I shouldgo and see Maxwell about 12(5) A and a suitabplace of detention.I had a talk with Butler about B.LK. Thesuggestion has been made that Cussen shouldtake it over and use Redfern to do most ofthe work. Personally i do not think this isaltogether satisfactory. The work isessentially B.Divn. work and involves therecording of leakages from BJs etc. onGrimaldi's index. This all ties up withoperations ind deceptions. I suggested thatthe essentially B.Division part of the work,namely the collation on a subject basis ofmaterial indicating the knowledge availableto certain persons and classes of persons onsecret subjects, and the collation of materiaindicating speculation by such persons whichcomes dangerously near the truth, should beCatalogue Reference:KV/4/191t215:transferred to Blunt and Young.-I gave T-R lunch. He seemed very lepressed.He said that he had really nothing much to dosince whenever he produced a document basedon his product or made any suggestions, hewas told that this was already being dealtwith by Section V. He is anxious if possibleto get a job in the Mid East, but thismight lead to the break-up of the section,which would be a disaster to all eoneerned.Goodacre came to see me about the suggestionthat he should go to Trinidad. He wasthink at first a little worried, but Ipersuaded him that his Head office experiencewould be of the very greatest value toTrinidad and that we hope in future tehave better liaison with the U.S.A.Medlam has returned for a short spell.Dick and I had a short talk with Horrocks. Hesaid that he had had three goes at the D.G.about making TAR an A.D.B. but the old manawas adamant about the creation of any nenassistant directors. It seems uselesstherefore to pursue the matter. The neworganisation chart is coming out but clerlyit will not give anybody the slightest ideaof now the work is carried out.Dick talked to me about P/Ws in Ireland. TheAir Ministry want to revise the policyaffecting the exchange of interned airman.Their arguments seem to be somewhat mixed.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/191abFirst of all they say that it will beincreasingly difficult for the Germans tofly over Irerand but that with the adventof the Americans we must expect an increasein forced landings. it seems now that theIrish are much more liberal in releasing ourplanes and pilots and that they are onlyhanging on to those originally interned.It seems to me that we are not likely tobenefit very much, since it is difficultfor the Germans toeseape, whereas our people nhave quite a reasonable chance. Both sidesare given parole and the Germans visit theirLegation once a'month. They could thereforetake back some useful information. Thereis a good deal of additional data which one W(would like to know about before coming to adecision. e.g. how many internees are thereon both sides. I have suggested that thematter should be debated at the H.D.S.E.Bill Younger same to see me about an informantof M's who has got mixed up with Cradoc-Owen,Morgan and the Patents Development Co. aBlack Market concern connected witn theSTOCKMAN case. As M's informant was gettiinto rather deep water, and was likely toget into deeper still, I decided to cut thepainter. The informant is to extricate him=self and return the money that he receivedin anticipation of the assistance that hewas going to give MORGAN to obtain a passportand exit permit for the U.S.A.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/191217C. spoke to me about the suggestionthat theDMI shoudd write to Gen. Strong of G. 2. onthe subject of our showing B.J.S to Thurston.He said the whole matter was SO delicateat the moment, that he was rather worriedabout American security generally and thathe did not wish at this stage to suggestto the Americans that there should be anyloosening up of the presentprocedure. Hetold me that he hd heard from Selborne, whohad got it from the Dutch, that an Americantalking to Gerbrandi, the P.M., the otherday, had mentioned the fact that we had gothold of certain machines. ile was tryingto find out tae identity of the Americans.I spoke to Phipps about the unfortunateaccident to Dr. STRATON in the I.O.STRATON was one of D.B.'s people. His housewas hit by a bmmb a few days ago. STRATONwas killed and nis wife seriously injured.The house was totally destroyed. Somevherein the ruins are important papers and awireless transmitter. I told Phipps thathe should go down and see the local policeand also a Dr. DRUMMOND at armouth, I.O.W.. whwas apparently a member of STRATON'S organ-isation. It seemed unnecessary to Keep guardon the place until somebody Came and clearedaway the debris. te should also find outabout a man called G. C.FLANDERS who wasfound on the site of the disaster about 10minutes after it occurred. This was about7 in the morning. FLANDERS is a friend ofa man called Hans HAMILTON who was closelyassociated with SNOW in certain businessCatalogue Reference:KVI4/191a16that he was conducting in Germany. FLANDERSwas described as pro-Nazi.April 13th.At the D.G.S meeting this morning Brooke-Booth mentioned the cases of American seamenof enemy alien origin who seemed unsatis-factory. One in particular had been naturalised in 1940 and had been voicing hispro-Nazi sympathies. It was felt that weehould tell G. 2 and ONI both of whom appearto be concerned, that we cannot agree tothe landing of types of this kind. he do notpropose ho ever to object to their employmenton American ships but the resposibility forthis must lie with the American authorities.Hollis asked for guidance about passingdetails to the Fighting French about membersof their organisation mo were Communists.It wasdecided that we should mark such cases"No trace", since anything Ne told the Frenchwould go back to the C.P. in this country.The rightine French have a number of Commun-ists in their employ about whom they pre-sumably know, but are indifferent.After the meeting Lennox gave us a certainamount of operational information. It isreckoned that the Germans nave roughly100,000 men in Tunisia, about y 100 tanksIt is not thought that Tunis will give muchtrouble but Bizerta may, as it is stronglyfortified. There is considerable ill-feelineagainst the lack of action by the AmericansCatalogue Reference:KV/4/191THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONS 193 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958aolat Fonduc. dad turey got throuya the LasSthey would almost certainly have cut offRommel's forces. Eventually a BritishBrigade was sent, down and did the job ofgetting throiah the mine-field, with the lossof abt 15-20 armoured venicles. Our totalcasualties in the recent orerations are lizntand amount to soething like 1.000. ThereIS considerable dissatisfaction about ouroperations in Burma ard Wavell is to berecalled for a conference.I had a t Lk wita Burt abot. the attitude ofKendal and S.3. ule told me that he taouentthe attack as really coming from Canning,mho was dissruntled about the hanliny ofthe NENE/ES case S.B. tink that MEE/ESshould have been taken to Cannon now inl thatthey should nave resented the case For theprosecution.Burt.seens to be on quite satisi iciory termswith Kendall but realises thit he iii.t naveto dra" in his horns a bit. ie thinkshat there re many Cases which can be much bbetter and mone exeditiusiy least witby his section than by S.B., uite apartfrom the Security asect. "e thinks titS.E. ane cererally rather disinclinen totake or to recomraend action. Burt alsotold me that Robinson's arointment hadcaused certain amount o1 ill-feelingamong other oficers t the Yard. > de taou, htRobinson was miite a good man ino ne realizestat ne will be only concerned witn theatalogueReferevee:V4/19 ill have r.othingt.o do ith the Intellience. AO anentiy some22o1 the higher placed Officinis at the ardtink tht they migt have been given the ob.There is a cert in amount of criticism ofthis derartment.by S..B. since thev onlysee a certain number of our someat desuitryenruiries. thev hlave no idea of the nunperof iies that have actually been caught.They probably calculate that as ve hiveonly executed 13 there are no others.Burt thinks ton that although the IOISEcase was originiiv turned down by the D.the matter is evidently being reconslderednd Counsel's opinion taken. It looks a3 ifCriws was not reorired to accept, the D...0.Sruling.I had a talk writh Mountin of the I.B.Staff.ie is very anxious that as soon as u. ofthe E.E.F. is forned "e should ut in ane ofOU1 fficers n0 would advise on I.B mattersfrom the ovening stage onvaris. f impressedon him thit i thought it important thitcur Officer should eome into contct withthose sections of the FSF quid beconcerned with giving effect to hisadvise. "e shoul then give the Dw.r. GCourse. which old hei then in carryin, outteir duties. He Seemed uite keen about thisG-F has rerlied to the D.G. on the estionof Signals Security. His letter is notparticularly satifactory aind e cropuse toraise the matter on the Radin Securitycommittee. Parry is evidently afrsid tnitCatalogae Referehce.KVI4/1910 F .lS. to look fter221Signals Security. He is threfore re luctantto have it brought to the notice of theChiefs of Staff that the Germans are acquiringa considerable knowledge about the dispositionof our units in this country and elswherethrough signals leakages.April 13thdiscussed with Dick and Milmo the questionof MENEZES! reprieve. We have no receiveda file from the H.0. asking us (a) whetherMENEZES gave any assistance and (b) whateffect a reprieve is likely to have in ageneral way. We have replied that MENELES didassist us but that we cannot give any generalruling on the question of the deterrent ef ffect ectof the execution. e offer the fortowingobservations however on this particular case:(a) the Portuguese authorities did give usconsiderable assistance, firstly in with-drawing diplomatic privilege and secondlyin rounding up a number of German agents inPortugal; (b) that a reprieve may possiblygive us assistance from other smbassies andLegations at a future date, since if theyfeel that a death sentence is inevitable theymighte be reluctant to remove diplomaticprivilege; (c) that if a reprieve is grantedfor reasons which would be carefully considered, as it is desirable to leave any actual orpotential enemy agents who may be working inforeign Embassies a feelingaot uncertaintyabout their fate should they be discovered,that some such phrase is suggested as "afterdue consideration of alt the circumstances" etCatalogue Reference:KV/4/191Lastly we have dran attention to the factthat if MENEZES is reprieved he should be puteither in Dartmoor or 20. If he is to servehis sentence in some other penal establishmentthere may be a leakage of highly secretinformation.April l4thFelix has asked whetherve are preparedfor.S.I.S. to sheet any materrt received fromthis office to OSS, or Whether we want tomake any reservations. One have replied that.any integrated material from this departmentcould be shown at the discretion O1 SectionV. officers but that if it is thoughtdesirable to show our products such as the020 reports we should be notified and giventhe opportunity of placing on them theproper interpretation. Lastly we have stipu-lated that we should be notified beforeany reports affeeting the FBI area, n tmelyNorth and South America, are given to OSS,since we ourselves shall be passing our in-formation to the FBI. In certain cases itmight Nell be undesirable that the reportsshould also go to OSS who might start takingaction upon them and so queer the FBI'Spiteh.At the Vednesday meeting Hart did that theinformation from Lisbon during the past Neekhad declined in value and aeeuraey. theAbwehr in Bremen are sending an agent ta theU.K. via Lisbon in the next few weeks. TheGertrans apparently have a bpanish gent rorkinCatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/191-293in Philadelphia. They are sending anotheragent from Cadiz to make contact with him.This agent will probably sail on the spanishship "Rita Sister" from Cadiz to Philadelphiain the near future. The FBI have been told.Jacob and Barbara WILDER have recentlyapplied in Barcelona for visas for the U.S.A year ago the Germans were interested inthese people. F.B I. have been informed.Milmo talked about the case of Frank STEINERwho has proved to be an extemely interestingagent. AS fr as Ne know he has come clean bubut hedoes not make an entirely favourableimpression. all his information which ischeckable has been found to be accurate. Hetold us amongst a great many other thingsthat the Germans earry secret ink in a Noollenthread which is woven i nto their clothes.This is a new development.Milmo also mentioned the case of LALART, aFrenchman who landed as a German agent inFrench West Africa and is being lent to onby Giraud for a math He was put ahore ina small rubber dinghy rowed by to Germansailors, but the boat capsized and the wholeparty, after marehing 150 kolometres tothe nearest French post gave themselves up.They said thi they only nad a revolver anda piece of sausage betwvean them the probab-ility is that they had sabotage equipment whidwas lost when the boat overturned. LALARTreceivee his training in Berlin.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1912I lunched with Creedy and told him about myplan for the creation of something in thenature of permanent staifs in the variousintelligence services, which will be able togive continuity to the ork and the promotionof intelligenee officers throughout the tireeservices, S. S.I.S. S.0.E. and ourselves.thought that this would give a better openingto anybody wishinp to make a career in theintelligencey world. On the present basiswe could offer little hope of promotion.April 15thGELATINE has been promised some money.GARBO made a further attempt to establishW/T contact on the 7th but was not successfulowing to weather conditions. The Germansappear to have fallen completely for GARBO'Sunderground project which involves thesending of saboteurs. We are thinking ofgetting FATHER transferred to India. Mean-while there is evidence that the Germans arestill placing reliance in him. A reportby LIPSTICK on operational matters hasappeared in ISOS. It is stated that thereport could not be vouched for but thatthe view is held in Berlin that previous re-ports on non-operational matters have beengood. We now have 17 actual XX agentsand 6 notional.D. D.M.1 .M. 1. has raised the question of the colla-ting and disseminating of 1.B. informationto the zone oi the armies abroad. Most ofCatatogue the Reference.Ki4/191 get is obtained in the LRC.125M.1.19 have not in the past distributedcopies ot their reports which they takeat the LRC. We feel that in future theyshould do SO. They do not however make apoint of collecting IB information. This1S more than covered by our interrogators,copies of whose reports are sent to SectionV. We have been under the impression thatSection V. were doing this work, butevidently they do not. I am ratheri clined to think that e should beresponsible for the disseminatior of ourown IB information which should go tothe W.0. country section concerned. Ipropose to discuss this with Harry onMonday.The D.G. has agreed that the question ofSignals Security should be discussed bythe R.S.C. He was a little inclined totake G-Ps vie and to be irritated byFrost's minute. I said that i did feelthat this was a matter in which Frosthad been quite right and that it was onewhich we should bring to the notice ofthe appropriate authorities since itvitally affected the security of thearmed forces in this country. It was theirbusiness and not ours to find a remedy. Isaid I thought it was ridiculous for G-Pto talk about not pulling the trigger. Thefact was that the trigger had been athalf-cock for 3 years and it was high timethat someone pulled it L rather felt thatG-f and ladgate had been getting togetherin order to avoid a dust-up. The D.G. thentold me that when R.S.S. was taken over he hCatalogue Reference:kV/4/19121had agreed that they should not acceptresponsibility for signals security. Thiswas new to me. I had always been underthe impression that G-P had laid off thisresponsiblity on the services without.consulting anyone.I discussed with T.A.R. and Courtney Youngthe question of sending DONALD to Lisbon.There was one slight snag in thatDONALD took part in the observation onthe meeting beteen TATE and a represen-tative of the Japanese Embassy in 1941.If he disclosed this to the Japs. theremight be awkward repercussions. On theother hand it might be argued that ifit had been his intention to do SO he hadample opportunity before the aps cameinto the war.Cecil's special sources indicate thatwhen the hue and cry was raised in thePress at the time of the passage of theScharnhorst and Gneisenau through theChannel on the grounds that the weatherreports which made this operationpossible had been sent by wireless fromthe German Embassy in Dublin, somethingof the kind did in fact take place. Walshregistered a protest with Hempel about theuse of his wireless set and made it clearthat if it came up again it waald eitherresult in the set having to be handed overor possibly a demand from the British andAmericans that the German Embassy S ouldbe closed and that Eire should abandonher neutral status.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/191227Four of the Russian agents who werebrought over here with a Vlew to theirbeing dropped by parachute in Austria areawaiting a ship from Scotland which is totake them back to Russia via the PanamaCanal, The party consists of 3 men andone woman, who are believed to be Austrians.They have been here for nearly a year andare being sent back either owing to theirunsuitability or their reluctance toundertake the job. They told their S.0.E.bear-leader that in fact they werBBeingsent to spy against the Germans but to bedthemselves in as long-term comintern agents.They think that they will now be sent tosome desolate spot in Siberia and areanxious if possible to be allowed to remainhere. It is possible that this may bemerely a ruse to get us to allo them tobed themselves down here instead of inAustria. On the other hand their storymay be a perfectly genuine one. GeoffreyWethered is going up to have a talk withthem.Aprily lothSpent the morning dictating at home.bennox brought Gibson to see e,Gibson isto be GSOL. IB for Huskey. He had beenpromised two people by SIS to form his SIBunit. One of them is to be Johnstone, anairman who is W rking in the SIS officein the M.E. and has a good knowledge ofItalian. He is to come back here to beturned into a soldier and then sent toCatalogue Reference:KV/4/191225N. Africa. Gibson does not know who theother is to be. He is strongly of opinionthat he should have a Security Servicerepresentative and is view is apparentlyshared by Mountain. I showed him theD.M.I. 's letter to us and our reply, whichgave him a good idea of what we had to offerI also said that I was going to suggestto Harry that he should take the matterup with the D.M.I. on Monday. Meanwhileit would be up to him when he got to NorthAfrica if he thought fit to put in aspecial request from there through hisD.M.I. who will probably be Kenneth Strong.I told him that Strong held vies similarto his own.BALOON has received E740Berlin hasauthorised a final payment to TRICYCLEof 187,500 escudos. We are still at aloss to find suitable cover for TRICYCLEto go to Mid East.FANTO, who is in future to be known asPUPPET, has sent to letters to Lisbonannouncing is safe arrival and hisreception in this country. He has givenquite a lot of useful information aboutthe Abwehr and German penetration inBelgium. No further action will bepossible of a XX aspect until PUPPETgets his secretiink.The Germans appear to be satisfied withthe work of BRUTUS. He is going to make asurvey of the south coast shortly.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/191929GARBO made contact on 9.4.43. T.eHe hasbeen asked to instruct sub-agent No. 3to investigate the movements of troops south-west of Glasgow. This appears to be arequest from Berlin who regard No.3 3'sreports as valuable.Che Germans are taking a good deal ofinterest in the "City of Lancaster", whichhas taken a long time to get from Lisbonto Gib. We have considered staging anexplosion in Gib. but on the whole thinkit wiser to await the vessel's return toLiverpool.April 17thI saw Maxwell and explained to him ourdifficulties with regard to the new LRC.I thought we wanted firstly an increaseof staff at the LRC, secondly a place wherewe could segregate detainees at any ratefor a limited period, and lastly an extendeduse of 12(5)a. MAXWELL was very sympathetidbut he was not very keen about extending12(5)a as he thought it would lead toappeals to the Hurstand Lindley committees.He saw no objection however to extendingthe R.I L. period. He undertook to havea talk with Moylan.On the D.G.S instructions I' told iaxwellthat we are not anxious to send our LRCreport to Moylar as it contained informationwhich affected SIS and SOE. They wereatalagueseference.kvayfoy about the recording230of nything relating to escape routes andthought that if we let the report gofurther than himself we might get intotrouble. He quite understood and handedme back their copy.I gave him to read a copy of the HARLEQUINreport that we had prepared for the P.M.I also discussed with him the questionof the H.O. appointment, the D.G. havinggiven me a note in which he asked whetherconsideration had been given to the twonames that he had put forward, namelySir Charles Stead and SirCampbell,two of his Indian civil service friends.Maxwell said that he had been reconsideringthe whole question and that he was nowconvinced that the H.O. should if possibleappoint somebody from within their ownorganisation.Ronnie Reed has written an extremely goodreport on ZIGZAG, a copy of which I amproposing to send to Duff Cooper.Plan MINCEMEAT has bee approved by theP.M. I have seent the documents whichare extremely well faked. The body isto be dropped somewhere off Huelva. Thecompromising document is one cont dining aplan and cover plan written by GCIGS toAlexander. Actually the cover plan isthe plan.Duff is rather annoyed that the questionCatalogue-Reference.kV4/9fof Security has been delayed. He231is writing to G-P and called a meeting forMonday.The D.G. has shown me his report to Duffmaking suggestions for the pest-warreconstruction of the office. He isquite emphatic about the question ofproper establishment and pension rights.I agree with most of what he says. Hegives some interesting figures about establiment in the past years. In 1909 therewas one officer with no staff, in 1914there were 4 officers with a staff of 10,in 1918 97 officers and 470 staff, in 1924a total staf'f of 28, in 1930 staff of 54,in 1938 130, and in 1939 220. Todaythere are 270 officers on the SecurityService establishment, 180 on militaryestablishment, and a staff of 2515.Maunsell has wired that more help is neededin Egypt. He has obtained an increasedestablishment of 30 and would be gretefulif we could fill any of the vacancies. Hecould L think have Kenneth Younger indue course and we could also at considerablesacrifice give him Brooman-White.April 19thThurston came in to see me. He is goingback to America on Thursday, The D.G. hadalready acquainted him with more recentdevelopments concerning the establishmentof a Security Service Office in Americaand Denham's proposed visit. L said itwas rather early at present to say exactlyCatalogue Reference:KV/4/19123?how things would plan out but that Ithought considerable progress had beenmade. L felt very strongly that untilwe had xxkxxk our own representativein the Bureau there were many things whichmght be of interest bo us which we shouldnot get. In particular L hoped it wouldbe possible to get over the difficulty ofnot passing us cases which were sub judice.1 explained that this was a thing whichwe were doing constantly. L hoped thatthe FBI would be able to reciprocate.Thurston entirely agreed and said thathe would take the matter up in Washington.I had a talk with Dick, Adam, Baxter andBrooke-Booth about the various categorieswho were in future to be sent to the LRC.Adam explained that he was still havingdifficulties with the Home Office. Hewas anxious in SO far as it was possibleto keep off categories. This would givethe SCOs much wider discretion. Heproposed that those to be sent up should be(1) people concerning whom there wasinformation at head office, (2) people w'unfavourably impressed the SCO by theirmanner etc. (3) people who had been incircumstances or in an area where they mighthave become susceptible to enemy influence.Within this framework it would be purelya matter for arrangement between ourselvesand the H.O. Adam said that the paperswere with the H.0. and Perkes had told himthat the matter had gone forward to Maxweil.I rang up Maxwell's secretary who knewnothing about the file. He undertook toCatalogue gue Reference:kV14/191233make enquiries and let me know. L gavehim the number of the file which Adam had,to chase up.The effect on BRUTUS of the recent troublebetween Poland and the Soviet Govt. isbeing carefully considered.The Germans are intending to send moresabotage materi l to Mutt and Jeff.Tate has expressed himself as being worriedand disturbed as he thought that he saw aD.F. van in his area recently. For thisreason he will not be transmitting So often.The possibility is being considered ofallowing Tate to take up a job. He isbeing given his freedom.Our plans for an explosion on the "Cityof Lancaster" have rather gone astray. Theship should have come in at East Ham, buthad to go on to Glasgow. It was decidedtherefore tht the captain of ship and the SSCO, nd certain officers, should inspectthe bunkers and the crew would probablydraw the conclusion that the investigation Wwas concerned with something which hadoccurred in that part of the ship. It wasthought that the subsequent expansion anddistortion of this interrogation whichwould result when the crew got back toLisbon would provide sufficient cover forZigzag suspicious if the of enemy him. were Reed at went the up moment but forsome reason or other thought it advisableCatarogue that REfePkefi4rpor wabould be "discovereThis L think was a pity.There is to be another Plan Dream invol-ving the sum of E2,500 in the near future.Two more of Garbo's agents have beenidentif'ied with Felipe's V-men.W/Ttauchhas been maintained and instructionsreceived to encipher all messages twicefor greater security until we receive anew code.Lipstick has had four incoming Duff inthe form of a questionnaire.A new agent named METEOR has arrived.He gomes to us as a XX with instructionsto act in that capacity, but also tocommunicate with other addresses whichis not supposed to have disclosed. He aasbeen put in touch with Tricycle.April 20th-Away ill with jaundice and then on Leave.In my absence it seems that a Germanstation was heard transmitting on 20. 4. 45trying to get in touch with Springbok.A letter has been thrown upby Censorshipfrom the son of General Louis de la Pellousein Occupied F'rance, to a Mrs. TREFUSIS inLondon, inviting her to come to Portugalfor discussions and giving her a coveraddress for her reply. it was clear thatthis letter was written on the instructionsCatalogue of the eferemane:kvsa/igth German the whole matter beingIHISIS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION2353 (4) OF THE DUBLIC BECORDSACT 1958reflected in ISOS. it aspessihle that thiswas some form of peace teeler. wrS.TREFUSIS is known to be pro-Vichy in hersentiments. The letter has been allowedto go on and arrangements made to inter-cept her reply. The cover address usedis a well known German collecting centre.On 5.5.43 Hart reported that an agentnamedis on his way here.He has been in Lisbon for 4 months andbefore that in Berlin. He is bringingjewels inste: d of money with him. Heis connected with KOESSLER'S circle andwas a member of the firm of utto WULIF.There is another, SO far unidentified, agentcoming from Lisbon, of whom it is said hewill communicate by B.O. Apossibly B.0. .C)The outcome of Wethered' interviewiththe 4 Austrians intended to be droppedin Austria as Soviet spies, which I men-tioned on april 15th, was as follows:He saw three of the four at Inverness andThe fourth in a convalescent home inSurrey. Their names Nere WNilhelm WAGNER@ Kurt TRAUB, Hilda UXA @ Marie DICKSEN,wife of WAGNER, Alvin MAR @ Georg MARTENSand Anton BARAK @ August HOFFMAN. Thealiases are the names under hich theyarrived in this country from Russia on18.12.41. MARTENS arrived later thanthe other three, as he replaced oneKarl SCHWARZ who fell ill and had toCatafogure 1942.arrived at tae end O1 Sept. h942, by MARTENS.2The nominal object of the expedition was forthem to be dropped by parachute in Austriaunder the auspices of S.0.E., in order tocarry out a plan specified by the Russians,but kknown to S.O.E. who assumed it tobe one of war-time espionage. SCHWAR'Z wasto be the wireless operator, and had a W/Tset, code etc. which S.0.E. did not see,and which he took back to Russia with hiMARTENS brought a similar outfit withhim but was torpedoed and had lost theset and all his documents. The Russiansthen sent third W/T set of the same kindand other papers, a few of which S.0.E. naveseen. The party, on their arrival, complain-ed bitterly of the documents issued tothem by the NKVD and the cover storieswhich had been arranged for them. Theyall declared that the NVKD had advised themto seeirassistance from the English inthese matters SO that documents and coverstories could be improved. When S.0.E.raised this point with the Embassy howeverthey received the reply that in no cir-cumstances were SOE to offer any help 0Yinterest themselves in the matter. Asno improvements could be effected the partyrefused to go and negotiations betweenLondon and Moscow began. New documents weresent from Russia, which apparently werescarcely better than the original ones.The main difficulty seems to have been notSO much in the form of the documents -which was approximately correct - but inCatalogue Reference:KV/4/19.23the cover they were sup osed to give. Mis-takes were also made, as for instance inone case three documents made outdifferentdates over a period of 5 years for the sameman each contained a precisely similarphotograph of the individual wearing the samclothes etc. In spite of negotiations,no real improvement was eflected, and theSoviet Enbassy never allowed the party toseek assistance from S.0.E. On thearrival of MARTENS, with no fresh instruc-tions or improved documents, mattersreached a deadlock. Party because ofthis and partly because of ill-health theparty refused to make the trip. They werethen ordered to return to Russia. Thisalarmed them very much and they asked ifthey could remain here, but the F.0.refused for political reasons. In Jan. .1943they were put on board a ship, which sailedfor the Faroes but as no convoy was availablreturned to Scotland in March. During thisvoyage the party were kept as prisoners byone TOROPCHENKO, who made no secret of thefact that trial and perhaps death awaitedthem in Russia. This man is now at Invernessliving in the same hotel as the threemembers of the party. All of the peopleconcerned were Austrians who originallywent to Russia at the time when an openinvitation was given to refugees fromEuropean communist parties to come and takeup work in Russia. Wethered thinks thatthe possibility that any member of the partyhad a role of penetration in this countrymay be dismissed. They are genuinelyataegEefReferefcehaifa/fot should they be sentback and anxious to give all the factsin their possession in the hope that theymay be allowed to remain here or go tothe U.S.A. Wethered concludes that noneof them knew for certain what exactlytheir presence in Austria was designedto serve. It is clear that they were toform some sort of information service, andtwo of them strongly suspect that theirchief role would have been a post-warone. They all said that instructions,requests for information etc. were onlyto be ansmitted to them after theirarrival in Austria and when they had setup wireless communication with Russia.The present position is that as it isobviously impossible for them to remainhere, the F.O. is at present consideringa plan by which certain facts should becommunicate to the Americans, and thatif the Russian ship puts in at an Americanport in the Panama Canal or elsewhere, asis probable, the party should be arrested,taken off the ship, and subsequentlyallowed to escape.On 20-5.43 we heard that the body ofMINCEMEAT had been washed up at Huelvaand had been taken in charge by the spanishNaval Authorities.It was announced on the Bth May that Nehad captured both Tunis and Bizerta at oneblow, and that the Germans were now retreat-ing into the Cape Bon Peninsula.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/191234On 11.5.43 Curry was seconded to S.I.S. totake over and work up their Communistsection. The idea is that he is lent forabout a year, and will work at Broadway.He will however continue to edit the GermanS.S book, the next edition of which ithas been decided to bring out about November.He seems quite pleased at the idea ofstarting in on this new job, which willcertainly give him something to get histeeth into, as S.I.S. have done nothingabout the Communists for the last threeyears.Asst. Commissioner Kemp and Sub-Inspectorf Regarof the R.C.M.P. have come over on a two weeksvisit and are going to be given as muchinformation and instruction as they want.According to Mills there are large gaps intheir knowledge of the various sides ofSecurity work which will have to be filled.(12/5)The papers this morning/had the news of thePMs latest visit to Roosevelt, the secretof which had been well kept in advance thistime. There was only one rumour as far asI know about it, which appeared on thetelephone check for KUH on May 5th.On 15.5.43 we heard that von ARNIM is cominghere as a prisoner. He will probably behoused with the Panzer Generals. It will beinteresting to hear what he has to say tothem. The war in Africa is over. TheGermans surrendered with masses of equip-ment, guns, petrol, etc. still available tothem, all of which is now in our hands.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/191240Von ARNIM was taken prisoner by the 4thIndian Division.We have now heard from Mills that thepackage which SIS were sending from New Yorkto Lisbon for delivery to Springbok's coveraddress, giving particulars of times when hewould attempt transmissions, was mishandledby the New Yor office and sent by sea insteadof by air, SO that it could not reachLisbon before the dates on which the trans-missions were supposed to take place. Theattempts to establish Springbok as a XX havetherefore been frustrated.Dragonfly has made contact with the Germans,one hour late. The Germans announced thatthey had a message for him, which willpresumably be received next week.Garcia ARMAS has deposited with Richard Butlerthe sum of E2,375 for the account of "DouglasWills". When the 225,000 pesetas have beenpaid over in Madrid he will give instructionsthat it may be released.Mutt and Jeff's w/t sets were both workinglast week, one from Scotland and the otherfrom London. It appears from messagesreceived that the Germans intend to dropsabotage material at the end of May. Plansare accordingly going ahead for working outa scheme. to sabotage the power station atBury St. .Edmonds. On investigation it wasfound that Basingstoke was unsuitable forvarious reasons. The Germans will pe infor medCatalogue Reference:KV/4/191941that Jeff has been posted to Bury St. Edmondsand he will then put up his revised project.At the Wednesday meeting on 19.5.43 Milmoreported the arrival here of the Belgianagent Jean HUY SMANN.HARLEQUIN is packing up on us.Stopford' agent Joseph who has just returnedfrom Lisbon, was approached there by the Japsand asked to act as an agent in this country.They suggested various sabotage schemes tohim, one to function in Glasgow in September.He was given a cover address in Lisbon,a seal specially made for him with hismonogram on it to seal the letters he wouldsend back by courier, and a promise of awireless set which would be sent in separateparts by degrees through the courier whowould bring his letters.On 22.5.43 The Soviet Government announcedthe disbanding of the Communist International.It has been decided to withdraw the chargesagainst DITCHFIELD, who turned out to be 17 yeyears of age, and to commit him to an approvedschool till he is 19.Jean HUY SMANN has been identified with thepreviously mentioned ISOS character JeanLEGRAND or LATOUR. One Gerard "P" left forU.K. on 19th May. So far unidentified.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/191May 3lstI returned from sick leave this morning.The principal things of interest seem to behat:Plan MINCEMEAT has been an unqualifiedsuccess. It has been reflected both in ISOSand MSS and it seems that a number of troopshave in consequence been sent to Greece.A post mortem was held, and the conclusionreached was that the man had been in thewater for 10 days or a fortnight, whereashe cannot have been afloat for more than 48hours. Had the post mortem been properlyconducted it would have disclosed that therewas no water in the lungs. The "death" ofthe "Major" has been reported officially inthe Gazette, and "relatives" have sentwreaths.GARBO has had another great success. He hasreceived a code which GC & CS say is almostthe equivalent of a one time table. What ismore important is that he has instructionsto use our army procedure in transmittinghis messages. The preamble and conclusionof his cypher message will indicate thathis messages are British Army communicationsand they will not therefore be recorded byvoluntary interceptors. The replies to hismessages will be in Abwehr procedure. Itwill not be clear who the recipient is ineither direction. GARBO has also a completetable of call signs, times and frequenciesup to Feb. 1944.Catalogu DUCK HOgueaefteneeded4nghe special job of getti243the Spanish tapes again.MENEZES has been reprieved.Looking at the move of the dissolutionof the Comintern at a distance, I came tothe conclusion that probably it would consti-tute no real change but that firstly itwould be a sericus blow to Goebbels, secondlyto the trade unions and labour parties whichthe Party was seeking to affiliate with,and lastly it would facilitate the rapproche-ment with the USA who have always been veryapprehensive of Comintern activities. Icannot believe tha the good W rk will not goon as before, and that it is far too valuablea weapon in the hands of Russia to be lightlyabandoned. It So s that the party herewere taken by surprise. They had receivedno prior notification of the contemplatemove.Harmer, who has been waiting for Mutt'ssabotage equipment in Aberdeenshire, reportsthat the plan came in to drop the materialsome 10 or 15 miles away from the arrangedspot. It was picked up by a farmer. Twohundred yards from where the parachute wasdropped there was a mobile R.A.F. beaconwhich may have been mistaken for Harmer'selectric flashes. The sabotage equipmentwas contained in a suitcase, dimensions14" X 10" X 4". Inside were an S.0.E. clamp,an S.0.E. flare and an S.0.E. detonatorcontainer, plus 1400. We are not acknow-ledging receipt and are going to suggest goingout again, i.e on the assumption that weCatalogueoreterenceokti4nolcontainer being found.Dick has had a conversationwith Frost. Itseems that the latter is likely to take ajob under Fladgate which will involve hislecturing to signals units on signalssecurity.Not much progress seems to have been madeon the Second Front. I1 telegram has beensent to Hill-Dillon asking him if he wantsJohn Mair. This is a pity. I think thatit should have gone to Kenneth Strong, DMINorth Africa, who would have given ita moresympathetic reception. Hill-Dillon willprobably consult Trevor-Waileon.I saw Duff and took him the MT5 report.He seemed very interested, particularlyin MINCEMEAT and GARBO.I saw Denham who is leaving for America onFriday. He seemed more or less to agreewith my views about what was necessary outthere. We both thought however that it wouldbe unwise to prejudge the case until it hadbeen thoroughly investigated.June lstI attended the Director's meeting. TheD.G. made a statement about a large numberof arriy ls from abroad at Camberwell andthe LRC. The situation has now become acute,and considerable pressure was being put uponus by the H.O. He did not think this wasreally justifiable. As far as he knew therehad been no complaints from the Allied Govts.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/191Tris A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONHE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958. lo De0\for about a year, neither aa ne think thatan increased of examining staff was justifi-able in the light of the present man-powersituation. Jim Hale dre' attention to; t.hlefact that mnost of our troubles with regardto internment vere due to bad accommodationPeople did not mind SO much being detainedfor a matter of weeks provided conditionspre tolerable. Camberell was under theLCC and was extremely badly run. Sanitaryconditions were bad and there Nas no propercontrol over the guests, some of Whomperiodically walked out. The D.G. saidthat he thought the whole matter shouldbe putror the same footing as the LRE, withimproved accommodation etc. Later DiCk hada meeting with Baxter and Brook-Booth in orderto get our requirenents quite clear. Opinionshave been some that revised during my absence.Dick thinks we still want improved accommo-dation at the Oratory Schools, with agrange-ments for segregation. He says Ne have nodifficulty with 12(5)A orders when the caseis a fairly doubtful one. When sending someont.o the Oratory Schools it has been necessaryget a 12(5) order if only temporarilyas it was not considered possible to holdsomeone in semi-detention on an order refusingleave to land. He thinks we should sendmore cases to 020 if they are really douotfuland that for the rmeainder Dropk-Booth shouldpersuade the allied governments not to takedoubtful cases into the forces until we hadconducted 3 thorough examination. Brook-Boothis quite confident that the various 2eme bureaatalogut RefPretfcetKVi4Agry out enquiries oncetheir natlonais are absorbed into the forces.1On the other hand however if they are keptout of the forces we have achance of makingmuch more searching enquiries. I told Dicktat I was quite agreeable to this line butthe trouble in the past had been thatenquiries in E.Division had been of a verydesultory kind. If they were now going totake over this responsibility they must doit thoroughly, with special facilities etHe said that Brook-Booth quite understoodthe position and was prepared to act onthose lines.Lennox came to see me and gave me a generaloutline of futureplans. There does.not seemto have been any particular material changesince I left, except that a rather momentousaddition was decided at the WashingtonConference. The Germans have about 19,000troups in Sicily and about 8,000 in Sardinia.The remainder of the forces are Italian.There are very few German troops in Italy.June 2ndI took the Wednesday meeting. I raisedtwo points on minutes of former meetings.It seems that quite a number of prisonerstaken by the Americans in .Africa are claim-ing to be Poles or Yugoslavs who were forcedto serve in the German Army. They DOW wishedto fight for the Allies. It seemed to methat they might provide a valuable recruitingground for ourselves,S. I.S. or S.O.E. Ifconsidered satisfactory the could asbeusedCatafogueRefeferce:KVI4/191Even 11they were wrong I don't see that we had muchto lose. T.A R. is going to take this matterup with roley and John Senter.The other question related to the examinationof returning escapers and evaders. From aremark of Jock Whyte's it seems that theygive a certain amount of information aboutdesirables, escape routes etc. I thoughtthat this information should be supplied tothe LRC for X inclusion in the InformationIndex. Jock Whyte undertook to get intotouch with Vesey about this matter.Hart spoke about the shooting down of theBOAC plane from Lisbon to U.K. which tookplace yesterday. It seems that accordingto ISOS the Germans had obtained cert.lininformation about the route to be taken bythis plane which had already been attackedon a previous occasion several weeks ago.Grogan mentioned a new proposal made by theInternational Red Cross that H/Ws should behlowed to communicate under certain restric-tons with their relatives by wireless. Itwas suggested that provided such messageswere delayed for 14 days no very great harmcould result. Jock Whyte suggested that inthe light of M. M.I.9 I. experience which showedthat our P/Ws send parts of the Same messagein different letters despatched by 5 or 6different people from the same camp, it mightbe advisable to do as the Italians did,namely to vary the period of hold-up from aCatalogue week to Refeopte&:kvierggnally 6 months Penggnally I feel ratherwheter we should not veto the wholeTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED2u"IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.scheme, as it will either mvoive U inL good deal afwork or be somewhat dangerous.have asked Grogan to let me have a C py ofthe proposal for careful consideration.I lunched with Mountain. It seems that he isgoing back to his company, the Eagle Star,owing to the death of one of his directorHe is very anxious to continue to do somepart time work for intelligence. Hiscompany has very wide ramifications. It isa pity in a way that he is going as he wasa great ally of ours on the Second Frontquestion.I saw Denham and sugge ted to him that eitherhe or Mills might usefully visit the ChicagoIntelligence School and let us know in somedetail what form the instruction took andwhether we could contribute nything from hereI said that I was not very anxious to senda Liaison Officer to Chicago as suggestedby Ramsbotham. Such a person, with all roundexpert knowledge, Nould be difficult to fir,and would soon get out of date. It would vemuch better if we gave the Americans acourse over here. Denham agreed and saidthat he was making enquiries.The D.G. showed me a letter thcit he had hadfrom C. about ebster.theS. S.1.S. representative in S.Africa, nad apparent-ly complained that ebster Was unsuitable andsomewhat indiscreet. I said that I thoughtthat during my absence Michael Ryde hadCatalogye yeeReferngeskYIAgT freely in confidenceabout his difficulties with Webster. the D.G.said he would very much Like to see anycorrespondence of the kind Harker hadalready shown me a letter that he had hadfrom Ryde. He had told the D.G. that Rydewas not happy but had not shown him theletter. Meanwhile I had seen a letterwhich John Phipps had forwarded on.Ipersuaded Harker that we should snow bothletters to the D.G. It was no good lettinghim take up cudgels on behalf of Websterin his reply to C. unless he did SO afterdue consideration of all the informationavailable. Harker agreed, and we showed theletters to the D.G. He said that in replyingto C. he would bear them in mind.June 3rdI have been looking through the Second Frontfile and find that there have been severalconferences in the W.O. about the establish-ment of an M.I. unit. The last paper is datedth May but there is still no final decision.ES REGARDS OURSELVES; IT IS SUGGESTED THATEITHER WE SHOULD BE APPOINTED to the .I(b)unit or to the I(b) staff. It seems incrediblethat after 4 years of war we should not yetbe clear as to the position of an M.I. staffwhich is to proceed with an expeditionaryforce. The whole matter has been brought toa head by a visit here of several mysteriousofficers from the N.0. saying that they wereconnected with oper tion "Horrified and hadbeen advised to call on us and in particularon .1C.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/19195150:The operation was too secret for them totell us what it was or where they were goingand they did not seem at all clear about theirduties. They were vaguely interested incounter-sabotage. I am taking this matterup with the D.G. and Harry Allan. John Mairhas been standing by for Huskey for thelast two months and I rather wonder whetherhis services are not required or those ofany of the other officers. I am suggestingto the D G. that these points should be takenup on a high level in order that we may knowpositively one way or the other. If they donot want us we can dispose of our officersto other organisations where they would bebetter appreciated. It seems clear thatthe specialised knowledge and informationavailable here is regarded as of some import-ance. We must therefore either be regardedas a centre for training service personneldetailed to go on foreign expeditions or wemust have a definite commitment to supplyand train such officers either from ourexisting personnel or from other sources.At present we have no positive commitmentalthough we have been told by the D..I.that he is most grateful for our offer tosupply trained personnel for I(b) work.At present there seems to be some idea thatpeople with the requisite experience and know-ledge of officers of this department can beturned out at the llth hour by sending themround here to read a few documents.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/191251I had a long talk with Finney, who isapersonal friend of Felix Cowgill, about therelations bet een .Division and Section V.He seems to have a very sound appreciatiorof Felix's faults and his virtues. Finneyhimself has been much impressed by theefficiency and help of the officers who havebeen preparing him for the job he is to takeon in India. He realises that you cannotrun a show of this kind on rigid lines andthat it is necessary to employ a wide varietyof people of different kinds of qualificationsSome must be field workers and others muethave organising ability and some again musthave high intellectual and academic qualifica-tions Felix's idea is "you only want fieldworkers", and that the work of people likeGwyer and others who compile memoranda onthe theory of DA work etc. and on the Abwehrare unnecessary and a waste of time. Hecannot appreciate the value of periodicallysitting back and trying to take stock ofthe position and see the direction in whichyou are going. His work is very largelyon a day to day ad hoc basis. Hinney knewFelix well in India and actually took overfrom him. At that time Felix was passionateabout communism. He thought it was theonly thing that mattered. Finney disagreedwith him. He thought that at that stage,namely 1938, D.I.B. ought to be turningtheir attention far more to the Axis. Felixslightly resented Finney's disagreement. Hesaid that Felix was a man who always tried tokeep all the details in his own hands and runCatalogue Reference:KV/4/191159the department as a one-man show. In hisrecent conversations he has told Felix thathe thinks he is making a great mistakeand causing much friction by his attitudetowards .Division. In particular he hastold him that his behaviour in regardingpeople in this department as not fit andproper persons to be made aware of secretsources of information is entirely unre son-able and causing a good deal of resent-ment. He has also tried to impress upon himthat so-called "intellectuals" form anextremely important part of the organisationand could not possibly be dispensed with.Felix remains more or less mute to theseaccusations and shows no readiness to makehimself more pliable. I said that if he didL should be very ple sed to talk to him butthat at the moment I felt htat our pointsof view were SO fundamentally different thatwe were not likely to make any progress.Finney had already suggested to Felix that heshould try and get together with us but foundhim deeply suspicious. He refused to meetany of us over the dinner table as he thoughtthat would only be a way of getting him toagree to something which he did not intendto give way on. Felix apparently bitterlyresents our efforts to what he calls "encroachon the Second Front. He thinks that it isnone of our business.The D.G. gave a dinner party to Kemp and Reganthe t to RCMP officers who are returning toCanada after spending 6 weeks with us. Kempasked me what exactly Den ham's office wouldbe, as he thought Commissioner Wood would beCatalogue Reference:KV/4/191253anxious to know. I said that Denham wasgoing purely as an organiser of M.I.5 repre-sentation in the Western Hemisphere, whichis to include, Canada, USA and the Caribbean.There would be no point in consulting himon matters of detail affecting the work ofthis office. Liaison would continue asheretofore and Kemp would be at liberty tocorrespond with anybody in the departmentNho he thought might help him. He coudalsoget a certain amount of expert assistancefrom Mills who was well acquainted with theworkings of B.Divsion. Kemp seemed verysatisfied with his visit. He is an extremelylikeable person, though in SO far as ourwork is concerned he is really starting fromscratch. He will be taking over the wholeof the CID at Ottawa on his return.June 4thI have written to Maxwell stating our viewsabout the unsatisfactory cases which we hadto pass through the LRC. We are asking forimproved accommodation at the Uratory Schoolswith opportunity for segregation and we areproposing in future that E. ivision shouldadvise the Allied ovts in unsatisfactorycases not to take them into their forces.This will give us an opportunity of carryingout observation on them after their release frfrom the LRC. Such cases will to some extentbe under the direction of Herbert Hart.I attended a meeting called by the D.G. atwhich Maj. aj.Gen.Cawthorne,I Gen. Cawthorne, DMI India, PeterCatalogue Reference:KV/4/191gouFleming, Vickery,Bamford, and my selwere present. India have been rather inclinedto think that a XX network can be built upon purely deceptio lines. TAR gave a briefsurvey of the work of his section. heexplained how it had been set up primarilyfor CE purposes and that only when it wassatisfactorily established was considerationgiven to strategic deception. it waspointed out that its primary purpose wasinsurance against penetration and thatdeception was really a side line. If theagents were not properly established and theCE aspect were not carefully onsidered, muchvaluable information would be lost. On CElines we had succeeded in learning a greatdeal about the enemy intelligencesystem, inobtaining his secret code, and other methodsof communication such as secret inks and duff.We had also established a position where ourword was likely to carry weight with theenemy rather than that of another agent whomight be outside the ring. We used theorganisation for deception in SO far as it waspossible to do this without jeopardisingits whole structure, According to JohnMarriott's letters from India there has beena certain amount of friction between D.I.Band the military authorities and it is hopedby this talk, which was very sympatheticallyreceived, relations in India may be improved.A letter from John Marriott today seems toindicate that things are moving more in theright direction. DIB will perform similarfunctions to ourselves working in closetouch with the military authorities.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1911s3I took Dicks daily meeting. Herbert mentionedtwo more agents destined for this countryand also the new service between Berlin andB.A. which has now been broken. thisservice is being run by the SD. Thereis a certain amount of information aboutcouriers which may be of value in Trinidad,when examining the crews of Spanish ships.There is evidently a certain amount offriction between the Sd and theAbwehrowing to the former's incursions into theforeign field.Milmo mentioned that the Argentine authoritieshad captured quite an important German agentwho had left certain of his papers on boardship with confederates among the crew. Itis intended to interrogate these people whenthe boat reaches Trinidad.B-W mentioned the KOBBE case. From recentB.J.S it was apparent that when he arrivedat Louisiana his bag was searched in a veryrough and ready manner by the Americans.There is still no solution to the difficultyabout showing B.J.S to the FBI representativeshere. I am going to try and take this upagains with Stewart Menzies.June 5thG.C & C.S have given us an appreciation ofGARBO'S cypher. They say that it has 3 out-standing features, it is new, it is perhapsthe highest grade cipher ever used by theAbwehr in their experience, and it isCatalogue Reference:KVI4/19125identical in principle with the cipherrecently, since lst May 1943, given by theGermans to their most important Spanishoutstations, Huelva, Bilboa, San Sebantian,Melilla and Tetuan. These ciphers have notbeen broken but with GARBO'S informationit should be possible to deal with them withina period of 2-3 months. It would appeartherefore that the Germans must have goodconfidence in GARBO and also in hisimmunity from danger of capture. At thesame time the Germans may believe, and thebelief is probably justified, that possessionby us of this agent's cypher would notautomatically "blow" the cyphers of theSpanish sttions. Each use of the cypherhas a different key process and without aknowledge of this the eypher has a good claimto be considered insoluable. The bwehrhave begged GARBO to guard his code withthe utmost care.I saw Cimperman this morning. He told me thatalthough he was getting onvery well witheverybody he was conscious of a slight feelingwhich he thought was fully justified, thatwe were not getting our full quota from theFBI. He felt sure that Thurston would seethat this was set right. He thought that thepresence of Mills in the Bneeau would makea vast difference. I said that I hoped verymuch that Ladd would see his way to comingover here as I thought it would do muchtowards inspiring confidence in our officersand would ease his mind when releasinginformation of a delicate kind. Cimpermanthought that we might possibly send him aCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1912$7special invitation as soon as Denham hasfinished his conversations with Hoover.Haylor and CO. have arrived in the Middle East.Kenneth Younger is probably going to be takenon by Maunsell.At the daily meeting I discussed the case ofthe SOE agent who came hereginally as a deserter and was subsegnentlydropped in Germany. He returned here againpassing through SanSebastian with a fictitiousstory. Apparently nis masters at SUE bellevehim. Fersonilly lly II think he probably plantedhimself on SOE in the first instance, andthat he is purely and simply a German agent.He is prepared to go back again providedhe is not sent to Germany. This I interpretas being the feeling of his masters in Germanythat he would be of much more use in occupiedterritory. SOE are now proposing to use himagain on some lone job. It seemed to methat in the interests of SIS and of otherorganisations of the kind, he should not beagain let loose on the continent. He shouldil act be interned under the hoy ll Preroga-sive. L am proposeing to have a talk withField Robinson about his case. Milmo seemedto think that we should be within our rightsin refusingto allow this man's employment.I do not however wish to have a row with SOEif it can be avoided. Day mentioned that he hagone into the case of the FLW of the GermanHinaEarG namet FRIED who said that hehadat lamborough Head in 1940Catalogue Reference:KV/4/191THIS IS A COPY259ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958and taken him off again This agent had donevaluable work in reporting the departureof certain aircraft which were shot downover Noyway. There seems to be somefoundation of fact of this story. Firstlythe aircraft were brought down in somewhatysterious circumstances, and secondlythe local police did report two somewhatmysterious men rowing out to sea in a boat.The other cases mentioned by FRIED weresolely hearsay. and probably untrue.June 7thGelatine received E238 on the 2nd April.On 26th May Dragonfly succeeded inre-establishing contact. He Nas toldthat a diplomat travelling to this countryat the end of May might bring jewellery whichDragonfly could sell. Watchdog has receiveda questionnaire which seems to disclosethat the Germans are interested in his case.I took the daily meeting. Mrs.Spring preduced an ISOS message indicating that theAbwehr in Lisbon have a fairly good ideaabout our future plans in the Mediterrinean.Milmo mentioned that there were difficultiesabout MENEZES correspondence from Dartmoor.There is no evidence at the moment that theGermans are aware that MENEXES has beenreprieved, although it is quite possiblethat the information has reached themthrough some Portuguese Govt. channel.Catatague Referenscerkaeacegban be censored if itis considered in any way objectionable.259Our only course therefore is. to act on theassumption that any letter MENEZES write isbound to be open:to some bjection. Milmothinks that the Germans may well consider itcurious that in no single case haveparticulars been published regarding theexecution of a spy who has been in thecountry for any length of time. All theablished stories relate to spies who have bbeen captured immediately on arrivil Inthe case of wenenes he thiks it desirablethat if B. 1A agents are not to be com-promised the facts should as far as possiblebe withheld. I asked Vesey to considercarefully the question of the circulatianof the RES report. it seemed to me thatpossibly we were going outside the termsof our agreement vita SIS that detailsregarding their organisations should not becirculated. Vesey pointed out that thedetails appearing in the report referred onlyto the cases of organisations ind individualswho were already in the hands of the Germans.I am going to discuss this matter tomorrowith Baxter.The P.M. returned from tae USA via NorthAfrica on Saturday.I have drafted a note to the U.G. dealingwith my scheme for improving the prospectsof promotion in this office after the war.It is based on the suggestion that the threeService Intelligence Depts. should appointa permanent civilian intelligence staff whowould give continuity to the work. AtCatatsguret ERefereroeekd/4/ngttuating body. As soonTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION2603 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 19582ouas their officers get a grip on their subjecthey are Nafted away to other spheres. Wethen have to try and re-educate the newrecruits. Promotion could then takeplace within these civilian service staffs,possibly SOE, S.I.S. and ourselves. Loxley,with whom Idiscussed the question thoughtthat certain F.0. posts might also be laopen. Financially I have suggested thatall services should be paid from theSecret Service vote and that the officersshould be uniformly graded in a looselyknit "Intelligence Corps". The advantageof the scheme would be (1) to increase thefield of promotion and thereby make intelli-gence work more attractive as a career tothose who have high academic qualifications,(2) to give wider experience toall workersin the intelligence field, (3) to providea well trained nucleus of intelligence workeron which to build in time of emergency, (4) tcretain for Intelligence as a whole theexperience of those who are Working in itsvarious branches, and (5) to promote:better understanding among all workers inthe Intelligence field.Field-Robinson came to see me about KurtI told hin that I hadread the story and found it singularlyunconvincing. E admitted thit I had nothad the advantage or disadvant ige oi seeingpersonally. I was only looking atthe case in cold blood. nobinson admitted ththat the storywas an extremely peculiar oneCatalogueaRetereniceekviaportbona fidesalthough of course he said he could not beTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDWNDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION263 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.>ov100% certain. He thought that in SOme ways-was slightly mad. In any case heappeared to be unaware of the enormous risksthat he would be running if he went onanother mission. He has gladly accepted thejob of blowing up the railway near Mainz.I said Iwas quite satisfied from the secur-ity point of view in this country,providecCOE could say thathad been isolateduroughout his stay here. robinson gave mean absolute guarintee that this was SO. Onthe other hand I thought there were certainrisks in having a man of nis type rollinground the continent and possibly makingcontact with our controls or other organisa-tions, particularly if ne had any thing inte nature of a passport. After furtherdiscussion we agreed that the possessionof SOE material, hich was NON known to bethoroughly blown, would not give him theentree. He would have no other credentialsexcept German Army papers, which Nould gethim nowhere with the British. There was per-haps a slight risk of his getting mixed upwith other people in Spain on his way outnd learning something about escape routes.To obviate this hobinson sid that he wasgiving very careful instructions that if heturned up he should be isolated from anyother escapees and the fact reported immedia-tely. Robinson said that if we Nere reallyapprehensive they would call the whole thingoff. I said th t provided the above precau-tions were taken I did not see that we oranybody else had anything to lose.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/192hHollis came to see me about telephone checksand special facilities on certain doubtfulmembers of the Russian Trade Delegation. Itseems likely that the F.O. will agree to thisprovided a suitable letter is put up to Eden.The F.O. seem to regard it as their preroga-tive to sign telephone checks for anyonehere who has diplomatic privilege. Ipresume that they base this on the oldanalaogy of special material which asalways worked by SIS. Such an arrangementwould be quite satisfactory to us providedthere is no .objection.Brooman-White discussed with me futureaction in regard to the Portuguese. We havereceived a letter from Philby showing theaction of the Portuguese authorities on therepresentations made by us about Germinexpionage in Portugal. On the 19th Feb.they arrested MENEZES' sister, MARCELO andMIRANDA. The sister was released afterinterrogation. On l0th March they weregiven charts illustrating the networkof FOESTER, NELTZIEN, SCHMIDT and GRIMM.Still concentrating on the MENEZES casethey arrested a number of people inthe Ministry of Foreign Affairs who werethought to be connected with a cypher leakageThe principal offender, CARDOZO, provedunbreakable and was released from prisonbut not reinstated in her former post. Anew phase began on 26.3.43 when Salazargaven the international police a copy ofthe charts and instructions to arrest every.-Cataloeuepeereie:Rm4rg in them. Ten day Slater the arrest of the Germans themselves3began, not only in Portugal but also in theAzores. In middle April however the Germaninfluence made itself felt. By order of theMinistry of the Interior FOESTER andSCHMIDT were released pending expulsion.No expulsion has SO far taken place. On27/4 three wireless operators workingunder ANNES and SCHMIDT were arrested.KunoWELTZIEN'S arrest appeared to presentcertain difficulties since two of hisprinciple agents enjoyed the protection ofthe head of the Secret Service of thePortuguese region. Chance however put intothe hands of SIS evidence since proved tobe a forgery which seemed to indicate thatFORGES and WELTZIEN were attempting topenetrate the War Ministry. They werearrested on 10/5. and 21/5 respectively.Anothernduckyechance discovery of MARCADO'SW/T set in the false bottom of his mother'sdog-kennel led to the re-arrest of ANNESand further evidence against SCHMIDT.It does not seem that our Minister, SirRonald Campbell has been of much assistanceand any srcesses are entirely due to theefforts of Philby and the local represen-tative of SIS. The Ambassador has shanbut luke-warm interest in the affair.It is our intention to bring some furtherpressure to bear on the F.O.Mountain of Home Forces who is going backto his own firm, came once more to tell methat he would like to do any work he couldon our behalf.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/19126uJune 8thAt the D.G.S meeting Brook-Booth statedthat PWE had asked whether we had anyobjection to their putting personal messagesof a rather obscure kind on the bottomofleaflets which they were dropping inBelgium. These messages would be fromBelgian citizens here who had beenresident for several years. The ideawas that such messages would induce peopleto pass the leaflets to each other. It isproposed that the vetting of these peopleshould be left entirely in the hands ofPWE. L said that L thought it wouldprobably not be long before the Germanstook advantage of this method of communica-tion, and that I doubted whether it wouldmeet with the approv l of SIS and SOE, andstill more doubtful of the value of anyleaflets dropped in Occupied Territory atthis stage. They might be of some use if wewere contemplating an invasion of thecontinent tomorrow. The B.G. ruled thatthere was no security aspect from our pointof view.Lennox gave us a talk about future operationsand the decisions at washington. Theimmediate ones were already known to us.Burma is being seriously considered in alimited way during 1943. Our bombing andfighting strength here is to be rapidlyincreased during the next few months.American strength in this country woulde roughly double our own. American troopsCataloguebRefereieenevi41girg numbers and when365the continental fromt opened will be roughlyin the proportion of 2-1 as regards our ownforces.I had a talk with Baxter and Dick aboutthe LRC. We agreed on the btter thatwas to go to C. in answer to his complaintabout interrogations. I have also askedBaxter to consider very carefully the questicof eliminating from the LRC report informa-tion which has a bearing upon SIS organisa-tions abroad. I am convinced that forthe purposes of theirwork it is probablyessential for section heads at the LRC to seethese reports but it should 1 think bearranged that when they have seen them theyshould return them to Baxter. Distributionup here should be limited probably toDick and myself. In order to meet thedifficulty about the copies sent to Maxwelland Creedy it may be necessary to havean expurgated edition.L lunched with rr. He mentioned the caseof a Miss CATTO, who had found her wayinto the Planning Section of the W.O.She is apparently a night-club hostess whois more often tight than sober. When inher cups she is singularly indiscreet.She was given the all clear after whatwas described as positive vetting. Thisonly included the pasing of her name overScotland Yard records. Orr quite rigitlythinks that more positive enquiriesshould be made about people before theytake up jobs of this kind. It was thoughtCatalogue Reference:KV/4/191inadvisable to sack her since she knows mostthings about our plans for the e"hext 9 months.She has been transferred to a trainingbranch of the W.O. where she can do lessharm.Frost came in to see me. He talked aboutSignals Security and mentioned also thathe thought there might be some opening forhimself in PWE if they were contemplatingtaking part in Second Front operations.I told him that they Nere, and that I thoughtthat they came under the Force Commander.I quite agreed with him that his presentposition did not give him much scope.I had a meeting with Brook-Booth, Groganand Stopford about allied seamen C rry ingletters from this country to Eire whichwere ultimately destined for OccupiedTerritory. There is now a great deal ofevidence to this effect. It was decided,subject to preliminary discussion by Brook-Booth with the Allied Govts. (1) to destroyall such mail detected by censorship asa deterrent, (2) to inform the Allied Govts.of our proposed action, (3) to get them tpost up notices on trawlers etc. making itclear that severe penalties would ensue ifseamen were found to be acting as couriers.I had a meeting with the D.G. and Harry aboutthe Second Front. It was byy no meanssatisfactory. I rather let myself go onthe whole question. Harry replied by sayingthat we had made our offer to the DMI andpresumably it was felt that our officerCatalogue Reference:KV/4/191THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION9673 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958aeolshould not proceed with the assault party.I said that I doubted whether the matterhad really been considered. Hill-Dillonwho had fixed up the arrangements of theSI(b) unit with Vivian, was obviouslyopposed to our participation in Second Frontactivities. When he got our ire aboutMair he would probably have had a talk withwho had doubtless gone backwell primed by Cowgill. With this as abackground excuses had been given thatwe were not catered for in Establishment.This is true, since the W.O. deliberationshave been SO dragged out that they havenot yet decided about the set-up of MilitaryIntelligence accompany ing the expeditionaryforces. Had we SO to speak been down inthe book our officer would have been in.Africa. If he joined the unit after theassault he would obviously be at a gravedisadvantage. If as II understood 3 SI(b)officers were proceeding in the first partywho were not particularly well qualified forthe work in hand, it seemed ridiculousthat our officers should not accompany them.D.G. entirely agreed with my point of viev.It seemed fairly clear that Harry did notsee his way to taking things up again withDMI. I then suggested that he could takeit up on the basis of the new operationwhich had just been planned and which wouldstart from this country. It was a matter ofsome urgency to us to know whether we weregoing to be called upon to supply an officer.If SO Ne should have to get down to hisCalaloiteirererencekipangrmmnediately.. immediately. Harryseemed to think that we should be required26to send someone, but he has undertaken tofind out. I think that in his heart hefeels that the whole thing has beenrather mishandled and that there is adefinite attempt by SIS to keep us offthe map. The D.G. told me afterwards thathe intended that he and I should go aerand see Duff Cooper about the whole matteras soon as the latter returned.June 9thI had a meeting with Denniston and DickButler about the enemy alien situation.I agreed that since my memo of 2.2.43 waswritten the situation had someNh t changed,and that we might be able to ignore to alarge extent any spy or 5th column aspectprovided there was no major catastrophe onthe Russian Front, when the problem mightonce more become acute.I did not think however that we could ignorethe postvar problem. Denniston said thatat the moment our knowledge ot enemy alicin this country could go no further thanthe cases which had for one reason or anotercome to our notice. There was a large numberof enemy aliens here about whom both we andthe police knew extremely little. He sawno way of tackling the problem unless he re-viewed some 60,000 cases, which he could notpossibly do with the staff at his disposal.I wondered whether if possibly the RSLOS coulundertake some of the work seeing that at theCataloguetRetereneerkvt4/ti9dr slack. Butlerthought such enquiries were not likely to269be very profitable since Germans who mightwish to remain here were probably carefullykeeping out of trouble. There is certainlysomething in this argument. On the otherhand it is not likely that they will beany more active at the time when theircase comes up for review by the H.0. Weshall then be faced with an avalanche ofapplications for enemy aliens to be allowedto remain here and I am seriously afraidthat we shall be singularly ill-equippedto deal with them.It was agreed that Denniston would have atalk with Prestige of the H.O. about futurepossibilites, and th t we should thenconsider the matter ag in with a view toformulating some line of action.The D.G. spoke to me about my post-warscheme for promotions. He thought theidea was a good one but did not wish atthe moment to cloud the issue with suggestionabout changed inadepartments outside ourown. He thought the first step was to getourselves established.I took the Wednesday meeting. Hart saidthat an ARGENTINE national of German origincalled Oscar LIEHR had been recruited bythe Abwehr in Lisbon. He has been inter-cepted by the control at Trinidad. He hasconfessed that he was carrying out a missionfor the Abwehr. A Spaniard who has beenworking at Vigo is being sent here by theAbwehr. He is to receive a questionnaire,a. sum of money in English pounds and secretCatalogue Reference:KV/4/191270ink. He has been given a cover address.The Abwehr at Vigo are expecting the arrivalof an agent from London. This man willtravel via Lisbon. Efforts are being madeto identify him. (Dashwood has returned from Lisbon. I methim for a moment at the club last night butit is clear that he had made no sensationaldiscovery about the Lisbon leakage. Ishould doubt very much whether he had hadeither the time or the requisite knowledge togo into the matter very deeply. I havearranged that he should come and see Hart.Milmo and I went over to see Maxwell aboutthe MENEZES case and about Otto WITT.Maxwell who is going away on leave called inNewsam. It was agreed that MENELES shouldbe kept from communicating with the outsideworld The Governor would be instructed tosend all his letters here and we wouldhold them up. MENEZES would not be informed.It was felt that as the Lord Chief Justicehad expressed the view that no publicityshould be given to the trial and sub-sequent reprieve it was up to the authoritiesto do everything in their power to preventthe information getting back to the Germans.It was admitted however that the arrangementproposed could not possibly give 100%guarantee. It was explained, that it was inour interests that in SO far as the outsideworld was concerned MENEZES disappeared inan atmosphere of mystery. We did not wishto lose the deterrent effect of his trialand sentence which would undoubtedly be aCatalogue Reference:KV/4/19127'matter for discussion in diplomatic circles.We were however anxious that nothing shouldbe known about the reprieve except by thosein the Portuguese Govt. who would be boundto know. There was another and more subtlereason for keeping matters secret. Do farthe public had been given details of some 13or 14 cases where a trial and executionhad taken place. In each of these cases itwas clear that the man had been apprehendedimmediately on arrival. The case ofMENEZES was the only one SO far where a manwho had been resident here for some timehad been apprehended and put on trial. fromtime to time it becomes necessary for us toliquidate a XX Who may be tied up with otheragents. The Germans know that this man hasbeen in this country for some time and ifit is our custom to publish details aboutlong term spies would naturally expect someannouncement to be made by the press tothe effect that the man had been caught andexecuted. If they were to reason on theselines they might become seeptical about thebona fides of quite a number of our XXs. .tis far preferable that the Germans shouldthink that we do not always publish detailsand it is quite possible for one of theiragents here simply to disappear the assump-tion being that he has been tried and excutedwithout publicity.Milmo explained to Maxwell the outline ofthe Case of Otto WITT. It had been raisedagain by a request from Hambro that forsome reason which has always been ratherobscure to us, Otto WITT should not beCatalogue Reference:KV/4/19121*allowed to write to his wife. Before seeingHambro Maxwell wanted to know the storyfrom us.Lastly we discussed the general arrangementsfor improving the conditions for the examin-ation of people passing through the LRC.Maxwell had passed my letter on to Sir JohnMoylan and seemed to think that the solutionwe had suggested Nould be quite adequate.He and Newsam were however somewhat worriedabout the delays at the LRC and possiblecomplaints. Newsam in fact S id that com-plaints had been received from allied Govts.I challenged him on this point, as I ratherdoubt whether any serious complaints havebeen made. I told him that our relationswith the allied Govt.s were extremely good anand that on the whole they took the viewthat our examination was somewhat lenient.Newsam and Maxwell rather wondered whetherit was not posible to pass certain categoriesthrough more rapidly. It was explained thatto conduct any sort of examination at ll onehad to reckon half a day for each man.-tIt would certainly take two hours toget hi story. Then names had to be lookeaup and checked, his prpperty had to beexamined etc.etc. I then went on to explainhow domplicatedt he whole business had becomeowing to the attempts by the enemy to penetraour own organisations and particularly ourescape routes. It was only by the mostcareful examination, and frequent consulta-tions with other depts. that we could arriveat any conclusions. There were still acertain number of cases where we were forcedCatalogue Reference:KVI4/191273to pass people we did not think had beensatisfactorily cleared. I think they beganto understand some of the real difficultiesthat we had to contend with. I believeMaxwell is to visit LRC and 020 tomorrow.This may give him a better picture of thecomplexity of the work.Frost came to tell me that he had had anotherlong talk with Gen. .Fladgate of army Signals,and ol.Lycett of Army "Y". It seems thatthey nave quite made up their mindsthat their own signal security is bad andneeds going into thoroughly. Simultaneouslywith the report that they will render toPeter Reid's committee they will reportindependently to their own authorities.One of the di ficulties is that en.Fladgate,head of Signals, and the General in chargeof staff duties, have no knowledge of inter-ception services, details of hich are knownto Col.Lycett. Tt is somewhat difficultto expect Army Signals to appreciate therisks which they run if they are notinformed about the technique empl yed and theinformation gained monitoring the enemy'signals. Army Signals are I think going toembark on a programme of education. Atpresent their units in the field are totallyuninstructed.I dined with Peter Reid who is chairman ofthe committee set up by the'Chiefs of Staffto look into the whole question of SignalsSecurity. I put him as completely in thepicture as I could about all our activities.He should be a very great help to us bothCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1912uin the matter of Signals cover for deceptionand of signals security. It seems quiteclear that signals security is fairlydeeply ingrained in the Navy and that theirtechnique and precautions are infinitelysuperior to anyone else's. It is a goodthing therefore that the Navy should bein charge of this committee and shouldinduce the other services and the variouscivilian departments concerned to conformSas far as possible to their standards.Peter I think has a very good idea of whatis required. He told me that his reportfor the Chiefs was very nearly complete.He had very clearly sized up G-P,Maltbyand Frost. He regarded them as blufferswho to some extent were also charlatants.Iexplained to him my position vis a vis allthese people which was that not being atechnical man I never knew when any of themwas speaking the truth.I told Peter about Garbo's new cypher and hisinstructions to use military procedurewhich was an added anxiety. He did not seeany immediate solution of the problem sinpany measures that might be in forcemust first be dependant on getting a markedimprovement in Army Signals discipline, andmachinery for enforcing it. He hadrealised Fladgate's position and very muchdeprecated the situation where people inthat position were left in total ignoranceof our "Y" activities. This was not SO inthe Navy who held a somewhat privilegedposition. I suggested to Peter that Ishould put him in touch with TAR on theCatalogue Reference:KV/4/191275question of signals deception.He very muchwelcomed this idea.Harry Allan told me last night that hewas pressing our Second Front case veryhard with the W.O. They were in theprocess of building up staffs and hethought that we should be required to sendan officer for the Italian expedition whichOwould be leaving this country and also forthe more immediate operation for which Ithink Stopford or Robertson would be suitableJune lOthI had a talk with Adam and Stopiord.. Thelatter is worried about the liaison at Dycebetween Josephine and MacRoberts, It seemsthat Ellman is putting a spoke in the wheelssince MacRobert who is admirably suited isno longer acting as intermediary betweenStopford and Josephine. Adam is going toAberdeen next week and will look into thewhole question.Harry told me this morning that the D.M.I.was going to N.Africa and has been thoroughlyprimed about our Second Front views.The second part of Plan Dream has beensuccessful. E2750 have been paid over todayto Garbors account. This brings his total upto something over E7,000.Harker, Charles,Dick Butler and L had talkabout stepping up the establishment of 020.This will involve making Tin Eye a full colo-Catalegue Referenee:kf191e danger is that it216may make him a little more difficult andincrease separatist tendencies. I thinkhowever that this is a risk that we shallhave to run. It was suggested that if theD. G. agrees to the scheme which has beenput up in order to assist us in gettingstaff of the right calibre, the D.G. should mmake it clear to Tin Eye that this in noway gives him any greater measure ofindependence and that for all intelligencmatters he is to consider himself still aspart of B.Branch.I had a word with Stopford about the possi-bility of his being required for a specialjob. He did not seem to be particuarlyenthusiastic about taking it but I thinkhe would give way if we really wanted him to.He thinks that the problem will be a limitedone. Once liaison nas been established withthe local authorities and a clean-up. hastaken place, it will boil down largely toPort Security Work. I would suggest hisgoing out for a couple of months, and thenhanding over.June llthA certain number of Russians who allege th tthey are eSC ped P/WS are coming through fromMadrid. We have agreed with the Russians togive them full particulars. yAfter a check-uphas been made their visas will be grantedand the men passed through the M. I.9 transitcamp before being handed over to the SovietEmbassy. The Soviet Military Attache hasCatalogue Reference:kVi4/191 reasopabte about the whole business.277Jock Whyte has a story that certain P/Wparcels going to allied nationals are notbeing subjected to censorship Grogan seemsto doubt the accuracy of this statement,which is being checked up. It might consti-tute a loop-hole for sending out plans butthe average time for parcels is about 5 monthsck,Bird, Grogan and I discussed Miss Evans!report and the attitude of SIS. The latterseem satisfied ind we are proposing to leavethe arrangements to them and Herbert. We donot think n ever that they are likely to beparticularly satisfactory or profitable.In connection with Herbert's scheme there isapparently to be a huge censorship conferenceat Miami to which we have been invited.D.B. has I believe suggested that I shouldgo. I do not however feel that I couldattend this conference without a serioustwinge of conscience.C. has written to the D.G. about the exchangeof spies. There is a Frencn national Whoworked for us who is under sentence of de ath,and also several British officers Who workedin iunisia behind the lines and were caughtby the italians. While we would like todo everything in our po over to assist SIS inthis matter, it does not seem that we reaalyare in a position to do SO. first of allwe need German and italin spies recentlycaptured and under sentence of death. withvery few exceptions all our spies are neutraland in the case of those ho have been atCatalogue Reference:KV/4/191020 we could not release them withoutrunning a serious risk of compromising TAR'sD.A.S. There is also the over-ridingconsideration that in this matter the Germanshave no sense of honour and would takeadvantage of the situatior to find out as mucas possible about the spies tht we havecaught. We have suggested to C. that he mighpossibly find some suitable exchange in the9Mid East. EPPLER and SANSTEDE have beenmentioned but as they have been in picklefor some months the chances of their executiowould appear pretty remote to the Germans.Maunsell may however have others.Tangye has produced evidence that informationis reaching the Evening Standar from theircorrespondence in Lisbon. This is carriedin letter form and posted in London, probablyby some member of the crews of the KLM. Iam suggesting to Brook-Booth that he should i:inform the Dutch and that they should warnKLM that if this continues we shall beobliged to search all members of the crewson arrival and departure. It is hoped thatthis will act as a deterrent.Tricycle has succeeded in getting himselfappointed by the Yugoslavs to undertake amission to Portugal and Spain, and is nowbeing prepared for his journey.A letter from KOESBLER enclosing furtherinstructions for PUPPET and the match whichhe needs for secret writing has been receivedin Lisbon for onward transmission.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/191279ISOS reveals that raris has obtained theaid of Berlin in getting Dragonily paid.Berlin is warned that the person paying themoney should not personally visit theaddress given were the money is to bereceived because of the possibility thatDragonfly is not genuine. The courieris coming from Switzerland and may conveiv-ably have some connection with the BUNSENorganisation. He is believed to be adiplomat.I have read a long account by Mawhood ofhis activities in Australia and N.Z InJuly 1940 Mawhood, who was formerly a securityofficer Eastern Command was sent out toorganisea para-military unit on benali ofM.I.R. which subsequently became SOE. Heseems to have turned more oi his attentionto attempts to set up a security office.Hegot himself mixed up in the welter ofdominions politics and the petty jealousiesbetween departments. tremendouss strugglewent on between the military and theCivilians for the control of the SecurityService which was not finally set up until2 years later. It is now a kind of combinedorganisation. Jones has gone, and Brig.Simpson has taken over. There is no doubtthat security in Australia is practicallynon-existent or at any rate of a veryprimitive kind. There are some organisatiodabbling in it, and the military and policewere throwing people into prison and pullingthem out without any rhyme or reason. Jonesappears to be a whole-hearted supporter ofMawhood but the miitery disliked him SO muchCatalogue Reference:KVI4/19.2%that they were wiring more than a year agoto the CIGS to have him removed. If 1remember right, Mawhood is a rather aggres-siveand tiresome type of man. He had noreal charter to deal with security mattersand little experience, except t omnandH.Q. Q. He appeared to be trying to manoeuvrehimself into tae position of importanceand not unnaturally incurred a good dealof odium. He recounts his difficulties aland meetings with high and low at very greatlength but during his stay in Australia andN.Z. never once appears to have reportedhome. We had no responsibility for sendinghim out and his attempt to set himself upas a security adviser was entirely his ownidea. Harry Allen as D.D.M.I(S) W.0. isnow trying to clear up the mess. Until theadvent of rig.Simpson we practically had nocorrespondence of any consequence withAustralia. The 1 ct is that at this distanceit is extremely difficult to know That theyrequire. There must be Jap activitiesgoing on there but there is no evidenceof German espionage.Isaw Duff for a few minutes and gave himsome more recent information about thesubjects dealt with in our last MT5 report.He was going to see the P.M. at 4.30. Ishowed him a copy of G.C &c C S report onGarbo which I think pleased him. If B. lAhave done nothing else for the last 3 years thwould certainly have justified their existencewith this case. I also talked to Duff aboutSignals Security and my talk with Peter Reid.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/191I have had a ongiletter from Cyril Millswho is eagerly awaiting Denham's arrival.He seems to have rather big ideas about the Ssetting-up of an organisation in the USA.He is very emphatic that we should concentratalmost entirely on the FBI to begin withnd only establish with other departmentswhen our position is thoroughly secure.I am inclined to think that he is right.My own view is that good relations withthe FBI after the war are going to be ofgreat importance nd that even if we do notget a very good return for our money now, itis essential to try and build for the future.There will doubtless be an effort to makens revert to the old sy stem of placing ourenquiries through Passport Control, but thisshould I think be strenuously resisted. Itwould in fact be far more logical for M.I.5to take over Passport Control. The latter iscompletely blown as a cover for SIS but asa defensive organisation concerned merelywith preventing, through the visa system,undesirable people from coming to this countryit quite naturally has contacts with localpolice, and 2eme bureaux. It S functionscome far more logically into the C.E. orbit.S.I.S. should really be built up under acommercial cover.I had a talk with TAR and Harmer about thecase of Mutt. Mutt's father is a hair-dresser in Oslo, and has sent a message to hisson by a Miss WHITE, who found nerseli inNorway at the time of the German invasion.She has just been allowed by the Germans toCatalogue Reference:kV/4frone aged mother, age 00.A6VMiss WHITE has told Mutt that for a timehis father was placed in a concentrationcamp. Miss WHITE does not make a particularlygood impression and if she was wrong shemight have been told to give this messagewith a purpose. Mutt should normally react,byt cannot do So because he is not supposedto have disclosed to his father that ne wasgoing to England. Miss WHITE thinks thatMutt is in the Norwegian forces which infact he is, SO that if nything gets backit will not affect Mutt's position.Pantelleria capitulated early this afternoon,ffterracconitunwoars mnertheaynbombardmentover a longish period, both from the sea andfrom the air.June 12thThere many be a sudden change in OperationLifebelt which will in that eventualitybecome Operation Vault. It looks as ifthe Portuguese may agree to our terms inwhich case a brigade may go out in a weekor 10 days time. The security problenwill remain much the same. Harry agreesthat it will not be a very long operationsince once a clean-up has taken placeand the necessary liaison has been estab-lished there ill be nothing much left todo except control the transit shipping.I think Stopford would be much the mostsuitable candidate. He has the right sortof experience and speaks the language.This new move is to protect our Atlanticconvoys both from sea and air. L gatherCatalogue Reference:KV/4/191THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION32A.:OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.that our new ntisupariae vemuurr IS extreme-ly effective. It is a neN type of bomb,small but dropped in large quantities overa considerable area. It clings to the sideof the vessel, explodes and makes a smallhole. It now seems that our troops hadactually landed on Pantellerid before thewhite flag was hoisted. I gather ho'everat there were practicaily no cusualtieson either side.June 15thOn my return from Whit weekend this morningI discussed Operation Vault with Dick, whohad been making the necessary preparationswith Stopford. It appeared at first thatS.I S. did not intend to send anyone butlater Felix intimated that he had raulin training for this job for the last11 days. It seemed i little odd thatwho had only left us a fortnight ago andspeaks only Spanish, should be chosen to goas the SIS representative. Stopford haseen his Brigadier and has been given therank of Major. It seems that Felix intendsto consult "C". I spoke to "u" myseif onthe telephone and said L thought it washighly necessary that we should come tosome arrangement about expeditions of thiskind. I made it very clear to him thatwe had no wish to encroachoupon theirpreserves or muscle in on foreign territory.We felt, and L thought rigntly, that thepresent constitution of I.D. .staffs wastalogueleteeencekyi4/ipte past training ofbes6an I.B. staff officer outside his purelymilitary duties was really in this office.As things were at present, I.B. personnelreceived no training. M1 few of them hadbeen given a very short course of lecturesbefore Torch but otherwise nothing had beendone. We felt therefore that we had some-thing to contribute on parties of this kind,since there were many functions which weperformed which were not performed by SISat all. On the other hand there was notvery much done at Glenaimond that was notcovered up here. It was for this reasonthat pe had offered oertain trained officersto the D.M.I. Our offer had been acceptedand this was the first occasion on hicha demand had been made for our services.i made it very clear that we were not goingout as M. 1.1.5 but as I.B. staff. In factwe were selling our people to the Armyentirely, and we did not expect them tocommunicate with us except through theB.staff. "c" said that he would beseei Cowgill and would let me know whatthe possibilities were of a joint missionon thisparticular occasion.ISOS disclosed that IC.iRDO, who has beenresponsible for a good deal of the leakgeof information about convoys etc. in Lisbonis an interpreter for the British andAmerican Consulates. Enquiries are nowbeing made is to wno this man is likely to be.If he is identified, our anxiety about actionin Lisbon to find somebody connectedwithCatalogue alpgpaeieencekegrastified. our missions there who would fit the billI have read through John Marriott's lettersfrom India. They start in a very pessimisticmood. He found things very different towhat he had imagined. He thought that D.I.Bsoffice would be at least as big as S.J. Inactual fact it only consists of 12 peopleand in a number of respects is extremelyone-horse. There is a tremendous shortageof personnel and of equipment, methods oftransport etc. The worst feature of thesituation has been the quarrels betwe DIBand the Army and nobody had a very clearpicture of recisely what was wanted or howthe job should be carried out. the Armyhave been thinking entirely interms of decep-tion, not realising that it is necessary tobuild up en firm foundations a CE networkin which the enemy had full confidence.Until this has been achieved it is no goodthinking of deception, since you cannotassess the degree to which you are likelyto be believed. Marriott eventually put upa long memo on the whole question which heis getting accepted by DIB. He also seemsto have made considerable progress in Armycircles which we have reinforced by ourconversations here with the DMI India andPeter Fleming. At the end of April 7 partiesof spies, consisting of two agents and awireless operator each, were dropped inIndia. 13 of these have since been apprehen-ded. Marriott was anxious to get into touchwith these people Who should form the basisof a D.A. network. He was not howeverallowed to see him. +his situation has sincebeen remedied and I think that there shouldbe decent co-operation in future. Marriott'sCatalogue Reference:KV/4/191256proposals are that there should be a TwentyCommittee under the auspices of DIB as it isunder our auspices here, and that sub-committees should be formed in certain ofthe Provinces. He has also made a numberof other recommendations which from thepoint of view of man-power etc. shouldimprove the whole position to a considerabledegree.Lennox tells me with reference to OperationVault that negotiations with Portugal seemto be taking a favourable turn and that wemay be able to act with their full consent.Miss Sherer came in to see me. She has justarrived back from New York. She has beenworking on CE in S.America. since howeverit was decided to transfer this work toLondon her job had become little more thana sinecure. SIS tried to get her to stayuntil Vivian came out and had told her thashe could only get a secretarial post hereas women in SIS did not do executive jobs.They did however offer her the job of runningtheir office in Mexico. I told herabout Denham's visit and its probable out-come. If she were prepared to take it onthere might be a job out there as assistanto Mills. Alternatively she might work herein lA as a case officer. This would benecessary in any case until the position inUSA was clarified. The experience wouldalways be a useful one. On the other handif she thought that SIS had nything tooffer her which was to her advantage I didCatalogue CatalotgueiReferencektaanginde any obligation to287this office. She said that she had beenasked to go and see Cowgill tomorrow. Shewould let me know the result.June l6thI spoke to "c" again this morning about theSecond Front. I told him that thoughtthere was a great deal of prejudice enteringinto the whole business, I once more made itquite clear that we had no intention ofencroaching on his preserves. 1 discussedwith him the present constitution of I.B.staff and its inadequacy. I made it clearto him again that L thought we had somethingto contribute. Since however our functionsoverlap+ it seemed to me reasonable thatwe should get together and work out somejoint charter. There might be occasionson which we could provide a better officerthan SIS. On the other hand SIS mightbe able to act for us. it seemed to meeminently a matter on which we should workin the closest co-operation. He agreedwith this but said th t he was getting atRiley or Arnold-Foster to go into it andcall a meeting with ourselves. Pat Rileyrang me up later to say that he had fixeda meeting for Friday between himself,rnold-Forster,Felix Dick and myself. L hope thatwe may once and for all be able to get thismatter settled.At the weekly meeting Hart mentioned thecase of PASTOR who from his source seemed tohave some contact with the Abwehr. They areat any rate anxious to get into touch withCatalogue Reference:KV/4/191286him. From the facts given, arris wasable to identify this man as a SpanishProfessor who had recently left this countryand who is in fact a B.lu agent of a kind.We shall have to consider now we are goingtodeal with him when he returns.I lunched with Rupert Speir and Col.Barrowof M.I.1.A to whom I explained our ideasabout an I.B.staff. He Seemed to be inentireL agreement and quite appalled bythe proceedings of the committee which hadbeen set up to decide the composition ofmilitary intelligence units in the field.The fact is that none of them really knowwhat they want and it is clearly up to us toput them right, otherwise they will go ontalking till the COWS come home. Barrowsaid in despair that if they would decideto have 5 Salvation Army lassies and onepoliceman it would be better than what theyare doing now.Gibbs came to talk to me about the cases of4 submarines which had either been damagedor failed to surface during their trials.Three of these accidents occurred to shipsfrom Walker's Yard, and NID want us toinvestigate their cases:. Two of the shipshave already been examined and we are quitesatisifed that "teyere due to accidentalcauses. The case of the submarined "Untamedwhich is lying in not very deep water offthe coast of Scotland cannot very properlybe gone into until the ship is raised. Thiswill not occur for about another three weeks.At the moment we have no starting point.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/19123If Burt goes up he will obviously have tocover a very ide field and cause quite alot Or alarm and despondency perhapsunnecessarily. I am writing to ADNI inthis strain.Miss Snerer Came in agiin to see me. Shehad beenoffered an secretarial post underrien. She had turned this dorn, andwas told that possibly something might be foufound for her in the Mid East. 1 have sugges-ted that she should take her holiday andthen make up her mind if any offer is forth-coming from SIS, whether she preiers toaccept it or return to us. L told her thatshe should regird nerseli as a perfectlyfree agent.There 1S still no suggestion from SIS thatStopford should get together with PaulMathes. ile feel now that it is better toleave things na trust to the good Nillbete Stopford and Muthes sho Kno'M eachother, to or out a concerted plan onbroro ord ship.Ramsbotham has returned from doing an I.B.course and put in 3 memo. He thinks thatpeople from here MO are going on SecondFront jobs should know more about militaryduties. He found himself rather it sei. ILsaid that while L agreed that some knowledgeabout Army procedure would be useful, thoughthat he had perhaps got a slightly exaggeratecview of ita importance. Things were veryCatalogue Reference:ky,4i91 Referertce:l whiit they were atCOrYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDaN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 Sa 00.1home. great many of te formaitties werecut ot and language, personal relations, etc.were much more practical and informal.Ramsbotham is joining up and hopes to get acommission in 6 months. It seems rithera waste after doing the course and beingtrained here he should be handed over ascannon-fodder. We are going to keep an eyeon him SO that e cin get him earmarked fara Second Front job.June ihA serious protest has come from "e" aboutJoe Stephenson receiving RSS documentsconnected with his Nork by bag. On arrivalin Cairo Joe was taken to see the SIS people.T'hey complained that they could never getmuch inf'ormation out of London and asked himwhether he could enlighten them on certainmatters for the purpose of a memo which theyhad to prepare. Feeling that he WaS amongfriends he produced some of his documentshich got into the h nds of Fdneymho passed them on toimpounded the documents and wired thenews to "O". "C"s complaint is (a) thathe was not consulted ind (b) thit themiterial NS not coded. He idmits nit hewould robably have agreed to some oi itbeing allowed to go if it had been coded.Clearly the documents are essential toMaunsell and his staff and indeed even moreSO to the SIS representative. In fct ofcourse they never receive them. The routeCatdlogheReference.kvralyres is generallyconsidered to be absolutely safe and Iabelieve the bag also contains the P.M.Sdespatches. The fact remains however thatie have committed a technical breach. Thisis unfortunate as I was just about to takeup a number of questions which have beencausing intense irritation betvee ourselvesand Section V. I was proposing to say thatmost o1 them are of an extremely pettykind and due almost entirely to the narrow-ness and jealousy of Felix. E shal nowhave to wait a bit until this latestincident has simmered down.I have read an interesting report by WheelerBennet of our Embassy in Washington on avisit that he has paid to BRUNING at the endof February. He says that he had never seenhim in such a nationalistic mood. He wasall German patriot, hating French, Czechs, PolPoles and Russians indiscriminately. Hishatred of the Nazis is unabated and hesincerely desires their distruction, yet hisfear of the Russians and his affection andadmiration as an old front line officer forthe German Army per se lead to very confusedreactions regarding the war in the East.While he would welcome the overthrow ofNational Socialism by the British andAmericans it does not seem as if he couldstomach the thought of Germany being defeatedby an alliance which inclues Czechs andPoles, who like all the Germans he despises,and also Russia, whose political and ideo-logical ambitions he profoundly fears.BRUNING was at that time incllinedi to thinkthat that the war would be a stalemate.It would be unfair to say that he favouredCatalogue Reference:KV/4/191a stalemate peace but he does take a decided-ly defeatist view as to its possibility.He is rather bitter about the bombing ofGermany, particularly of his native townof Munster. He thinks the Casablanca formulaof unconditional surrender has renderedimpossible any chance of an uprising inGermany or of a coup on the part of the Army.It has resulted in the consolidation ofGerman morale. Wheeler Bennet has theimpression that BRUNING has a growingdesire, perhaps even ambition, to play therole of a German Talleyrand at the peacetable and to win for a non-Nazi Germanybetter terms than there would otherwise begranted. He seems to regard it as apatriotic duty to save if he can for thenew Germany as much as possible from theshambles which will follow the collapseof national socialism. BRUNING'S reactionsare interesting in the light of Vansittart'sbook which I have just been reading.Hollis has just told me that SPRINGHALLhas been arrested. He had approached a girlnamed Mr.S SHEHAN in the Air Ministry whosehusband had been in the InternationalBrigade and who was either a member ofor fairly closely connected with the C.P.He had suggested to her that us we werefighting on the same side as Russia shemight pass him information which would beuseful to our ally and which he would see gotto the right quarter. The had been in fairlyfregient touch and atusome of the meetingsa girl-friend of hers in the Ministry hadalso been present. SHEHAN fell ill a fewCatalogue Reference:kVt47191days ago and gave her friend an envelope to293hand to a man called "Peter" who would becalling. The girl friend consulted withher officer who steamed open the letter andfound inside details of the C.P.cell in theAir Ministry and also details about somesecret device. A copy was taken of theinformation about the cell and that about thedevice was removed. The envelope was thenhanded to "Peter". When SHEHAN was inter-viewed by the police she said she thoughtthat Peter's name was SPRINGHALL and shesubsequently identified him from photographs.The police thereupon arrested SPRINGHALL andfound on him the document about the partycell in the Air Ministry. The chain ofevidence is therefore complete. Unfortunate-ly the law is somewhat inadequate in thecase of a man who is spying on behalf of anally. It seems unlikely that SPRINGHALLwill get more than 9 months to 2 years.SHEHAN had communicateawith her husband andmore or less intimated to him that she wasgoing to carry out some kind of secret workon behalf of the Party. The husband isemployed on some RAF station.I attended a meeting at the F.O. in Loxley'room, at which Philby, Milne and Sir JohnDashwood were present. We discussed thememo we had prepared on the result of theprotest to the Portuguese Govt. about Germanespionageactivities. It was agreed by allthat as soon as the memo was approved thematter should be taken up vigorously at bothends. it was known that the PortugueseAmbassador in London was anxious to seeCatalogue Reference:KVI4/1919Sir Alexander Cadogan in order to thank himpersonally for his intervention in the caseof MENEZES, and it was thought that thiswould provide a good opportunity forpointing out that we expected rather morein return. Hopkinson, Loxley's predecessor,now Minister in Lisbon, was expected herein a week's time. He isfully acquaintedwith our work, and it is sggested that weshould brief him thoroughly on theinadequacy ofthe measures that they haveSO far taken.Later on I was joined by Stopford andwe had a discussion with Loxley aboutOperation Vault. It was quite clear tous that nobody had considered what thepossibilities were going to be on thearrival of the party. ould they enter andraid the German consulate, were all communi-cations in the island suspended, were Germanships to be boarded, etc? Much of coursewould depend on the replies received tothe present approaches being made by ourAmbassador but in the meantime the partywill have sailed and will have to becommunicated with in some form of code.Loxley undertook to go into this with Brig.Hollis and would be getting in touch withStopford xxx before he leaves.I told Philby that we were having a meetingtomorrow about the Second Front. He seemedto think that some form of consultation washighly desirable in order to avoid incidentsof the kind where a plan of action was leftSO much in the air. He obviously could notCatalogue Reference:KV/4/191296however commit himself on the problem of theproper set-up of an S. I. (b) unitl He toldme that he could not understand how we hadgot the eimpression that Section .were notsending an officer since we had given themPaul Mathews for that very purpose. I saidthat I had been away at the time and that Ihad no idea and I was quite sure Dick hadnot either, that Mathews was required forthis particular operation. We were noteven aware that such an operation wascontempated at that time.June 19thWe held our famous meeting with Felix, ArnoldFoster and Pat Riley this morning, and seemto have got our proposals more or lessaccepted. Felix is clearly full of thegravest suspicions and receded only inchby inch. We put forward the suggestionthat at the earliest moment there shouldbe a consultation between Felix and myselfabout the selection of the best men or manavailable in either service for anyparticular operation. Those who went intothe SI(b) unit would be seconded to M. I.6 I. 6for their term of service at the end ofwhich they would return to their formerduties here. Felix raised two difficulties.One was that he was looking for peoplewho could stay on after the war, and theother was that ao member of an S.I(b) unitcould have higher rank thanthat of Captain.We all felt that the secad one was adifficulty which somehoN or other ought tobe got over. It seemed incredible that theCatalogue Reference:KV/4/19129bbest men should hot be put into the rightjobs merely because they happened to haveearned higher rank than that laid down inEstablishment. As regards the firstobjection, we said that many of our peoplewould probably be returning to privatelife and it would not be possible togive any sort of guarantee. The officerscnosen here for the S.I.(b) S.I. unit wouldbe released for instruction at Glenal-mond at the appropriate moment. Thiswas dependant to some extent on the exactnature of the job. For example, if theywanted a Case officer who was in a sense atechnical man, it would not be necessaryfor him to spend very long in Section V.before going out. This would all be amatter for consultation and arrangement.We then made it clear that we had anentirely different commitment to supplysuitable security officers to the I.B.staff. fWe thought however that these office]would provide a soft point in the I.B.Stafffor giving effect to the informationobtained by the S.I I. (b) unit. Felixclearly did not much like this idea asit tended to bring together our respectivefunctions rather than todraw a sharp divid-ing line, which is what he always appearsto want. Actually, as I see it, ourofficers on the .B.Staff will probablybe asked to advise on all the informationput forward by the S.I(P) unit for action.Lastly, we suggested that a general courseof ainsitmuction for selected .B.officersCatalogue Reference:KV/4/191297already serving should be jointly plannedand carried out by us both, and that officerof G. 2 should be included. While Felixagreed that this might bedesirable, he didnot think that Section V. should take anypart beyond approving the synopsis of anylectures which had as their backgroundinformation obtained from secret sources.We had quite a tussle over prior consultatiobefore an operation between our I.B.Officerand the S.I. (b) unit. It had been clearlydemonstrated in Operation Vault hownecessary this was. There was clearly nopoint in S. I. (b) carrying information onan expeditior unless they knew just howit should be used. There are points whichmay concern the F.0., or the Chiefs ofStaff, or even the Cabinet. If we didnot consult before hand and thrash outthese details nobody else would. Thedecisions would rest with high authority andwe should have to move them to action.Pat Riley was very insistent on the necessityfor this and ultimately he managed to geta para included in the minutes of themeeting.Submarine "Untamed" will be brought to thesurface on Monday, and it has been agreedwith A.D.N.I. that we should have someonepresent. Burn is also going up to consultwith Vickers.T-R has written an extremely interestingmemo on the struggle between the Abwehrand the b.D. Himmler is graduallymuscling in on Canaris's preserves.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/191The conclusions are(l) that the S.D.,expanding its original political intelli-gence assignment, is now engaged insubversive activities on an increasingscale, including those para-militaryoperations which are typical Abwehr interest(2) that it is Canaris's policy to con-centrate abwehr resources on supplyingimmediate operational information forcommanders in the field. It is by hissuccess or failure in this that he willbe judged. His Spanish contacts are hismain support. (3) that the S.D'S politicalintelligence service is constantly encroachinon the work of the German F.O. The intelli-gence which it provides varies in qualityin different places to an extraordinarydegree. It is good where they have highlyplaced pro-Nazi elements, and is generallybetter in eastern Europe than in the west.Stopford is off tonight, but will not sailfor another 3 days at least.A definite requiest has at last come forthe services of John Mair. He is to gowith that part of Husky which will leavethis country.Maunsell has Nired for some assistance inrunning deception in Algiers. It is alittle difficult at the moment to see howwe could help him.Kirk and Robinson have arrived from the MidEast. The latter is in charge of XX thereand has come to consult with TAR.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/19299Michael Ryde has written saying that nisjob is really impossible. Apart from thedifficulties with Webster, the police andD.M.I. are both at logger-heads andintensely jealous of their own preserves.The last straw has been the arrival ofMark Oliver who will end by purveyine hisinformation direct to the appropriateauthorities. It is quite impossibleto set up any C.E. organisation or tomove the appropriate authorities to action.He thinks therefore that the sooner hecomes home the better. His place can betaken by an office boy, which appears tobe all that Webster seems to require. Weshould be glad to have him back as he willobviously be useful somewhere on theSecond Front.June 19thMair talked to me today about his positionas an I.B. representative for Husky. Thereis apparently no S.I. (b) unit for that partof Husky which leaves this country. This tosome extent impairs Mair's usefulness, sincehe will have no direct contact with secretsources. Ideally he should leave with thatpart of Husky to which the S. I. (b) unitis attached, but probably it is too late toarrange this Now. We might however ensurethat as soon as the first part of the opera-tion is over he should join 'the IB staffof the Force Commander.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1913I had a long talk with Burt about corruptionin the police force. Burt knows perfectlywell that it is going on and he thinks thatthe Commissioner is largely in ignoranceof the really rather serious state of affairswhich has been reached. I gather there arecertain reliable people of fairly high rank,chief inspectors etc. who are also veryconcerned and would like to see the positioncleared up. They know however that peopl(who previously had a hand in these matters,like Supt. Thompson, have made themselvesextremely unpopular in the force and aretherefore somewhat reluctant to go forward.Burt thinks that if they had any real back-ing they might do SO. He thinks that NormanKendal knows a little about what is going onand that Howe knows a good deal more.Burt is even more concerned about the payof the police. He says there has been noincrease in allowances for many years, andthat with the high cost of living many policemen of therank of Supt. Inspector, and ChiefInspector, have been finding it extremely hardto carry on. A Chief Inspector's pay underpresent conditions does not amount to muchmore than L6 a week net. Burt thinks thisis far too little and only leads to briberyand corruption. The sums offered areextremely large:since pay is indequate itneeds a man of fairly strong character toresist the temptation of a bribe. I gatherthat recommendations for increased pay havegone forward but that Morrison has turnedthem down. All of what Burt says is of courseconfirmed by the STOCKMAN case, which showsCatalogue that there Reference:KVI4/191 least 20 policemen heavily300implicated in bribery and corruption. It isthe greatest folly that any government cancommit to fail in giving adequate pay to theforces of law and order, and it can onlyaggravate a situation where endless regula-tions involving control of prices make itworth while for certain people to offer bigsums in order to evade the law. The D.G.is now considering theSTOCKMan report.I asked Burt whether he thought that a matterof this sort could be cleaned up within thepolice. He was doubtful. He said he coulddo it himself but that he would not like thejob.Liversidge rang me up about a Norwegian call-ed DAHL who is a prominent agent of theAbwehr in Vardo. This man is about to beapprehended by the Swedes, and S.I.S.,ir S. inconjunction with the Norwegians, are goingto try and persuade them to send DAHL tothis country. Liversidge wanted to knowwhether he could have our agreement inprinciple to the sending of this man to020. I said that he could. He will bewriting a note in confirmation.June 21stMINCEMEAT seems to have been more of asuccess than we originally thought. Thefirst Panzer Division h IS been moved fromFrance to Greece. it is a fortnight overdueas it is meeting with all sorts of difficul-ties on the way. These include the blowingup of railways etc. There is also considerablereinforcement in Sardinia. 11 further indi-Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1913o7cation is that GARBO and BRUTUS have beenasked to say whether any Greek troops areaccompany ing the Canadians destined for theMid East.There is a special committee under FindlaterStewart who is rying to decide what pre-cautions should be taken here and whataction should ensue if the Germans usetheir secret weapon, known as Do-GeratAccording to F/ S this is a large rocketgun of considerable dimensions. It is saidto fire a projectile weighing 70 tons andcontaining 10 tons of explosive. It has arange of 150 miles and it reaches a heightof 45 miles in the course of its flight.The latest reports from S.I.S. were to theeffect that some of these batteries werebeing brought up near the coast of France.Findlater Stewart and 1 gather also someof the scientists are fairly sceptical.P/W conversations by the Generals inferthat the game may not be worth the candlesince enormous quantities of copper arerequired which might more profitably beused for other purposes. it is alsothought that the weapon is not particularlyaccurate. It should however be possibleto get within 5 miles. of the objective.I saw Robertson today who is doing XX workin Mid East. He seemed a very sensible per-son. As in India, Twenty Committee workbegan the wrong way round. It started WithCHEESE being used as a deception agent.There are now 3 reliable a pents in Mid EastCatalogue aagueiefetencekviarfgfss, and putting303over deception. Deception is regarded asthe beginning and end of XX work and is underthe control of Dudley Clarke. If neN agentsare caught he really has the first call ontheir services from the deception point ofview. There is a good deal of trauble inAlgeirs where the French are in control.Strictly speaking they should not practiceany deception except under Dudley Clarke'sdireetion. The French are not very inclinedto tell about their agents at the moment.Clearly something in the nature of a TwentyCommittee in N.Africa is required. Ifhowever we attempt to send anyone therethere is bound to be trouble. Perhaps thejob can be done by Trevor-Wilson, a repre-sentative of the French and a representativefrom Mid East. Robertson thought we shoulddo well to get the full facts from DudleyClarke through the controller before wewent any further. T.AR. will do this.C. has written to the D.G. informing himthat a new series known as ITS which is theItalian equivalent of ISOS is goming out.He wishes that the same precautions shouldbe taken. He seems to think that the textof ISOS is seen only by Hart and T. R. Howhe imagines we ever do our work I can't think.However since SIS stand SO much on the letterin these things we shall probibly have toget the position clear.A suggestion has come from S. Africa thatMichael Ryde should establish himself withMark Oliver at Johannesburg and that the twoof them should co-operate on intelligenceCatalogue Reference:KV/4/19130matters with Muggeridge. The D.G. isinclined to give this a trial. It issuggested that the new office should beshared between SIS and ourselves:There hasbeen a hitch about John Mair.apparently he cannot sail with that part ofHusky leaving this country. Harry Allenis proposing to telegraph to the DMIor Kenneth Strong in .Africa with thesuggestion that Mair should proceed withForce Headquarters, which of course willbe eaving from .Africa.I took Dick's meeting. T1 captain of a RedCross ship which sails between Lisbon, Giband Marseilles, has been giving informationto the Germans on what he sees at Gib. Itnow transpires that he is an SIS agent,although SIS have no kno ledge of theinformation that ne gives to the Germans.He is in other words selling inforationto both sides, and quite possibly sellingSIS as well. They have asked us to suspendaction till they get further information.Personally L think that Ne should pressSIS to let us remove him at Gib. and sendhim back here. If he has been working forSIS in Marseilles the surface of Leakage isprobably broad enough to lay the informationoff the ISOS.Hart quoted from his source a further messagefrom an informant in this country of Kuhlen-thal. This informant, who is described asa neutral diplomat, has always been regardedas notional Most ii not all of his informa-Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1913tion is grossly inaccurate. Personally Ian rather inclined to think that a bodyexists. Most of the information comes fromthe Avonmouth-Cardiff area. I havesuggested that we should find out whatneutral consuls there are in the area, andalso whether these consuls communicate incypher with their Embassy in London. itis of course possible that ARTAZA, ,SpanishConsul in Cardiff, is the offender.Wethered mentioned the case of a Dane namedJENSEN, who is to come here as an agent,his cover story being that he was releasedfrom Germany, to fight the Finns, butdeserted at Stockholm. We had previousinformation about this man, who is now inStockholm. The suggestion is that we shouldget him over here.11 German airman P/W has succeeded in escap-ing from Oran. He stowed away on a boatand swan ashore at Algeciras when the boatwas off Gib. He has given a certain amountof information about preparations in AfricaI had a meeting with the D.G. and Harry Allanabour our report to the chiefs of Staff onthe possibilities of sabotage here. Inactual fact we have very little informationto go on. Our feeling however is that theenemy would concentrate on shipping andpossibly also on highly vulnerable targets.Gibbs feels very strongly that theinformation we have in N.Africa,America andFrance about the possibilities of sabotageare not really relevant and should not beCatalogue Reference:KV/4/19130included. He thinks we should be making amistake in drawing deductions for the Chiefsof Staff on information which did not reallyapply. I am inclined to think he is right.Burt came to see me. He had had a talk withLewes about the sabotage cases at Neweastle.Lewes is apparently rather upseteby ourletter in which it is suggested that nouseful purpose would be served by investigating these cases until the report onthe submarine "Untamed" has been received.Preliminary investigation on two of theother cases which it was thought mignt beconnected with "Untamed" as they all camefrom the same Yard, showed fairly conclusive-ly that the trouble was accidental, ordue to some mechanica defect. I proposeto see Lewes and smooth things out.June 22ndAt the D.G.S meeting it was decided to ceasethe publication of the Fortnightly Intelli-gence Summary that Tangye edits, sinceB.Division could no longer contribute owingto the secret nature of their sources.Contributions from other Divisions are infuture to be circulated separately. Thismeans in fact that they will not be circu-lated at all.M.A.P. have raised the question as to whetherthe M/L factory inspectors should be allowedCatalogue Reference:KV/4/191301access to production figures etc. This oncemore raises the point as to whether produc-tion figures are at this stage in the wara matter of any significance or interest tothe enemy. If he gets to know them they canonly give him a headache. It is impossibleto get any pronouncement on this questionfrom the authorities concerned. Possiblythey might be induced to express a view oncertain factories where a particularlysecret contract exists. On the questionof entry of M/L inspectors there is acurious complexity of the law. The FactoryAct says they can go in whereas D.R. leavesit to the discretion of the manager wherea protected place is concerned.There has been a crisis in the GARBO case.Mrs. G. is extremely home-sick and jealousof GARBO who is completely absorbed in hiswork and has consequently to some extentneglected here. Her one desire is to go backto her home country. She thinks that as thewhole of GARBO'S/work is notional we haveno further use for his services. It hasbeen explained to her that he is a mostactive collaborator which of course sheknows already. She now threatens to go tothe Spanish Embassy if she cannot get herpapers. She ought really to be locked upand kept incommunicado but in the state ofthe law here nothing of the kind is possible.T.A.R. is going down to read her the riotact and to explain to her that she hasalready committed an act preparatory to anact by threatening to go ta the SpanishEmbassy. It has also been suggested, to giveCatalogue Reference:KVI4/1913093her an interest in life that she should beshown a bogus message indicating that aGestapo agent here has some instructionsto make contact with GARBO. We would thenput in Jack and let her run his case. Thiswill of course be an added complicationto the already complicated GARBO case.We have also thought of warning the >panishEmbassy here anonymously that a woman ofMrs.G's description is anxious to assass-inate the Ambassador. This would, we hope,ensure her being flung out if she attemptedto go to the Embassy. It would howeverresult in the police being called in whichwould be a bore. If we let her go backto Madrid it seems highly probable that shemay talk.I have just seen Aiken-Sneath, who is dressedup as a captain, and doing a course withC.C.A.0. He has been told that C.C.A.0. hasnothing to do with Security of our kind andthat this will be a matter for the .B.staff.Sneath wonders therefore.exactly where hecomes in. He has now been included with agroup described as Civil Defence. thisincludes fire brigade,A.R.P etc. He saysthere are endless lectures dealing withthe general political and economic set up incontinental countries. I told him to have atalk with carry Allen who is really respon-sible for sorting out all this at his W.0.Committee.Victor arrived in Cairo on the 20th.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/191The plan to deal with the GARBO crisis hasbeen changed. It is now proposed that Burtshould take a letter to Mrs G. after 5 p.mwhen the Spanish Consulate would be closed,telling her that her husband had beenarrested and asking for his yjamas, toothbrush etc. Tomorrow if she appears to bein a repentent mood she will be taken tosee GARBO either in a cell at Cannon row orat Camp 020 GARBO will say that theauthorities decided to liquidate the daseand suggested that he should send one finalmessage, that he thereupon blew up, becameabusive and threatened to give the whole Showaway. He had thereupon been arrested. Itis hoped that Mrs.G. will then say that herhusband is entirely innocent and that thewhole crisis has been due to her stupidity.June 23rdThe plan to bring MrS.G. to reason seems to begoing fairly well. She rang up Haines andTommy Harris in a frightful state. Haineswent and found the room full of gas. Thiswas clearly a bit of play-acting for hisbenefit. He did however think that therewas a 10% chance of her doing something fool-ish, SO MrS. Harris was asked to go and calmher down during the night. This morningshe was interviewed by TAR who heard herplea and explanation. She has signed astatement saying that the whole of the inciderwas due to her fault and that on no accountwould she behave badly in future. She is tobe taken to Ham in a Black Maria this after-Catalogue Reference:kV/47191noon where Tineye is staging an appropriate3i0act. She will be allowed to talk with GARBOin his cell. GARBO will be released tomorrowwhen it is hoped that a reconcillation willtake place and that he will fall into thearms of his ver-loving wife. tommy Harrisis to be notionally eliminated from the case.H e will not see Mrs. G. any more but willcontinue to work with the husband.I have had a letter from victor From Gib.He had an appalling passage with a 5-knotconvoy on an American aircraft carrier of somewhat indifferent design. He was sick allthe way and the journey took 9 days.He hasfound plenty to do in Gib. where the XX set-up is the only barrier between German sabot-eurs and our ships. So far these opertionshave been extremely successful due to thework of an ex-school-master called SCHERR.this fellow is a captain in the IntelligenceCo Coeps. ps. nie has only recently been rpomotedfrom the rank of L/Corporal. He seems tohave a real aptitude for the job. Victoris very anxious that we should get himtransferred permanently to the staff ofour security organisation in Gib. He thingstoo that we want a ppanisn speaking MI5officer to take over from Scherr for a monthor 6 weeks SO that the latter can come nomeand get himself thoroughly acquainted withhead office. I am going to try and arrangethis.I dined last night With Peter neid. Hewas on the "Valiant" in Alex. when his shipwasn partially blown up by a one-man italiantorpedo. H tanker went up just astern ofCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1913them and he assembled the crew and informedthem that something similar might happen totheir own ship. de had only just closed hiscabin door when there was a huge explosion."Queen Llizabeth" was damaged by anothertorpedo of the same kjnd. Apparently it wasfairly easy for a one--man torpedo to slipin behind another ship when the boom wasopen. A subsequent attempt at a later datewas completely frustrated.Peter told me that the committee had now gotreports in. He understood that the armywere trying to put their own house in orderbut had doubtless been stimulated to do SOthough the whole matter having been broughtto notice. Thus matters of importance havecome to light. it had been discovered thatthe police broadcast full particulars of alldeserters, regimental numbers, units ete.This of course was a gift to the Germans.The matter was brought to the notice ofthe Chiefs of Staff immediately.Peter evidently does pot think very much ofFrost. He said to me that he thought we shou.do well to get a really good technical expertLogically he thinks that we should controlRSS. I told him about the restrictionsplaced upon us in giving effect to ISOSinformtion He said that as far as he knewthe Admiralty took whatever action theyconsidered necessary on the ny" materialwithout any prior consultation with "C".Theywere naturally just as interested as he wasin safeguarding the source.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/191I took the Wednesday meeting. Hart said thatthere was evidence to show that the Germanswere using the addresses of British engineersin Spain as cover addresses. tt is notknown whether this is with the collaborationof the engineers or the Spanish Censorship.Jim Hale said that the 1.0. had approachedhim on the general question of the releaseof internees under 1OB. who were quiteopenly opposed to this country and hopedthat the Germans would win. He had beenasked what the security reasons were. theanswer is I think fairly obvious. We knowthat such people are a potential danger andthat if they had an opportunity they wouldcommunicate information to the enemy. Ifthey are released they will require super-vision. If they are not to be kept insideone might as well argue that all interneesshould be released, and a potential 5thcolumn be given carte blanche to do what itlikes. Information about these releaseswould ultimately get back to the enemy and themight try to take advantage of the situation.propos of the Kuhlenthal agent in thiscountry, I asked Grogan to ascertain whatcypher telegrams were being sent byconsulates in this country to their embassies.I had a talk with Baxter, Milmo and Hart aboutthe LRO report. It was agreed that anycases relating to the activities of SISshould be in the form of an appendix to thereport, and that the appendix should not becirculated outside this office. The presentcirculation of the report is to Section headsCatalogue Reterence:KV/4n1g Reference ck,iart,Milmo, TAR313 3There has been a serious explosion two daysago on HMS"Achilles" at Portsmouth, resultingin the death of 15 ratings and injury to anumber of others. We sent ish down yester-day to look into the matter, and on Burt'srecommendation we have called in an explo-sives expert in the H.O.We had a meeting in the D.G.S room at whidhthe organisation of this office was explainedto Brig. Vale, D. D. M. 1(O). The idea was tolet him Know in greater detail what thisoffice could contribute towards the settingup of an I.B staff. Vale admitted thatthere was a deficiency in I.B training duefirstly to the fact that our office had beenperforming a large part of I.B. duties inthis country and that there had been littlenecessity for I.B. work in the field in.Africa since operations were taking piacein desett country. Furthermore in the backareas I.B. work had been carried by S.I.M.E.He seemed fairly satisfied that we hadsomething to contribute. Things are perhapsmoving, but very slowly. Before coming overhere Vale clearly had only a very hazy ideaof what we are all doing. Harry Allen madethe point that when an expedition was plannedit was necessary on the basis of informationavailable about the area concerned, to workout precisely what personnel was required.There should therefore be consultation betweeourselves,S. S. and the Force vommanders,before the D.M.I. made his approach to theDirector ofSTaff duties for the necessarypersonnel.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1913iu31June 24thAn ISBA seems to disclose that ZIGZAG isstill on the map and being prepared foranother sabotage exploit.I had lunch with TAR and Peter Reid. Petertells me that he has made another discovery,about railways. They are only supposed touse their wireless in emergency andperiodically for testing. In actual facthe has discovered through the Post Officethat they are transmitting about 7 hoursa day. He is finding out exactly what thistraffic is.I introduced him to T.A.R. in order thatthey might discuss wireless cover fordeception, which is one of Peter's jobs.T.A R. told him that at a meeting held bythe Controller the view had been expressedthat owing to the manpower situation itwould be impossible to build up wireless cove:since SO many trained operators would berequired. Peter takes rather a differentview. He thinks that the Germans couldnot be expected to get everything and thatthere would be ways and means of indicatingto them through what they did get that therewas a division in a particular area. Isuggested that possibly the problem mightbe narrowed if we intimated to the Germansthat the presence of certain divisionsin an area was regarded as highly secretand that special instructions had beengiven that they should cut down theirwireless communication to a minimum.PeterCatalogue Reference:KVI4/1913lsis going to try and reopen the matter. Healso thinks that something in very generalterms should be said about the possibilityof German agents adopting our procedureas in the case of GARBO. He thinks thiscould be done without jeapardising thesource.He came up afterwards to see the actualdocuments which GARBO had received givinghim instructions in the use of his new code.I think he is going to be a very valuableally.Frost and I saw Duff in the afternoon andsuggested to him that he might write toIsmay asking for a copy of the report ofthe committee on radio security, andsuggest to Ismay that before the report wasdiscussed by the Chiefs of Staff, he mightprofitably have a word with Gen.Fladgate,who is conscious of the Army' deficienciesand anxious to put them right. This willenable Fladgate to overcome the difficultieswhich he is sure to encounter from theDirector of Staff Duties. At the momenthe gets the bird every time he suggests toHome Forces that they should take certainmeasures to tighten up security. Frost'smotive in all this is to ensure that Flad-gate's scheme goes through, since he hasreason to think that Fladgate will ask forhis services as lecturer to' units on RadioSecurity.We also raised with Duff the question of thecommunications of allied governments withCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1913Algiers,Lisbon,Gib.etc. Lisbon, n,Gib.etc etc. At the moment itappears to be the rather vague responsibilityof Gambier-Parry to see that these communi-cations are in order and that the cyphersare secure, but in fact we know that prac-tically nothing is done. It was suggestedthat we should write a noteto Duff proposingthat the matter should be considered by theRadio Security Committee of which Duff isChairman.Subsequently Frost rang up to say thatat today's meeting of Reid's Committee ithad been proposed that some enquiry shouldbe made into the communications of S.I.S.and S.0. If this is agreed to, they mightquite naturally tackle the problem ofallied radio communications.Tommy Harris tells me that the GARBO crisishas now been liquidated, according to plan.The concluding scene was at Room 055 whereCussen in masterly style explained to Mrs.Gthat she herself had only missed beingarrested by a hair's breadth. She has givenan assurance that she will make no furthertrouble and she understand that if thereare any other incidents of the kind bothshe and her husband will be detained for theduration of the war. I think she is thorough-ly chastened. GARBO, bearded from hisprison life, is returning to, her this evening.I gather that he is somehat shaken by hisexperiences of the last 48 hours, and thatalthough the plan was of his own making it wasone of the most distasteful things that hehas had to do in his life.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/191317A new plan has been worked out for gettingGARBO'S brother in law over here. The latterwill be impersonated by a Spanish-speakingagent who will make contact with the Germansin Lisbon. Ultimately it is hoped to workthis agent into the local German Abwehrstelle.June 25thThe D.G. held a meeting to discuss increaseof staff and promotion at Camp 20. It wasfelt that the first thing to do was to obtainthe officers, whatever theirrank might be,and then if necessary grade the existingstaff at 020 accordingly. If we were toobtain suitable officers of the rank ofcaptain, there would be no point in makingTinEye a full colonel. I suggested that inorder to ease the situation at the LRC wemight offer to train interrogators for theI.B. staff. If one officer were attachedto each language section they would le learntheir job in a practical way and would easethe pressure on LRC till they were wanted forsome Expeditionary Force. It was decidedto put both these matters to the J.I.C inorder to get their support.Denham has sent a wire saying that the D.G.Sinstructions about his taking over MI5 dutiesin U.S.A have been regarded by Stephensonas taking effect immediately. Denham thinksthat Stephenson has done this in order toembarrass him. He has said that he willtake over when he is ready and not before.At the moment he has no accommodation, nostaff and no funds. He has met with a warmCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1913i% 31receptionfrom the F.B.I. and also from theState Dept. and the RCMP. He is conferringwith Guthrie about the functions that heperforms for this office and then he intendsto go round the Caribbean. He complainsthat he was not fully briefed about the workGone in the western hemisphere by thisoffice. In actual fact he was given a longwritten brief and all the policy filesregarding the USA which he did not troubleto read. As regards the R.C.M.P. and Caribb-ean he can get all the information he wantsfrom Mills and Stratton. The D.G. isreplying in this sense.There has been a roundup in Gib. Sabotagematerial has been captured and Spanishofficers are implicated. We are wiring tosay that if any diplomatic action is con-templated, it should be co-ordinated withany relevant information here. It wouldobviously be far better to register thecomplaint through Sam Hoare or the SpanishAmbassador here than through the Governor.June 26thForty -one Italian parachutists landed inBenghazi in uniform on June 14th. Theycarried time bombs with which they destroyedone Wellington, one Liberator, and a hangarcontaining three aircraft. Bombs wereremoved from four of the aircraft on BeninaAerodrome. Their main target was 4-enginebombers. The operation was para-military.There have also been landings by clandestineCatalogue Reference:KV/4/19 insaboteurs319The MULLET case appears to be going ahead.ol.Servaes came down from Brussels tosee von Kharstoff in Lisbon and to tell himthat authority forwith Koessler'sorganisation was approved by Berlin andwas not to be interfered with by theLisbon Abwehrstelle.On 17th June a warrant for the arrest ofBRUTUS was issued by the police and hisflat was searched. Copies of a new illegalpublication called "In defence of ourcolleagues" were found. This is an attemptby BRUTUS on behalf of certain youngerelements of the Polish Air Force to organ-ise a protest against the activities ofGen.Ujejsky, Inspector General of thePolish Air Force, and contains violentattacks on the Soviet and on the Generalfor having attended a reception given byMaisky. BRUTUS was placed under arrestand has been transferred to Scotland wherehe is awaiting court martial, on a chargeof indiscipline and offensiveness tosuperior officers. The charge is not agrave one though a substantial term ofimprisonment can under Polish law result.A message has been sent to the Germansindicating that BRUTUS is in trouble. Hisaction however fits in to some extent withhis mission to this country.He maytherefore be able to make capital out ofhis arrest.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/191s0Preparations for Tricycle's journey toLisbon are virtually complete. He is onlywaiting for his Portuguese visa.Harry Allen has seen the D.M.I. John Mairwill not be required unless and untilthe further development of Husky takesplace.Ede came to talk to me about O.C. He hihas drawn up a paper for discussion withthe D G. on various aspects of his work.After reviewing the whole position hethinks that D.S.0. have not receivedsufficient recognition of their servicesand have not been kept properly in thepicture. This has been largely due tocommunications and he thinks these shouldbe improved. ile also feels they should comehome every 3 or 6 months. As regards thefuture he proposesthat planning shouldbe done now to deal (a) with the fareastern situation when it arises and (b)with our post-war activities. He Heis isvery emphatic that people with the rightkind of training and of the right typeshould be chosen.Burt came to tell me about the explosionon HMS."Achilles". This was due to someform af acetylene welding gas which whenmixed with air is highly explosive. H manwho had been using this instrument had notleft it in the tank under repair but hadput it on the upper deck. When the enquirywas made after the explosion the apparatusCatalogue Reference.VI4/191 It seems likely82 32 2that some inexperienced person was using it.Unfortunately most of those concerned whomight have given evidence have been killed.Some of the injured may be able to help,and also the man who was using the appare-tus the previous day.These enquiries raise the wider question asto whether in cases of this sort we shouldbe called in in the early stages. Thereis clearly no sabotage. It is a case fortechnical experts. Unlike the Air Force,the Admiralty do not appear to have anymachinery for dealing with cases of thiskind. I propose to discuss the matterwith Lewes, who is a little inclined toregard us as a subsidiary department ofN.I.D.Lennox told me that the negotiations withSalazar about Vault were a bit sticky.He apparently does not consider that ouroffer of a few squadrons of Spitfires isaltogether satisfactory. Meanwhile thetroops are getting somewhat fed-up afterbeing kept cooped up in a ship for 10 days.There is now a proposal that they shall beput ashore on 7 days notice.the WITT case has blown up in a ratherunpleasant way. wwaxwell has written aletter intended for the B. of S.for Warin which the Home Secretary expresses hisgrave displeasure and concern at the treat-ment of WITT at the London District Cage.wTITnas made a number of allegations aboutill-treatment which have been denied.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/191377The only admission is that WIESNERslapped his face. If the denials areaccepted it seems an incredible thing thattwo Secretaries of State should be drawninto a matter which involves a Lying littleNazi having had his face slapped by a Czech.It seems to me that the whole case hasgot totally out of perspective. The D.G.feels rather hot about it although je arenot directly concerned since the inci-dent did not take place on our premises.At some stage in the proceedings it is allegethat Milmo or Sneath said that it was theBritish Govt's view that it was better that9 innocent men should be executed thanthatone guilty one should escape. This statementwas merely made to frighten WITT but it isargued bhat information extracted in fearis of no value. I rather wonder whatMaxwell would say if he read all the 020reports. I am quite convinced that nophysical violence is practiced at 20 butall sorts of threats are made without wnichirKX many cases one would not get at thetruth. It all depends on the man you aredealing with. If the H.O. think that theycanehandle spies with kid gloves on it isabout tien someone disillusioned them. Iam going to suggest to the D.G. that heshould see Grigg personally aboutthis caseand try and get it back on more sensiblelines.The D.G. has written a reply to C's letterabout Joe Stephenson. This is in generala good letter but there is one major pointwhere I feel he is making a great mistake.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/191923C. said that if the Minister of Defenceknew what had happened he would be gravelyconcerned. the D.G. replies that he has noobjection to a full statement of the casebeing made to the Defence Minister, if C.so desires and then goes on to say that neis sending a copy of the correspondence toDuff Cooper who could, if he thinks fit,mention the matter independently to the P.M.It seems to me that this rather forces C.to register his complaint with the P.M.If so we are unlikely to come off best seeingthat we pleaded guilty to cert in minoromissions. I very much hope that I shall beable to get the D.G. to omit this passage.J.C. came to see me about a talk that he hadhad with Lord Charwell. On instructionsfrom the F.M. Charwell has been going verycarefully into the Do-Ger't scare. Charwellsay& that the I.M. takes alt these secretweapon scares very seriously. Charvell himseldoes not believe in the D.G. although he saysthere is a 5% chance thatvit is a feasibleproposition. This led him to consider thepossibilities of misleading the German scien-tists by suggesting to them that ve hadsome particularly terrifying seeret veapon.H.C. wanted to know whether he could encouragCharwell to put up certain propositions.This would mean disclosing to him somethingabout our Twenty Committee work. I saidthat I could see no objecti'n. I thoughthowever that ne should give us variousalternative suggestions. We could then seewhich was the most appropriate for puttingover our existing network.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/19132uJune 27thStopford telephoned to say that the ForceCommander was coming to London, ae suggestedthat he should ask for permission to comedown too. I told him that as far as E knewhe was likely to be put on 7 days notice.J.0. and tonnie Reed came to talk to meabout TATE. They are anxious that heshould be given permission to take employmentin some photograpni business in Watford if tthis can be found. His detention underpresent conditions is getting on his nervesand also on those of his guards. If wecan with reasonable safety ease the situationI think we should do SO. According topresent arrangements TATE can go about thevillage unattended and it would have beenquite possible for him to escape if hethought it worth while. Employment in Wat-ford wouldonly extend his ares another 5miles and should he attempt to escape thematter would become known to us within afew hours. I said that I thought providedwe took all the necessary precautions likeinforming the C.C. and having photographsready for circulation, we could afford togive him this measure of extra liberty.TATE must know that if he attempted to getback to the Germans they would almostcertainly shoot him. He might say that hehad been working under duress, but he couldnot explain why. he had not let the Germansknow through the Jap N.A. that he was undercontrol. Moreover if they went back on histraffic they would hold him responsible forCatalogueReferencekV4/19nER.ISISI COPYORIGINAL OUMENT RE TAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3293 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.Janshows that the Yugosiavs nave with theirusual indiscretion informed their reresen-tative both in Lisbon and wadrid that TRI-CYCLE has a special mission for the Dritisauovt. I think we may be able to cover thisto some extent by giving THICYCLE a missionfrom the M.O.I The fact rem ins howeverthat a circle of people in the Yugoslavegation here who know about nis work musthave been considerably widened. The factsere supposed to be known only to the .M.I have heard some further particulars ofour latest anti-subm rine veapon. known asthe To Four Bomb. It is of Americin designwhich only Came into operation at thebeginning of May. It is estimated thatin a period of 24 days we succeeded insinking 20 U-boats. If they were withinl00 yards of the target, this aerial torpedois attracted to the U-boat and Nill divertits course accordingly. it travels underwater at about 12 nots, and dives as deepas the German J-boat, which cannot proceedat more than 5 knots submerged. The J-boatsre therefore beteen the devil and deepsea. II they do not dive they are bombed,while if they subomerge they are caught bythe Two your Bomb. The latter would be nouse on the surface because the U-boat canproceed at 15 knots, and would probablavoid it. I gather that the Germans areextremely worried about this ne device andinstructions give been given to them tosurface and attack the aircraft ith flac.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/19132June 2othI had a meeting with Cheney, ,Grogan, Robertsonand Cecil about the evasion of censorshipregulations by Dutch and Belgians who havebeen passing theirietters through. seamenand unauthorised postboxes in Eire. Thisroute to Occupied Territory is apparentlybetter than tue one vis Lisbon, were themails are often confiscated by the GermansWe decided that the Belgians and Dutch shouldbe asked to put up their scheme which wewould sponsor with the Censorship. it canthen be discussed by the Censorship Committeeand if approved the details can be worked out.This will have to be done more carefullythan in the case of Lisbon otherwise it isnot likely to last more than a few months.As soon as the Germans know that the mailsare going that way they ill take appro-priate action. We shall stop any mails thatdo not come through the authorised channels.Dan isto be informed.I had a meeting with vick and TAR in theafternoon to decide what officers couldbe made aailable for Second Front activities.Later L hid a meeting with Mills and Wilsonof Section V. I.,TAR and Brooman-Wnite on thecase of KOBBE. We were all agreed thitit ould be too dangerous to try and makeany use oi the B.J.S. We thought it wouldbe preferable for Mills or some other appro-priate person to make a direct approach toCalalbgeereferease!kiv/4gegperation. He couldthen be run as a straight agent either by327ourselves or be put in contact With theRCMP. If he was really co-operative he mightbe run as a XX. I said that before takingany action of the kind suggested, we ougntperhaps to say a word to Loxley and in anycase to consult External Affairs in Canadasince there was just a possibility thatKOBBE might register a complaint.The D.G. has approved the amendment to the leletter he has written to C. about JoeStephenson.Finney is dtie to leave for India on Fridayand Marriott will be starting back about 22ndJuly. This should give him about 10 dayswith Finney.John Mair is getting rather restless. I navetold him to take a holiday and to talk thingsover with Harry Allen. He is very anxiousto get into the field somewhere. I saidthat if he just sold himself to the A.G.Sbranch he might land up nywhere and findhimself doing a job which would not give himthe scope for which he is qualified. I canunderstand his feeling of frustration but Lfeel fairly confident that in the long runhis services will be required.June29tA CX. report shows that the American SupplyDepts. are a little inclined to think thatthe nussians are using bease Lend to get postwar machinery etc. Probably they think theyhad better get as much of every rything as theyCatalogue Reference:KV/4/191328ca while the going is good.Miss Sherer rang up to say that she wasreturning on the 5th. She has had a letterfrom Felix that there is no job to offer her.At the D.G.S meeting today the questionof regulated areas wa.s discussed. Thereappears to be some anxiety as to whether themilitary nould have powers to removealiens from any particular area under theircontrol. I think the answer is definitelyno. The military. certainly have powers toclose roads, divert traffic etc. but theycannot go beyond this.Lennox told us. that Vault had been placedon 7 days notice. Charles Medhurst is takinga party to Lisbon for discussions. I don'tsee how such a party can escape unnoticed.Personally, in view of successes due tothe B To Four Torpedo, I wonder whetherVault is really necessary when the compdi-cations involved are considered. Sam Hoaredoes not appear to be very worried aboutthe ppanish reaction. He thinks theGermans might threaten to take theBalearics or that this might be put forwardas an argument, to which our reply might bethat if they did we should have pleasure inocoupying them ourselves, which ve certainlyshould not do if they remained in Spanishhands. This might not perhaps ring verytrue in the light of Vault.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/191THIS I IS A COPYORIGINAL DOC OCUMEN RETAINEDA DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3243 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958B-\V nas suggested tt ve mrgrt take actionagainst HRTAZA who has been comnunicatingair raid damage reports to the ambassy fortransmision to Madrid. If another raid onedastle takes place Tangerine could reportthe facts by telephone. the conversationould be intercepted. he would be inter-viewed and then disclose what she had foundthebnleF.O. could then nake a formal protest, notonly about this incident but about Germanactivities in Spain. Loxley is being con-sulted.An analysis has been made of P/W opinionabout Hitler. Many Germans distinguishbeteen Hitler and the National soclalistregime. Considerable misgivings about suchmanitestations of Nat. Socialism as theHitler Youth, the S.S and the Gestapo arenot inconsistent with a high degree of faithin Hitler. The more liable to criticismsome features of theregime become, the moretightly these Germans cling to tas Fuhrerabove the possibility of human error. Hencec.e attitude to Hitler personally may be amore reliable test of the Loyalty of Germansto their regime than their attitude toNat. Sociakismm The analysis shows thatfrom the outbreak ot war to Pearl Harbour, 74per cent put Hitler above criticism. FromPearl Harbour to the surrender of Stalingra(62 per cent, and since Stalingrad 54/0.Experience with F/INs suggest the inadvisabil-ity of direct attacks on Hitler. thoseCalalogae'Refereacetkyr4ng1te hide their innermisgivings about Hitler even from themselves339are unlikely to react favourably to a directattack from outside, ind particularly fromenemy sources, and those who whie critisingHitler accept him for want of a betternational leader may be strengthened in theirallegiance by the feeling that any indivi-dual on whom the hate of the enemy is SOconcentrated must truly represent thenational character. Attacks on Hitler tie-fore should be made indirectly SO thatit appears to the German people that theythemselves have originated the criticisms.Hitler should be connected at every oppor-tunity with the conduet and continuance ofthe war SO that as the war goes againstGermany it becomes increasingly difficultto shift the blame on to Hitler's subordinateThe reasonableness of allied rar aims inregard to the simple needs of the common manshould be emphasised with the object ofdestroying Hitler's exclusive prerogativeto represent "the little man". It is alsothought that there should be some measureof recognition of the better elements inSocial policy, thus reassuring the Germanof our fsirness and open-mindedness totheir point of view. It is suggested thatthe 23-25 age group should be more susceptiblto propaginda undermining their confidencein Hitler since they are less conscious ofthe pre-1933 period and its unemploymentwhich was rectilied after the Nazis came topower.A report from N.Africa giving a survey of theCatdlogteeference:kv/4yf9?,30 300 German prisonersimmediately after capture provides an33(interesting contrast to the reports on thosewho have been some time in this country.Morale and confidence in victory was extreme-ly high due largely to German propagandaand the absence of reliable news. A largenumber of men professed to know that therewas great activity on the Russian ront andthat Leningrad, Moscow and Stalingrad werealready in German hands. The Standardattitude to their defeat and surrender inTunisia was a typical piece of Germanreality evasion. "We were not defeated assoldiers, we vere over-whelmed by materialsuperiority". the mass of German soldiersas yet uninfluenced by a prolonged stay inBritain and still held within the groupspirit in each camp Without segregation,were pretty solid for the Fuhrer, extolled hiachievements and gifts to the working manand his capacity as a war lord. This wastrue of the simple rustic as well as of themore politically conscious Hitler Youthtype. The British were favourably regardedas fair fighters, good soldiers, and a fewwent SO far as to say that they "enjoyed"fighting against us. The feeling about theUSA fell into 2 or classes. One sort tendedto bracket them with the Britisa as muchthe same people. Another group would speaksomewhat disparagingly of US troops andmilitary efficiency as compared with theBritish. The 3rd view regarded the USA asa ruthless imperialist power determined tooust Britain and rule the world and as theonly nation to whom war was "good business".Catalogue Reference:KV/4/19133?Those expressing this view almost regretttedSO great a calamity for European and NordicBritain.June 30thStopford has returned. He will not bewanted again for some days. Meanwhile hehas suggested that Major Dartford, the GSOTII.B. should be allowed to do a coursein this office. This apparently meets ith thForce Commander's approval. The FieldSecurity Officer who was to deal with portmatters has been allowed by the Force Comman-der to do a course with the S.C.0. in Glasgow.All this goes to show how necessary it isfor .B.staffs to have some sort of traininghere. Stopford is making anote on his10 days experience. Paul Mathews seems tohave had fairly clear instructions aboutploughing his own furrow. He was proposingto leave one of the known German agents atlarge for about 5 days. The Force commanderdid not seem to think that this was a verygood idea, since valuable information mighthave been sent back to the enemy. There Waseem to be nothing against arresting theman immediately and turning him round forwhat he would be worth. It is doubtful whetherhe could be run successfully for more thana week or SO.At the Wednesday meeting Hart mentioned thecase of an Austrian named Rudolf ENDER, who isbeing sent by the Germans on a mission to thiscountry from Lisbon. This has has a coverCatalogue Reference:KV/4/191333address in the name of a British subjectresident in Switzerland about whom enquiriesare being made. Instead of money the agentis to carry jewellry which is being sentfrom Berlin for this purpose.The Abwehr in Madrid nave received a reportfrom an agent in conjunction with anotheragent who has previously prodcued a numberof inaccurate reports. The contents of thisreport are also inaccurate. The combinedreport from two agents of this organisa-tion is a new departure and tends to confirmthe suspicion aroused by the consistentinaccuracy of these reports that they areinvented in Madrid.H French Naval Officer named FEYGUIN hasarrived in this country. He has admittedthat at one time ne recruited a small partyto fight against Soviet nussia. Arrangementsbroke down owing to the scuttling of theFrench Fleet at Toulon and the occupation ofthe whole ofFrance by the Germans. FEYGUIN Vwas then recruited by the Germans for a missifor the Abwehr in this country. He wasextremely badly trained. The French areanxious to use him as a XX but it is verydoubtful whether he will be suitable forthis purpose. He will probably go to 20.Gwyer talked about the case.of Ernest Freder-ick LEHMITZ concerning whom we have hadreports from the .B.I. Tnis man's corres-p endence was picked up at Bermuda. it wasdetected because the contents of the lettersCatafogdrteterence:kv4/9r and purposeless.28uThere was a great deal of detail aboutdomestic matters, cats, chickens, ete. Itturned out ultimately that all these detailswere completely true and in fact were usedto prove the idatity of the writer. Theletters disclosed that LEHMITZ had returnedto the USA sometime during the first fourmonths of 1941. With infinite pains theFBI searched through the baggage checks ofall arrivals from Portugal during that period.It was in this was,by comparison of hand-writings, that they identified LEHMITZ.This gs a good piece of police work whichis absolutely up the FBI street. Incidentallythe Germans seem to have a very high opinionof the FBI. Iney nave issued a very severewarning to GARBO about any suggestion fornotionally sending MOONBEAM to Canada orthe USA. Whether this can be taken as anindication that the Germans have very fewspies in the USA I don't know. It can ofcourse only represent the views of one statiorof the Abwehr, perhaps only of one individual.The Germans evidently think that bycomparison we are not much good.I had lunch with Dill Stephenson at hisrequest. He began by saying that he hadno intention of asking me to lunch in orderto discuss our affairs in the USA. He didnot in fact open the ball. After a longdiscussion about the relations of OSS andG2 which i was anxious to get clear, Iremarked that I was sorry that L had not comeout to American again. Bill then ratherlet himself go about Denham. He regardedhim as a silly old man who was messing aboutin something that he did not understand.Catalogue Reference:kV14/19COPYORIGINAL RETAINEDNDEPARTMENT RIMENT UNDER SFOTIOA3333OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958DooHe was rather upset when he found that Denhamhad come to take yer. ile thought that he wasgoing to look into the position and when hehad reported there would pe further discussiorHe was also annoyec about the suggestions winshad been made when he was last here that theCanadians were fed up ith Security Co-Ordin-ation. lle asked me whether L had seenthe1terfrom hobertson of External affairs. Lsald I had. He then explained that all thetrouble about the security situation in Hali-fax had started with us and not withSecurity Co-Ordination. de had merely givenus such assistance as ve required. L saidthat I was not aware of this. I thought itwas really an extension of Connop wuthrie'sactivities and a joint affair beteen himand Stratton. bill intends to see blood whenhe goes back and explain to him thatSecurity o-Ordination cannot accept anyresponsibility for the way the whole thingwas handled. I am inclined to think thatthere must have been a great deal which wenton in Security o-Ordination about whichBi1l was totally unaare. If CommissionerWud is to be believed, there were a greatmany intrigues in Halifax to get upt. Eameskicked out of his job. it may be of coursethat the wavy Dept and DMI in Canada werethe responsible parties. certainly thepolicy of Guthrie and Stratton nas to bounceWood into a scheme which he did not thinkwas very practical and which he could notcarry out owing to lack of man-power. Hewas clearly badly handled. Stepensom presum@ataloguel @ataloguelReference:kt/4nlo1viole iciea wasStratton' S and therefore ours, and thatConnop wuthrie was only there to help. Lam inclined to think that Gurthrie was pro-bably the moving spirit, since when L wasin NeW York Stratton was clearly in hispocket.As regards G.2 and OSS it seems that theposition is much the same as the relationsbetween S.I (b) unit and the Force ommalr.OSS consider theselves to be directlyunder the Force Commander and in no waysubordinate to G.2. 2. Really however it villbe G. G.2 2. who will have to give effect tothe information supolied to OSS.There is a CX. report on Gen. VLASOV's movementwhich has uts headquarters near Smolensk.VLASOV is a renegade hussian who says hehas recruited some 500,00 of his compatriots.It seems that he is given a fairly free handalthough he is surrounded by German liaison0 ficers. He says that he is working for anhonourable peace with Germany and the dereatof Bolshevism. he is nationalist in outlookbut has no use for communists, plutocratsor Jes. lt is of course remotelypossible that he is recruting an armywhich at the propriate moment ill attackthe Germans in the reir, althougn this isnot suggested in the report.Lick has nad a letter from Maunsell in whichhe states that all his efforts to keep thepeace between 5 and 6 in the Mid East lookas if they were going to end in failure.Catalogyes SReferencek/4/191rrival ofimpregnated with Congilliania, there has337been a distinct change in the friendly atmos-phere that formerly existed. i1e is3onvery good terms withbut intends todo some plain speaking w.ich will eitherkill or cure. The last straw has been thedestruction byof the documents takenfrom Joe Stephenson. 1 few notes apparentlyhave been tiken bybut nothing elseremains. L do not know that the D.G. isgoing to say about this. U. may not knowabout the destruction of the documents inwhich case he vill probably wire out butelling nim to give them bick toStephenson.vill then reply thatthey have been destroyed. C. will be moreor less forced to support him, in aletterto the D.G. This Mill put the fat properlyin the fire. I understand from GilbertRyle that Vw reports never to Mid East,a.lthough they must be essential yorking tooisfor anybody tryin to study iSUS ind ISKmaterial intelligently.Victor seems to hive gone do very gell.we is now streaking or abadan. A counter-sabotaye section is to be set up in Mid Last.ine services of Miss lieed D. lU have beenapplied for.THIS IS A CORYORIGINAL DOCUMEN RETAINEDNDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSCatalogue Reference: 958. 250