The National Archives(c) crown copyrightCatalogue Reference:k :KV/4/192Image Reference:74372producing a 10 ton bomb which will be inoper tion by mid-December. It is I think tobe used in mining districts with a delay-actiofuse which it is thought vill break up themines and cause them to be flooded. It canbe lif'ted by the Lancaster.I asked C. about Gen. Cochet. He had not methim but was going to do so. He wis a littleworried as he had heard that Cochet mightremove Paillol. He hoped in our conversatione would do anything ve could to put in a goodword for Paillol who was doing extremely well.November 6thGen.Cochet called to see the D.G. accompaniedby Bonnefusse. He explained nis position andthen said that ne was vorried about thesecurityof his agents in this country. Therewere some 60 of them and they Nere all herdedtogether in one place, where they all t lkedabout their business. The result h d beenthat considerable damage h d been done toFrench resistence movements in France. Hethought it possible tnat there might beagents here picking up information, particular-ly Vichy agents. I said th t I did not thinkthat there vere likely to be many German agentsbut that Vichy gents were 1 Air r more diificultto detect. It was agreed thit we wouid doanything possible to assist Bonnefusse tofind better accommnodation where these agentscould be noused according to "rayons" Thiswould at le st ensure that if an agent of one"rayon" were caught he would not be in aCatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/192position to divulge information about other"rayons". If Bonnefusse at any timne hadreason to suspect that somebody was beingunduly in nquisitive, about the work oi theseagents he would ask for our assistance.e then discussed the arriva of the Frenchpilots, ind en.Cochet agreed that this Nasa seriousmatter nd th that they snould be vervcarefully vetted. Brook Tooth pointed outthat even the officer in charge Of the partywhich had just arrived had said th he wis notat all happy about certa individuals. Veexpl ined to the General that we vere going toexamine roughly. 100 who had succeeded ingetting out of France after the total occu-pation. He agreed that this was sound pre-caution. It has not been possible to geta Spanish visa for Tricycle which is perhapsa good thing since it is preferable that niscontacts with the Germ ns should be limited toLisbon. Information has been received fromLisbon that Hamlet has received assurancesfrom the Germn ns that all is well ind thitmoney for Fuppet is on the may. A member o1Ast Brussels called NERNER his got i totouch with him from the Spanish frontierand arranged a further meeting. It a yearsprobable tht the Germ ns still believe in thiscase in spite of the evidence to the contrary.The Jap mbassador in Berlin bas been toldby the Germans that the reverses on the easternfront are due to the unprecedented good eatherThe Germans had been relying on the rains toto give them breathing space. The russians,Catalogue Reference:KVI4/192taking advant ge of ituation, had sent379up their winter reserves. Conseently theyhad a tempor iry superiority. It wis tho ghthowever that they would not int in theirofiensive throughout the vinter. The Germnwere counter-attacking vith vigour and successin the region of Krivoi dog. In Italy theGermanshad 10 divisions vhica they intendedto use in the frontline in the deience ofRome. They were faced by10 10 anglo-americandivisions The Germans who have had another a cert 13 in divisions air superiority. inreserve. They believe that in attack in theBalkans nas not been ab ndoned and that thenext move will be against rance, for whichthe British and Americ ns need at le st 50divisions. If these divisions were defedtedit would probably be the turning point Ofthe war. It was therefore doubtful mhetherwe should embark on so hazardous a ventureunless we ere forced todo so as a result ofthe Moscow Conference. Germany was rying toachie e the 3 follo ing objeets in her prose-cution of the var. First to stabilise the est-ern front, secondl to use Germany's ne veaponfor attacks on Britain and thereby make itimpossible for the anglo-America nss to bombGerm n industry. Thirdly to eliver a crushinpblow to the Anglo-Americans somewhere inLurope.O These 3 it was thought on balancethe probability is that the second projectould be put into operation speedily.The question of the vireless set in the GermanLegation in Dublin has again come up jor reviewin the light of Overlord. Sir Joh Maffey,who was present at a meeting t the D.0.,took the view that if we made aa request to theCatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/192nEire Govt. we should have to insist thataction shald be taken. litherto our policyhad been to avoid raising any questions inwhich Irish neutrality would be the directissue. It might be that the time would come.when this policy could be revised, in whichcase the Germoan Legation W/T would be a pointof great value. The F.O. apparently takethe view that action in Dublin might causereprisals by the Germans in Berne and in tIthe Vatican City. The latter problem mightbe solved within a montn, when it as expectedthat Rome would be captured. They were anxioustherefore that no action should be takenin the meantime. Cecil, speaking solefrom the security point of view, said that heconsidered in view of Overlord that thecontinued presence of the W/T was a riskwhich should if possible be removed. Thechance of its being used effectively mightonly be 100-1 against but the operation Nasone of such importance that even that riskought not to be in curred. On the technicalside Morton-Evans said that although therewas a double check on Dublin both from Long nand Gib.,no absolute guarantee of pickingup a message could be given. In any cise t teharm might already be done.Hedidthinkowever that prior to sending a communicationthere would be some signs on the air, as theset nad not been used for a longish period.He also pointed out th at it yould alvays bepossible to rig up a receiving set as trans-mitter. This could be done if the Legationobtained the services of Hans BELL the Germaninterned airman,for which they were negotiatingCatalogue Reference:KVI4/192376I have been looking at the case af OSNOVIENENKO.This man who described himself as a Ukrainian,was picked up by the police at the London Docks.Everything he has said appears to be untrue.He pleads that owing to ill-treatnebt by theGermans his memory has failed him, and thathe is entirely unable to teli us how he reachedthis country, although he knows that hetravelled on 5 diiferent ships. The suggestion3 that he is a deserter, ossible from theAmerican forces. He expressed willingnessto join the Czech Forces, the Polish Forces,the British Forces or the Russian orces, oreven to. lie down in the interrogatior roomand have his he d chopped off. It is extremelydifficult to know how to deal with a case ofthis kind.We are sending back to Ita taly the ItalianGenerals Messe,0lando and Berardi, and alsoa Maj.Bouderia. The theory is that they aregoing to operate as co-belligerents. Thisis being kept very quiet for the moment.November 7thL lunched with Loxley, when I discussed vitnhim the future of the office. He told methat a comittee was discussing SIS's affairsat the moment. His own view, although I donot know what those of SIS are, is that C-Eshould come under us, both at home and abroad,and that we should be responsible to the F.O.for what we did abroad and to the d.o.for whatwe did in this country. He did notthink thatCatalogue Reference:KVI4/192377subversive movements could be divided fromespionage. He thought quite definitely thatPassport Control should be kept clean ofespionage and evidently thought it quitepossiblethat we might take it over on thebasis that it was the first line of C.E.and brought us into direct touch with ouropposite numbers in foreign countries.I asked him about the attitude of Russia to ardthe Polish question at the Moscow Conference.He said that this was the one matter onwhich they had been somewhat sticky. Evident-ly no decision was reaced. He thinksuite definitely that the Russians will occupythe whole of the Baltic States, EasternPolandand Bessarabia.I told Loxley about our trouples on the 1.B.front and what we were propaving to do.Novemoer thBurt came to ask me whether ne should takeuD the case which had been reported to VineSt. of a Col.GOWEF of Hobart House who nas,according to an Ordnance Officer or NCO whohas returned from the Mid East, accepted asumn of E250 in order to give this man hisdischarge. He is mn fact asking for 11,000.Burt after consultation with speir and NedReid, is going to speak to Norman Kendal.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/192379Hart and Milmo came to see me about theHELMUTH case. A letter has come in fromLoxley which does not give us an absoluteguarantee that ve can hold HELMUTH at allcosts. The indications so far are that heis likely to break fairly easily if subjectedto the normal 020 treatment. We thinktherefore that the best thing is to send nimnto 020 but to segregate him from the otherprisoners. 020 are to be very Carefullybriefed in order to protect IZAK.There is another group of somewnat unsatis-factory cases at the LRC. They do theirwork extremely well in all the circumstances,but I have an uncomfortable feeling thatan odd spy or two may be getting through.Victor returned from Gib. today. He seemsto think that his visit has been worth mnile.November 9thAt the D.G. S meeting today with Harker in thechair we discussed certain propos ls put upoy Denniston for the release of a number ofGerman internees. I said tht while I was inagreement with all Denniston's arguments, itwas for consideration thether the moment wasappropriate in view of the special instructionsbeing issued to all military.uni regardingsecurity in connection ith Overlord. I gatherthat the CUSSAC proposals ure to be subject todiscussions by the Security Executive next reekCatalogue Reference:KVI4/192370I lunched with Lennox. He asked me whether ihad any information about the future of theorganisation and then went on to say thit hehimself had no particular job to go back toand wondered whether there was any future forhimself in the Security Service. I said th tit was extremely difficult to ive him ananxwer without knowing precisel what thecommitments of the Security Service were goingto be in the postwar period.He then talked about Harker who seemed tohave ideas about remaining on afterthe varas DDG. This Lennox thought was quiteimpossible. In fact he felt that the soonerHarker went the better. It was painfullyobvious to me that Lennox San himself inHarker's position. He asked me what my inten-tions were and hether i aspired in any way tothe position o1 DG. I said that certainlywas not breaking my neck to get the job butthat if it were offered to e I should, in thelight of experience, incline to modify myprevious view that it would be wrong for meto accept the position. We discussed the IBfront and the difficulties in COSSAAC. Lennesaid that if he could possibly be of any nepby going in there he Nouid be very giad to doso. i said that rather doubted whetherthejob would be of sufficient importance, sinceL rather anticipated that once the planninghad been done, which would be, in the hands ofDick, there might not be a. great deal more.LennON said that in a way he felt himselfslightly in a backwwater and vas wondering whathe should do. I was doubtless a ware that ashort time apo a certa oi suspicion hadCatalogue eference:KV14/192350fallen on him and implied that people thoughtthat he was angling for the post of DG. Hethought that even Dick regarded him with acerti in amount of suspicion. said th inthat connection I did not think that his frienDesmond Orr had done him much good. I believeDesmond to be honest of purpose. He hads oken to me and I had given him my viewsquite frankly. At the s ame time consideredhim somewhat nblanced. My mind went backto the days of the Scrubs when rr had walkedup and down in an almost pathological st te,saying that I ad everybody else would besacked and that Frost was goin to take over.de wondered whether it would be a good thingfor him to go and see the King about it.10 minutes before he had done precisely thesame thing in Victor's cell. Victor asked meafternar rds if Orr had been to see me. L saidhe had and that i thou ht he was of hisrocker. Victor had pparently ined the sumeimpression. Lennox said th t ne relaisedthat one had to be on one's guard againstone's friends.In talking to Dick afterwards, Dick thoughtthat the ide of Lennox going into COSSAC asG.] might not be quite so erazy as one mightthink. He certainly has a way witn him ind canput things over provided he tikes advice, whichhe generally does. If ne were left on his oNnhis bluff might be called. The poi t is justworth considering.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1923C6Kembal Johnston tells me that MONKEY hasbeen able to arrange for himself a passage toSweden about the 25th of this month. I haveinformed Cordeaux.C. has written to the D.G. asking for Brooman-White's services at Section V. L have rec-commended that we should give him to Fnilbyon the understandin that we may have torecall him for TARs deception unit, andthat for this reason ne should remain onour payroll.I dined with Victor. He had had an extremelyinteresting time at Gib. looking into the caseof the Olterra. There is no doubt that allthe operations from this tanker were conductedwith the connivance of the Spanish authoritiesand we s all probably be able to make out agood case for the F.O. to out over in Madrid.Both Victor ind B-W think that Medlam shouldbe rec lled and that Kirby Green should takeover. Medlam imself seems quite anxious tochange. There is no doubt that he is extremelyunpopular on the Rock and that good relatic iswith the Navy will never exist as long ashe is there.November LOthAt the Nedsnesday meeting Hart said that theAustrian Rudolf EIDERS who Nas recruited bythe German I.S. as an agent for this country,is to be brought over. He has already giventhe British a thorities in Lisbon a consider-able amount of information. Recently theGerman I.S. in Lisb.on has discussed theCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192382possibility of working ENDERS inwith theorganisationof Paul FIDRMUC, which worksunder a commercial cover. If this took placeand ENDERS succeeds in penetrating FIDRMUC'Sorganisation he mignt be useful in this countrFIDRMUC reports purportin to come from thiscountry are almost without exception untrue.The young English seaman William HEAP whoOffered his services to the German I.S. inaAlgeciras and who recently returnedto Gib.has disappeared. He was not put under arresting to the difficulties of extradition orconducting the trial in Gib. Steps had beentaken to persuade him to return voluntarilyEvidently he thought things over and decidedto clear out. He is poor material and it isdoubtful whether the Germans ill be able tomake much use of him. It was probable thatthey had already decided not to use him.Wethered spoke about the unsatisfactoryarrangements of SOE for the despatch of theiragents. These agents re pparently neverse rched before their departure. It should ofcourse be a normal precaution.There have been a number of new arriv ls, MOM:PEAY, ELFERINK and BERTRAND. There is nowconclusive evidence about HOPPE, who stillremains adamant in 020. ELFERINK has so fardisclosed nothing. Stephens thinks that itmay take some little time for him to appreciatethe atmosphere of 020.There is a little trouble about MacDermot, whoseems to have been associated with the organ-CatalogirenReterehce.kW4/92itain" This purportsto be anti-communist and anti-fascist. Itsgeneral tone is Beveridge. At the head of itwas a curious Yugoslav personality known asMITRINOVITCH. He succeeded in collectinground him a number of cranks over whom heseemed to have an almost ypnotic influence.Free love and homosexuality seemed to playsome part. MacDermot appears to nave had arow with one member of this organisation inMay 1939. He nit a man in the chest, whosubsequently died from heart failure. MacDirmot was charged with man-slaughter butacquitted. All this is rather unfortunatejust at the moment when we are thinking ofputting him into COSSAC. I have askedCussen to look at the papers.Dixon came to see me at my request. L broke tohimthe ne w NS that his appointment to COSSAChad not been entirely a success and that inall the cireumstances we felt bound to with-draw him. I said that I thought that a muddlehad occurred owing to a misconception of pre-cisely what the job was. The military wantedone of their staff officers who they thoughtwould be in a better position to drivethings through. The idea was that he shoulahave Dick as his adviser with an understudyprovided by this office. Dixon took thisblow extremely well but did not disguise thathe had had many difficulties with which tocontend. At present the whole of IB workwas in chage of Col.Black and Blakeney neitherof whom had the slightest knowledge of thesubject or of security of any kind. Dixon hadput forward certain memos to them which nadCatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/192subsequently been re-written by them. Theone on Port Control had been written by inAmerican Nav l Officer and was complete non-sense from beginning to end. L said that allthis strengthened my view that Dick would beable to do far more outside the heirarchy ofCOSSAC as he would be able to ive adviceand at the s ame time have direct access tohitefoord. I hadpreviously spoen to White-foord who thought it would be better if Ibroke the nes to Dixon. He took theopportunity of telling me that he was extremne-ly pleased and impressed by the memo on T.I.Swhich Dick had put up. He intended to putthis through with one or t o minor amendmentswhich he thought would probably ease itspassage.I spoke to Frost about Friday's meeting oftheReid Committee. Hewas rather taking theline that there was nothing more for us to do.I said that L thought that from an edica-tive point 01 view we should do for thecivilian orgnisations what the Army veredoing for the signals Units. I arranged th tNe should discuss this matter further tomorrowMeanwhile I have rung up Peter Reid tellinghim that Frost is leaving us butvillprobably be attending the meeting on Fridaywhen he would try and disclaim any responsi-bility for civil security in signals matters.I asked Feter to push this matter well on tohis plate, if he thought that ve Nere theright people for the job. Peter seemedpleased with the general progress tht h dbeen made regarding military security. He wasCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192not ple ased noever. the rather stupid3essdecision of the JIC on the priv te cypnersused by the heads of allied armies for communination with Mid East etc. He agreed with methat before coming to a decision the JIC shoulask hat material had been monitored and de-cy phered during the last 6 months. It wasonly in this way that the relative importanceof intelligence over security or vice versacould be decided.November llthThe PM is off tomorrow by the Renown toGib. Malta and Cairo. Heis being joined bythe President and a delegation from the SovietUnion, wwhen the question of bringing Turkeyinto the war will be diseussed. Cairo doesnot strike me as being a particularly goodspot for such a meeting, since from thepoint of view of leakage it is more or esswide open.Ede talked to me about Dixon replaloing Medlam.I said I thought it would be wrong to su er-cede Kirby Green who was doing extremely welland knew the whole set up in Gio. It wouldtake a ne person quite L time to get thehang of things. The alternative might be tosend Dixon to either N irobi or India.Tangye tells me that there isa grea dea. ofgossip in Fleet St. about the rocket gun.The press, h ving been left In rather a st teof uncert inty are surprised that no precau-tions have been taken to evacuate hospitalsor children, and that no instructions have beenissued to police or civil authorities. HeCatalogue Reference:KVI4/192THISORIGINAL DOCUMENT ETAINEBNDEPARTMENT. UNDER SECTION386ACT 1958.3 T4) OF THEPUBLIC RECORDSthinks that if a rockeu pomb doesland does and uphere and nothing has been one, the governmenill be in a some hat awkward position. Oneof the difficulties is of course Unknon toTangye. If we show any signs Of alarm thereis no doubt that the .Germans will pile it ongood and proper. There Nill then be increasedifficulty in sorting out what is propagandaand what is truth.Tommy Harris has made a very good report onGARBO'S secret ink operation. The primarypurpose was to assist cansorship by letting ibecome known to the enemy that. we were in possesstonn-of the re-agent foran ink which on account of its complex develppment creates considerable difficulties: ifmails are to be bulk-tested. A secondarypurpose-was to indicate to the eenemythatthrough the medium of censorship additionalsecurity measures were being taken in the UKprevent leakage of information prior toimportant militry operations, in this casethe exercise Starkey, by imposing 100% cen-sorship on mails to the Iberian Peninsula ancSwitzerland. They might feelthat if thiswas done with an exercise for inv ision, simi-lar procedure could be adopted prior toOverlord. Thirdly Ne hoped to create confusiby blowing a lot of Garbo's cover addressesand throwing him over to wireless hich inmany respect's is mae convenient. The operation the whole waS fairly successful althoughhad to some extent to goad the Germans into. aCatalogue Reference:KVI4/192THIS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDINEDEPARIMAEN UNDER SECTION313 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.2e0realisation of the facts by various means.They did finally react after we had startedto interrogite in Lisbon the various coveraddressees. This was on 12..10.43 when theysent the following telegram: "Nearly allLisbon addresses h ve been interrogated. withregard to origin o1 letters. This appears tobe a general measure all over the country.In addordance with instructions aadresseeshave replied satisf ictorily. Neverthelessno more letters have arrived. Our represen-tative has left for Lisbon. Cese allcorrespondence also via the courier untilfurther. notice. Likewise agents correspon-dence. We mill have to study a new procedurefor sending correspondence avoiding Englishmail also Portuguese by making use of cutouts (eontacts). I will-continuetorkeep--yo will continueto. keep-youinformed as to the result of cur representative's journey. It is advisaole that youshould be-on be- on your guara"Later they reacted even more forcibly, urgingGarbo to lie row. Though it is perhaps alittle early to draw. conclusions, we can I thinkclaim that we have put the enemy to enor-mous inconvenience, destroying completelythe greater portion of their cover aadressnet work in Lisbon, bringing. the total numberof addresses given to Garbo and subsequently.cancelled by them to 23.: We have deprived themof one cf their best secret inks, cencealingfrom them the fact of their use ofbasic inks. They will prob ibly find. itextremely. difficult te establish a new cover adavfogen using.address genseferenkeanvi4azcale e92V4992cale of the one theyIt nas served as a scare andTHIS IS A COPYORIGINALNDEPARSTMENT UNGER3 (4 OF THE PUBLICRECORO3S8ACT 1958they now realrse tre Tecessrbye keepingGarbo well supplied with reliable coveradaresses, good cyphers andwinks. The factthat he escapes detection should tend tomake them have increased ased onfidence in hisability to run hisrorganisation. It shouldtend to make his somewhat incredible set-uyppear more realistic. It is difficult tosess the degree to which theyhave asso-ciated this m noeubre with operation Starkeybut it is possible that reactions will yetcome to light which ill give us indicationsas to what they will expect usto to do incornection with OverlordL went over to see Duff and told him aboutour progress the-LB.frontIalsotol toldhim about the history of JOB!Later I saw the D:M.I: with TAR and: Bevan:THpurpose of the meeting was tosgetstheiDMIto agree to one approving authority in COSSACinstead of four as at tspresent arrangedat Atthe moment traffic has. to be approvedit byGTQ, Home Forces through Goudie on behaafofDMI, by the Americans through 2lstcArmGroup and through COSSAC: DMI thoughtithereshould be one approving authority at COSSAC.It might however be necessary to get approvalin certain cases if the traffic conernedthe American Armies outside the-COSSAc group:I showed the DMI the case of Neville duBOULAY who according totalked indiscreetly to the Portuguese Ambassadorsabout theCAtatogute Refererade:td/4ngae DMO who wasavery veryanxious if possible to prosecute. I explained56quite definitely that the production of theevidence was out of the question and that inview of the family connections with thePortugueseit would be quite impossible tosay any thing to the officer at all on thebasis of the information obtained. He shouldtherefore be sent to the north of Scothand orto some country abroad which would preventhim from dining with the Portuguese AmbassadorThis course was agreed.Dick Butler has had a talk with MacDermot.There is no doubt that he was in the middleof the "New Britain" movement but that fouryears have caused him to change is-views.The society has been dispersed and he nowonly very occasionally sees MITRINOVITCH inconnection-with some legal matter affectingthe property. Heistill thinks that MITRINO.VITCH is a very remarkable man, althoughheradmits that his hypnotic influence andtheoriesaboutfree love were definitelyunhealthy. Personally I do not think thereis any need to worry about MacDermot or hissuitability for the post in COSSAC.DIOTangye tells me that Duff had resigned anwas later to take up some important postabroad.November 12thDufti's resignation is reported': in the presstoday. His post abroad is connected with theinvasion of F'rance. He apparently to be Min-ister Designate. This fact however is not tobe made public.Catalogue Reference.KV/4/192DEPARTMENT UNE390OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT ACT:1958 96u0Dick Butler, has been over to see Creedy. Itseems that Duff will remain in charge of theSecurity Executive for the time being. Thefuture of that organisation is as yet.undecided. Duf'f is seeing the PM todayabout the future executive head of this officHe thinks that he should not have a successorbut that the department should from thehinisterial point of view come under theMinister ofDefence; atany rate duringwar time.I went over to see Newsam about the.case. The latter wants an opportunityof having a look round London before goingback to Iceland, this in order to give himthe necessary cover with the local inhavitantwho imagine that he has come heee voluntarilyto give information to the authorities:The. Americans. are now going to run him inconjunction withSIS. I am not sure whetherthis is wise.. Their point is that if he isdot run, Cobweb will be compromised: Newsamgave authority for the detention part of the12(5)a order to be revoked and for 35, CrespigRd. to be declared a proper place of detentioHe thought. that the I.0. would have to beinformed at the port of departure in order toget the man clear. L saw no objection to thi:DML rang up to say that the VCIGS was anxiousto ke.disciplinary action against Du BoulayHe wanted to know whether he would be atliberty to discuss the matter with the Directoof Personal Services. I said that C. was theatalegereortieferercohevsapron and that therefore Icould not really give him the answer. I thenthen rang up D.B. and told him what had hap-pened, advising him to'have a word with C:Tricycle. has Left for Lisbon. Ian Wilsonis going today. Balloon is still notionallyin Canada but may later be going there onhis own business. Hamlet has been assuredthat Puppet's reports are much appreciated asthe Germans have SO few lines into this count-ry. Lipstick has reported to SIS fromMadrid. He says that a specialist from Berninterrogated him with satisfactory results,The Germans regard him as-a f'irst-class agent.Lipstick expects to -receive cocrete instruc-tions and directions from the Germans inLisbon sent back to the country. Dragonflynowhas notional employment as an investigatorof Black Market offences in the Ministry ofFood. This gives him the opportunty oftravelling about.I dined with Walter Bell and Kim. Walter. tellsme thathas written a letter sayingthat Bill Stephenson and Hoover habe nowgot their arms round each other's necks andare seeing each other every two days. Iftrue, nobody could wish for anything betteIt will be interesting to see precisely whatit allamounts to.I hada long talk with Kim about organisation.It seems that our ideas more or less coincideexcept that Kim is for total amalgamation ofSIS and MI5. He thinks it would be difficultto separate C.E. C. work from the offensive side.Personally I do not agree. I cannot reallysee why there should not be close cooperationCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192392inthefield.This has been found quitepossible in SIME, and really boils downto the question of personalities. Kim evi-dently has a very high opinion of the officersof B. .Division and regretted that both qualityand numbers in Section V. were SO low, andquite inadequate to perform the task that theyhad on hand. We talked about Brooman-Whiteand the arrangement that L had put forwardseems quite agreeable to Kim.-F'rost came in to tell me about the meetingof the ReidCommittee. He took the line thatthe pass had already been sold at the meetingat Kinnaird House a month or two ago, andthat there was realy nothing very much forhim to say or do. In a sense of course heis quite right. It was agreed at that meetingthat RSS should monitor the civil establish-ments as and when they were able and turn inthe results to the Reid Committee on whichare represented Min. of Supply,MAP,GPO, Supply, MAP, GPO,Railways, And Police. Reid's secretariat wouldgive these bodies such assistance as they canand woudd point out to them the mistakes theyhad made. All these bodies are on occasionsco-opted to the Reid Committee. The reasonwhy L did not press this matter at the meetingat Kinnaird House was that I did not wishto build Frost up in a new job where hewould again be at logger-heads with everybody.Had he not been there I should have pressedhard for our taking over the educational sideand urged that RSS as our technical tool shouldmonitor from time to time and turn in theCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192products to us. In the circumstances howeverit seemed better that the Reid ormittee shoultake this matter in hand. The result is thatweare now only asked to look after privatefirms which in fact we do already. We maypossible extend our activities in thisdirection.November 13thI gather from Sclater that Frost has somejob for the BBC in connection with broadcastingfrom the Second F'ront. He is apparently toaccompany Howard Marshall and look after thetechnical side of the equipment. Meanthilehe is bent on liquidating Barnet. L thinkthe best thing will be for him to put down onpaper what he thinks ought to be done withBarnet and then disappear. TAR can then lookthe whole organisation over and decide what isto be done. Meanwhile Maltby has communi-cated with Sclater, telling him that as soonas the coast is clear he wants to get togetherand decide how we and RSS can mutually assistone another.November 15thDick butler has seen Duff. Duff say the PMon Friday in his bath. He was at that timesomewhat harrassed (a) because he had justbeen injjectedfor typhoid andyhad a tempera-ture of 100 with a possible 101 the followingday, (b) because of his impending departurefor Cairo, and (c) owing to the dispute withthe French over the Lebanon incident. TheCataloguedreterenee:k4niez Duf'f's memoabout theTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAT DOCUMENT RETAINEDNDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION39%3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958future- of the Dept: and hed written Lo ErnestBrown telling. him to take over the SecurityExecutive and that he would also eMinisterfor MI5. Duff replied that this was quiteimpossible, since this meant that Brownwould have access to all Most Secre't materialproduced by SIS, apart from -our own highlyconfidential reports. The PM. eventually,ther under protest, pressed his bell andcancelled his letter to Ernest-Brown andsent for Eden and Bridges. Duif thendis-cussed the matter with them, after which itwasdecided that in future our representationon the ministerial level should -be: Dick LaWof the F.O. This is L think quite a wisedecision. Dick Law is very much a coming manand the fact of our now beingunder an0.Minister will torpedo any. objections thathave formerly been raised to amaggamation onthe grounds that we could not operate abroadbecause-w are not under the F.0. We shallof course continue to be responsible totheH.O. for such matters as concern them. Creedyis to be head of the Security Executive; whicwill clearly on this account lose a'acertainount of its force. It will really be Iittlnore than a forum for discussion of inter-departmental matters.At the press meeting today Tangye said thatthe Fleet St. view of future operations wasthat we were going to attack, the herbourgPeninsula in January.I had a meeting withFelix, Dick, Milmo,Catalogue Horrocks efereace theney on the subject ofa Oi a Black List which would2395come into operation at Stage A. It was agreedthat the basis of this Black List shouldbe the second front documents, Purple Primers,and the like, which had been compiled by SIS.It was also agreed that a special list ofpeople of international importance likelyto travel from one area to another should becompiled. The responsibility f r this listwould be ours and the names would be sub-mitted to Passport Control in the formof special circulars to -their representativesabroad, instructing them to report backany applications.L had a word with Horrocks afterwards.: Weare not: very sanguine about the basis forthe first list since we had doubts about thereliabilityof the information compiled bySIS. Horrocks will decide how the secondlist is to be compiled and who should beresponsible for it. He will subsequentlyissue a circilar.Dickihad-a meeting with Felix last week when heexplained to him, the part that he is playirin COSSAC. Felix was inclined to take thview that in so far as the dissemination ofinformation to LB. staffs was concerned, thishad already been arranged with Army Group.Dick said that Army Group were subordinate toCOSSAC and whether Felix liked it or notthe juggernaut of COSSAC would pass over him:He would therefore be well advised to come inwith us and join in some sensible form ofplanning. Rather reluctantly Felix agreedCatalduuetRiferercieckvis/nzving a frightayl time3sikwith Cols:Blac and Blakeney; who, with theirAmerican A.T. secretary, commonly known as"Butterfly"; are: a knockabout turn of theMarx Bros. variety.. Their knowledge of I.B I.matters is zero and since they are at themoment in charge of that side of I. workat COSSAC the -position is really ratherserious. It is hoped that before long someresponsible I.B.officer will be appointedG.1,IB. Dick seems: quite worn out withthe "Butterfly"iatmosphere and the whole set-uIn the middle of a serious conversation,Blakeney suddenly remembers that he has adate;-rings-up-on-thetelephone-an date;- i-rings telephone and holds-along, frivolous and sexy conversation witha girl, with asides of "How'm I doing g,Butter-fly'?". An important document relating to.B.staf'f matters was -required butneedlessto. say.: nobody could find it. Butterfly onbeing somewhat harrassed tells the assembledcompany.not to razz her: She also alludesto her senior af ficers as 'the boys". Some-thing will have to be: done about the situationsoon.November l6thI went to-theJ.I.C. today-to-discuss-thepaper recommending that the visits of Serviceand CivilAttaches to places of importanceshould be curtailed. The meeting was heldlate unfortunately and L had to leave at thecritical moment to attend the decorationof Col. Bartik and Major Slama by Gen Grassetat the: W.0: 0: This event seems to have beenan unqualitied success. - The .G.made anCatalogue Reference:KVT4/192THIISIS ThISISAcomy comeOBIGINAL303:4) OF THE PUBLIC HLCOIAACI 1958excellent speech. Brig: vae, Rupert Speir,Dick, Charles,and myself were all preserI found itdifficult to keep a straight faceThere is no doubt that the whole proceedingsincluding a slap-up lunch at Manetta's whenBartik made a very goodlittle speech, willbe most beneficial to the.continuance of thegood liaison with the Czechs.November 17thI discussed with Caroe the question of theH/T in the German Legation in Dublin: 1drafted a Letter to Archerof the D:0: agreeing with the contents of the note for SirJohn Stephenson, but pointing out that theactual date of the demarche did not appearto have been-decided on. 1- suggesteathatit were made 4-5 weeks before the operationit would not give the Germans much timeto get a new set going and wouldanotra not as farSrl.could see pinpoint Overlord since aeriareconnaissance would by that time have madeclear that operations were impending: T alssuggested-that-to-cover-M-E! pointabothe possibility of a reserve transmitterthe Eire authorities should be induced toask HEMPEL for both his wireless sets oralternatively for his wireless set and anyother wireless equipment in his possession.At -the Wednedday meeting Mrs-Spring saidthaISOS disclosed tha't at the request of theBOT a man alled "Bastler" is being sent tothis- country The LRC have found: a characterCatatagueelenensettv/4/92bao who is coming tosee the BOT and seems to fit. t.he bi Ho396appears to have in his possession a cover addre-ress which has been given to Lipstick.There is the usual flood of totally inaccuratereports from Lisbon and Madrid alleged to bereceived from this country.Hughes came to tell me that Frost is tellingis statf that the whole organisation atarnet is being liquidated by Horrocks and thatthey had better look round for other jobs,and that he will be notifying all concerned.I think at this stage Frost is merely talking.I have spoken to Horrocks who tells me thathis recommendations will be coming up to metomorrow. He thinks it may be pas sible tobring the personnel up to London or at anyrate the majority, but he agrees that noliquidation should take place until TARhas had an opportunity of Looking intothe department, and the liaison with RSShas been given a chance of developing.Dixon came in to tell me that he had spokento Whitefoord who was extremely sympathetic.ixon told him quite frankly of his difficultieswith the Americans and said that he would bewell-advised to arrange that his new G. 1 haddirect access to higher authority and did notoperate through Cols.Black and Blakeney, whohad no knowledge of IB matters whatever.Whitefoord had apparently been unasare of thefact that Dixon's memo had been put in thewastepaper basket by these two mountebanks.Dick also $aw him today and rubbed the point inCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192Bruce Ottley came to see me about a Cypriotcalled MATTASS who has been acting as anagent for MEW at Mersin. This man isapparently a thoroughly undesirable Levantineand the consulate are anxious to get rid ofhim and feel he is less likely to do harmif he is sent here. I said that we couldnot refuse him leave to land as he was aBritish subject, although we were notanxious for more doubtful citizens herethan was absolutely necessary.November lothI saw Gibbs, who is leaving us in the courseof the next day or to. He has offered tocontinue instruction to officers going over-seas on counter-sabotage duties, and he is alsowilling to come back to us if we are really indifficulties.L hear that Cookie h hi IS caught a spy aged 16who was about to fly a Tiger-Moth over toGermany.Tim Airy is leaving tomorrow for Ceyl lonand will probably be at Mountbatten's head-quartas.T had a meeting to discuss the case of JOB.TAR was rather anxious to knock him off onSaturday. The only fresh information is thathe has visited an individual called PERLIMANwho may conceivably have some connection witha man of that name in Paris who has an Abwehrconnections. So far JOB has not visitedDragonfly or delivered the goods. We haveCatalogue Reference:KVI4/192THIS IS A COPYORISINA3 (4 OF THE PUBLC REERDSAOT 1958been trying to get tnrougat LO the Germans totell them kkxk Xso, but SO far -without successBearing in mind that our main objective is.to get Dragonfly. on the air and: on goodtermswith his master and in addition to safeguardhis position as much as possible, we havedecided to let the case run on for anotherweek in the hope that the jewels will bedelivered. We might then consider whetherJOB was worth watching on heassumptionthat he might have erassignmentIf we could catch him out we might thenprosecute him without introdicing the Dragonfincident.at; allsa My Own n-belief isethatJOdecided to serve the AbHerh as means ofgetting away and that he intends to pockettherjewelleryand say: nothing; in case hemight be misunderstood and-getintodifficulties. This is not a very ypatriotio attitudeif in fact he knoNs the jewellery was intendeforma German agent: in this country: wearrest him on present evidence. itlis: nomeans certain that we shallzbe able to holdhim. He might very wellrsay that, hearingthat he was coming here, friend gave himThe jewellery to deliver to someone namedof whom he had no previous knowledge: Hehad not done so; either becausethe had not hatime to deliver it in person, or because hethought the matter slightly fishy, or becausehe intended to keep he-jewellery for himselfIf he has to. be released there'willalwaysbe a certain risk of the truth getting backto the Germans. As long as he remains atlarge we cannot acknowledge the recet of thejewllery since we do not know whetherhe has:batalogueryeterentfikt ted with the Germans insecret ink in which case our story: might con-flict with his. 2 We have decided to let thecase run for another week. Meanile weare discussing with the H. H..O ..0. the conditionshis arrest and detention can be carried out.HELLMUTH-haS-broker entirely nd'-given usparticulars about his relations ith the SD andhis mission to Berlin. This is fortunatethe thecase case was rather an awkward one from thepolitical angle. The-Argentine Ambassadorwas already intervening on his behalf.Josephhas arrived in Lisbon and establishedcontact with the Japs:Treasurer has arrived at last and after 5 daysinterrogation atithe LRCiwaS-releasedShe isvery intelligent and co-operative: KliemanniS supposed to be sending her a H/T trans-nitter-viatheSpanish:diplomati bag or bygetting the transmitter disguised as a portablegramophone, packed by a gramophone company inLisbon andsent over by them. Treasure issupposed to buy second--ha hand wirelessreceiving set as soon as possibleafter arrarrival and to listen for Kliemann straightaway: She hasto cover addresses to. hich toreport her arrival. We are trying try ing to get heremployment with the British Red Cross.has-been interviewedby the American authorities and has givenpermission for his name to be used for XX pur.poses in America whilehe he himself remains-:the hands of the Dutch Govt: The case hastheatafogvebrsefeteneesklouel9to the FBI:yoNovember 19thGarbo asked a short time ago what steps heshould take in connection with the rocket-gunscare. Should he move his wife and childrenout of London, and report on the results ofthe rocket, by wireless, correcting errors offire, etc. On 10. 8.11.43 he received the reply"In regard to the rocket-gun, there is nocause for you to alarm yourself". This seemsto fit in with the theory that although theGermans may have a rocket-gun its claims aregrossly exaggerated.The D.G. talked to me today about Brooman-White. He now wants him to act as a kind ofP.A. to Dick. I said that if Dick wantedhim I had no objection. I wondered a littlehowever whether there was much in the circum-stances he could do. Dick will have MacDermotto assist him in regard to the I.B. .staff andother experts in this office on particularroblems. Such papers as come up to himfrom Hart, Milmo etc. are already thoroughlydigested. L told the D.G. about Frost'sintention of liquidating his own department andsending letters round to all his contactsThe D.G. was annoyed and said "He wull do nosuch thing".The question of the publication of escapestories has been raised again through a rathercritical letter received from Admiral Thomson,whose NDO has seen fit to criticise thisdepartment for being uncooperative. As, luckwould have it, both Stamp and I were in theND 'S r om when the Press & Censorship repre-Catalogue Reference:KV/4/192u303sentative rang up. He could only give us anoutline of the story with no name. We saidthat the story coincided very much with PERCHand that if the individual was PERCH the storyshould not be published since if PERCH wasall right the organisation which helped himto escape and his relatives would suffer, andif on the other hand he was all wrong, weshould be making a present to the enemy ofthe fact that he had passed successfullythrough our controls. The Censorship repre-sentative said that the individual with whomhe was concerned had arrived within the last24 or 40 hours. As PERCH had already been inthe country for some weeks it was assumed thathe was referring to some other individual aboutwhom we had no kno ledge. We asked him toascertair the n me but he did not seem inclinedto help. Meanwhile it has been discoveredthat the story had already been released tothe "News Chronicle". It is high time thata firm ban was put on all escale stories.The publication of the experiences of LucienneCLOAREC a fe eeks igo has successfully blownthe Sibiril organisation, which has beenresponsible for getting well over 100escapees to this country.Dick Butler received a call from IDNI askingif he could possibly come over to SanctuaryBuildings on a matter of urgent importance.He found Lewes and Janson struggling with anote which they had been asked to prepare onthe Security Service. It seems that thequestion of the future ministerial head of thisoffice was referred to the Chiefs of Staff,Catalogue who held a eferenceskviditogoes meeting without saying404that none of them knew anything about theSecurity Service or indeed that it had everhad a ministerial head, though it is quitepossible that the N.O. thought that it cameunder the C.1.G.S. They therefore decidedto request their subordinates to obtain thenecessary data aboutthis obscure organisationin order that they might reach a decision onthis momentous question. The effect of this hahad been th t Admirat Syfret, Acting thiefof the Naval Staff, called a meeting consistingof himself, DNI, ADNI and others, which seemsto have been somewhat on the level of theMarx Bros. Nobody apparently had the slightestidea what they were talking about, andeventually they broke up after instruetingADN to collect the necessary data and preparea paper. Dick Butler found a draft preparedby Janson which seemed to contain one or twomajor inaccuracies, but concluded on thenote that the whole question seemed to be beyorthe competence of the Admiralty and was reallya matter on which the Director General ofthe Security Service himself should expressan opinion. Lewes was extremely apologeticand it was very considerate of him to ring upand consult us. This is a typical exampleof how things go wrong When they reachexalted circles. Nobody knows what they aretalking about and the fate of a department isdecided by the toss of a coin. We decidedthat the D.G. must be informed about thewhole matter tomorrow.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/192(orNovember 20thDuff was very concerned about the fact ofhis successor bei g the subject of discussionby the Chiefs of Staff, and directed thatDick Butler should go over and see Bridges.When Dutler got back here he found MalcolnCumming in a state of great excitementbecause Pettit on behalf of Buss was seekinginformation about the Security Service andits responsibilities, clearly in connectionwith the question of its future ministerialhead. Could we give him any assistance.There has so far been no reaction from theW.O. who doubtless say wee already are underthe Minister for War and that therefore thequestion does not arise. When Dick Butlersaw Edward Bridges, the latter nearly hitthe roof, shouted for his secretary and pressedbells. He said that the matter had gotnothuing to do with the Chiefs of Staff,that it was entirely in his hands. He hadhowever consulted personally Sir Edward Grigg,also Sir Arthur Street and someone in theAdmiralty. He had also had a word with SirAlexander Cadogan. It had never been hisintention that this matter should have beenthe subject of discussion by the Chiefs ofStaff Committee, and he instructed hissecretary to summon the Secretary of theChiet's of Staff, when he will doubtless tellhim that his masters are meddling in somethingwhich is not their concern.I took Dick's meeting this morning. We dis-cussed the case of HELLMUTH. SIS are apparent-ly anxious to cash in on the information bygiving it to G2, with the suggestion that theyCatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/19240bshoud discuss the position with the Chiefs ofStaf'f. We however in the normal course ofbusiness should and must give the informationto Thurston since it concerns an area forwhich Mr. Hoover is responsible. the realdanger is of course that the FBI may startinstigating a number of arrests of SD personn-el which will result in the closing down ofIZAK. We therefore propose to give SIS 48hours start in order that they may warn G2that they may be approached by the FBI forfurther information on the basis of IZAK, theexistence of which the FBI are aware althoughthey are not allowed to see the material. Weshall then issue the 020 report both toThurston and to SIe, entering a caveat inour letter to Thurston against taking anyprecipitate action without prior consultationwith the State Dept. SIS may say that we arejeopardising the IZAK material This howeverwould be otally utrue since it is perfectlypossible that the FBI could take action purelyon a basis of the Camp 020 report.Reggie Gibbs told me about his conversationwith Vivian. He is very worried about thelatter who he thinks is suffering from perse-cution mania and f'rom an obsession about thewhole American business. He cannot stoptalking about it and goes round and round likea squirrel in a cage. Gibbs discussed withhim firstly the reasons why the FBI are inclineto gravitate to this dept. rather than toRyder St and secondly our reasons for wishingto discontinue the automatic sending of copiesCatalogue ReferenCe:KV/4/192of all our correspondence with the FBI toSIS. He pointed out to Vivian that inalmost every letter sent by the FBI they madea specific request, adding that they would begrateful for any other information in ourpossession "along simil r lines". SIT mightor might not deal with specific questions butwhen they see "any other information onsimilar lines" they find themselves in some=thing of a difficulty since as an office ththey are sending out and receiving wires allday with rarely any opportunity of digestinginthe material and considering the best use towhich it can be put on a long term basis. Weon the other hand made a caref'ul study of allthe material we received. 020 cases werethoroughly sifted, information distributedto all concerned, old cases were re-siftedin the light of fuether information etc. Wewere therefore better constituted to supplythe information on similar lines". this wasa point which did not seem to occur to Vivianbut he admitted that it was a point of con-siderable importance. As regards sendingcopies of our information to SIS Gibbs saidthat in future e proposed to ask thurston tto indicate on any items of information sub-mitted to us whether or not he had passed acopy to SIS. If he had done SO we shouldautomatically send a copy of our reply to SID.For the rest,GIBBS suggested that we should beallowed to use our discretion as to whether amatter was or was not of interest to SIS. Hemade it clear that Thurston was to an increas-ing extent obtaining his information by wordof mouth and occasionally we followed up a con-Catalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/192versation with an item of information in writingosDivorced from its context,suc a letter wouldhave no meaning for SIS at all and only leadto confusion. Vivianhas apparently agreedto this agrangement.C. and D.B. came to see me after LunchI showed C. the noteof Garbo's Garbo'straffi traffic relat-ing to the rocket. C. thought it is. in a sensesomewhat re-assuring. He thinks it quiteossible that therclaims by P/Win connectiorwith the rocket may.-well be exaggerated-a andthat its primary use is for antiinvasionpurposes.t It is by no means certain thatthe emplacements in Franceare to be used forthe installation of rocket apparatus! Meanwhuother German experiments. are going on swithsomething in-the nature of a Queen Bee carryila heavy load-of explesive, but the indicationsare that nothing is likely to come into production before the New Year. The whole busilness seems-to be stillto- a considerable extenin the experimental stage, although everypeffort is being made to get this new form'ofglider-bomb bombintoproduction: into. told me that Passy is leaving here to takever command of the Intelligence-Services inN.Africa. I fact he1S more ar Tess totakeCochet's place, the latter having been sacked,although he did not know it, before he arrivedhere. What is extremely unfortunatesis that RRivet and Faillol have resigned. gatheredthat Passy was going to do all he could toof the French is to try.and-run try and run the-whole of thretain the - services of Paillol. The tendencyCatalogue ReferENCe:KVI4/192THIS IS A COPY09TAMENT INEEFHEPUBLLE RECOROSeceshow from N. Africa. hey have Lready unbuttoned a large proportion of ISOS althoughthey.have not got ISK U. is very muchopposed to their trying to run agents intoF'rance from N. Africa since this can only leadto confusion. The French Service-here isgoing-to be e--run run by a general-with a doublename who has recently come out of France.November 2lstIt has been agreed thatshould go toLisbon - and Madrid for a period of 3 months.He-will -make-contact with isformer Germanconnections in the Embassies and yultimate-Ly worm his way. into Abwehr circles.J.ohn Marriottan J.C. came to see abouta reportmfrom the NDO to the effect that aplane had vlown very low over the usual areain Aberdeenshirel last night. The TheRSLO RSLO wantedto know whether we ereexpecting anythigg;since the RAF had had instructions to Leavethe plane alone. L think this is probably anold -instruction which had not been cancelled.Curiously we hadin facthad a date withthe Germans. last night but for some reasonthey.thad called it off. Perhaps they hadforgottento tell their ow air force.I amfinding out: whether this flight can beexplained: in any way on operational grounds.If.not-we-may have to organise a search. Thelocal police have been warned. L spoke toHume of Edinburgh Region who is referring thematterback to Fighter Command HQ who willgetinto direct touch with us. Perhaps when weCatateg'yeereferencaakrtt4we9may take a differentview.yicWe then discussed thecase of Balloon. Henormally corresponds through Sousa de Camposf'rom whom both he and Gelatine receive draftSousa de Campos has recently confessed to anagent of SIS that he is in touch with Balloorand Gelatine. This creates rather an awkwarcsituation, since if we take O-action Sousade Campos will know that Balloon and Gelatinare XX agents, and may report the fact tothe Germans.- Thisiill of course compromisTricycle,Artist and everybody. else.. Thesuggestion is t at Artist who is after allin control ofithe whole party; should begiven the actsand-provide-some-solution-bywhich the Germans will cease to use Sousa deCampos. Marriott and J C. think this incideris the result of the blowing of cover addresses in Lisbon and Madrid during the 100%Secreink testing and subsequent action by Garbo,which has had the effect of frighteningall those who are working fnrthe for the Germanstosuch a degree that they are inclined to sellout to the British.A proposo this e:have had-a letter fromMills in which he states that OSS have recentpicked, up several Of Aspirin's controlledletters-and sent them back to the FBI asofpossible interest since they indicate thepresence of an agent operating in the USA.It maybe that the individual who is being usea S a cover address: has reported the facts toUSS. Alternatively OSS, having got hold of tWatch List, may be trying to make contact witCatallogteRefeenseivid1e2 addresses. This woulTHIS IS A COPYINOEPARTMAEN EMAENG UNDES SEC ON314) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958very. easily account tor Hoowver 6 atitude asdisclosed by Sir Edwin Herbert at the famousKinnaird Housemeeting on the future of ourrelations with the U.S. authorities, when hesaid that Hoover had refused to pass addressestorhis own censorship because he was afraidthat. they might reach CSS.who has come out through Gib., is dto arriveat Ham tonight. I had a wordwith Stephens. L told him. that.wouldbe quite ready to tell us about all hiscolleagues, but might be less disposed togive us information on the part that her him-self had played: He was probably of a typewhich might respond either to the soft pedalthe loud pedals E thought therefore in theearly stages it would beLbetter-not-to-treahim too rough.In the property of HELLMUTH; who--has completelybroken, was found a piece.o1 paper with thefollowing words written under each other:YSigismundo; Panadera, Principal, Temporal,Conductor" asiworkedthis- outfollows: Sigismundo is Sigismund. Panaderis the Spanish for Baker and means BECKER,Principal-m rincipal-meansHaupt",Tem Temporal means: "Sturm"and Conductor means "Fuehrer". Hence Sigis-mund BECKER, Hauptsturmfuehrer, who is theprincipal S: D. rppresentative in B.A.I. spoke to the DIG about his letter to C. onthe subject of the I.B. and suggested that asthings seemed to be going better: it might beCataogdetrefegence:kttl4send, K0/4802 the letter at thismoment but to await developments and send it4e7later if necessary. He agreed to do this.He also spoke to me about Brooman-White, whenI again gave him my reasons for thinking thathe could not be of any great assistance toDick.November 22ndI spoke to Fergie about HELLMUTH. He asks usnot to tell Thurston that a copy is beinghanded to G. G. 2 2. of our interrogation report.I said that the only purpose the actionsuggested would serve would be to build upG.2 2 at the expense of the FBI. Fergie deniedthat this was the purpose. He said th at thesole idea was to inveigle G.2 to give themaximum assistance to the FBI. He argued thatif G. 2 knew the full facts of our report theymight then be in a position to divulge more frosecret sources. I could not quite followthis point since it seemed to me that if G. 2were only going to disclose the IZAK where itwas confirmed by the interrogation report,their contribution would not be a particularlyprofitable one. It seemed to me tha theywould have to make up their minds whether theywere prepared to disclose the IZAK or a para-phrase of it to the FBI or not. Quite obvious-ly they should disclose it in toto, at thesame time making stringent stipulations asto the use to which it can be put. Fergie toldme that SIS had already notified G. 2 thatHELLMUTH had broken on the lines of theinformation contained in Most Secret material,and had advised them to approach the FBI and ifnecessary the State Dept. with a view topreventing any precipitate action by the FBICatalogue Reference:KV/4/192diswhich might lead to a/continuance of IZAK.I said that if SIS had already done thisit seemed to me more than ever unnecessary forthem to communicate an advanced summaryof our interrogation report to G. 2 beforeit had been passed to the FBI. I pointed outthat while we thoroughly appreciated thenecessity for preventing ill-consideredaction by the FBI, they were the dept. pri-marily concerned with the case. If there-fore they found us communic ting our interro-gation report in advance to G. 2 they wouldundoubtedly regard our action as a breach offaith. This was the situation which we wishedto avoid at all costs. Fergie ended byaccepting the terms of our letter. It wasagreed that we would simultaneouslyhand a copy of the reportto Thurston and toSIS and that Thurston would receive no cover-ing letter at all.JOB has challenged his atchers. This meansthat there is no object in continuing theobservation and that e shall have to pullhim in. It is proposed to arrest him under18(3) and send him to the Oratory Schools.L have now seen a chart of the aircraft that Ccame in on Saturday night off the coast ofScotland. At only one point did it touchthe coast and then only to a depth of abouthald a mile. I am very doub,tful whetherthere was any attempt to drop an agent.Probably the plane was looking for convoys.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/192T saw Jock Whitefoord this evening:toldhim about MacDermot's past historyT saidthat 4 years ago he had been associated withthe organisation known- nownas!New-Britain", whic]had at its head a curious individual calledMITRONOVITCH who seemed to have almost hypnotic-powers over over-h his followers. Young-Mac-ermot had been drawn into the organisatiorby his mother, who had financed-hin to a>certain extent. The organisation was anti-communist and anti-fascist: Otsbasisseemedto be a kind of Beveridge Socialism:During one of the meetings young MacEermothadhad-a row-with-another member: which hadended in a fight. His opponent who was hitin the chest died of heart failure and MacDermot was. put on trial ormanslaughters Heasacquittee, and -sincesthis-incidentheha sinceathis this incident he thas-had nothing more to do with the organisation,ad hardly ever sees MITRONOVITCH.I told Whitefoord that ypersonal view was:that wacDermot was only anxious to forgetabout the past.ano 1 felt confident that hewould-dohis job at CUSSACextremelywell:He was bothintelligentand energetici Whitfoord said he very much appreciated the D.G.wish that he-shouldbe informed. He wa'showever quite-satisfied that someoneEwh hadbeen employed in M.I.11 andy subsequently inM.1.5 with satisfaction was good enough forWhitefoord said he would not mention the matto anyone. He then told thathe wasverygratefil for all the help Dick White had bbeCatalogue Fefeterce: KRV/Arp9. He had studied thenemorabout the integration of IB.land3a IB.la and anORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDEPUBIS OHESAo 1958: 2edewas quite: satisiled that the course suggestedwas the right one'. He had written to C.accordingly: and did not anticipate any diffi-culty. I said that L alway.s found C. mostresponsive. It was only when such questionsgot down to Gowgill's level that there wasinvariably trouble.November 23rd-27thAway with flu.Dick tells me that. his meeting at COSSACrasquite successful. Felixis:-ill and wasrepresented by Vivian and a fellow calledDick had the feeling that Vivianwas wandering rather, and indulging in acertain amount of sentimentrabout Felixwhichcould not be appreciated either by those whoknew him or by. the majority who did not.However agreementappears to have been reached.We are apparently to make a considerable con-tribution to the Purple Primer. Details ofthis areto to be decided later. The meetingwas primarilyforithe for the purpose of gettingbasicdecisions and planning,of certain aspectsof 1B work such as the interrogation ofsuspectsetc:etc. I reallysthink that M.f:5are coming into their ownat last, since Dickgathered from Adams that Kenneth Strong hadlaid it down quite definitely that no agentswere. to be run in N. Africa except under- theIBstaf'f. Trevor-Wilson is consequently to bewithdrawn. This may account for Mair'sappointment and promotion to G.2 in order thathe may collate and co-ordinate the work of theS.I.0B)units. Jock Whitefoord is now beginninCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192416to talk of wanting an M.1.5 man for this andan M.I.5 man for that.Pearce f'ro East Af'rica is to take over Mac-Dermot's place in Lennoxis section, sinceBrock refused to part with David. Ratherhard on the latter seeing that he has done4 years solid drudgery without any increaseof pay. The job in Lennox!s section wouldhave given him a G.2's pay at least. Heholds the rank it present but characteris-tically does not get the money.JOB was arrested on the 23rd. He has beeninterrogated at the Oratory Schools andconfessed. So far 1 have no detalls butgather th t TAR proposes to run him. He hadsome secret ink concealed in his bazor handleand in a key, but so far had not made use ofit. He intended to hang on to the jewellery.I heard a rather good P. M. story which I amtold is absolutely true but not for repetitionA propos of Eden's visit to Mid East he said"The Foreign Secretary has asked me what heis to say to Turkey. L am of opinion thatne should remind T'urkey that Xmas is coming".He longed to send this message but refrainedf'rom doing so as he Ehdught that Eden mighttake him too literally.There was a lively discussion, about Ireland'sneutrality. Gray, the American Ambassador,drafted rather a good letter to Dev, urgingEire to join the Allies. When on leave heshowed it to the President who showed it toCatalogue Reference:KVI4/192ui7Winston at the time of the Quebec Conference.Winston referred it back to the Cabinet whopronounced against any move of the kind. Thecase was very ably argued by Cranbourne. TheP.M. was not however satisfied. He takes theview that if Eire does not come in with usduring the war, the prospect of a solution asbetween north and south will recede even furthethan it is already. Everyone will argue thathad it not been for our hold upon the norththe Germans might well have invaded lreland Nitdisastrous results to ourselves. lf on/ theother hand Eire joined in with us and becamea real part of the Commonwealth, some kindof solution might be possible. In the presentstate of the game the naval authorities donot regard the lrish bases as of any greatimportance. Maffey and the D.U. L believeopposed the move as they thought it betterto let Ireland stew in her own juice anddiscover for herself how she alienated opinionboth here and in the USA.I gather that there has been some tentativeapproach by both the Scandinavians and theLow Countries to Gen. Smuts to be broughtwithin the orbit of the British Empire.This is an extremely interesting move and onewhich, if the irish only knew, might make themthink quite a lot.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/192November 29thReturned to work. i have been looking intothe case of Charles BEDAUX who is under arrestin N. Africa. BEDAUX who is a naturalisedAmerican citizen of French origin, is in thecustody of the Americans and may be triedeither for treachery or for trading with theenemy. F'rom papers found in his possessionthere is no doubt that he is a whole-heartedcollaborationist but probably he is moreinterested in BEDAUX than anything else.He has had many connections with the Abwehrand with German officials, which fact headmits. He says however that it was only inthis way that he could carry out his construc-tive policy by establishing a pipe line fromthe River Niger to N. Africa, which was tocarry vegetable oils, He needed lorries,petrol, oil, tyres and finally iron and steelwhich he could only get with full Germanauthority. Unfortunately for BEDAUX, ISOSand HARLEQUIN show that he has told only thehalf-truth, interspersed with a few lies.One of his more interesting statements is thathe went to Berlin in Oct. 1941 at the instiga-tion of a Dr.Joseph Francois MEDICUS, wherehe spent approximately 4 weeks discussing witha large number of experts the various plansfor protection against the distruction of manyoil refineries in the Persian Gulf. The ideawas to protect these refineries from bombingfrom the air and also from long-distanceeRtiateed firing by the use of sand. BEDAUXthat these refineries belong chieflyto the English and that Mr. 0. Elkington ofthe Anglo-Iranian Oil Co. London could vouch forCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192the purpose of his visit to Berlin. BEDAUXadvised that he felt the refineries of thePersian Gulf belonged to the world at arge anctheir destruction either by the retiringAllied Forces or by the attacking Germanswould be a futile gesture. In his opinionthese refineries should be standing intactat the conclusion of the war, regardless ofits outcome, and it was his suggestion thatthe pipes of the refineries should beemptied and filled with sand SO that theywould be of no value to any country during thewar, and therefore there would be no strate-gic purpose accomplished by destroying them.BEDAUX claimed that many of the German expertsdid not consider his plan practical whileothers contended it was out of the questionin a total war. ISOS shows that on 25. 10. 41the Abwehr in Brest informed Einzluft,Bremen,that BEDAUX was travelling to Berlin at therequest of the Germany Embassy in Paris. He waanxious to have a conference with SonderfuenrerDr.Bensmann of Bremen who was to travel toBerlin for the purpose. On 27.10.4 27. 41 Bremenwas informed by the Abwehr in Paris that asPiekenbrock was ill, Bensmann was in thefirst instance to make averbal report tohis deputy, eputy,Lt.Col. Lt. Col. Scholz. BEDAUX was not tobe present at the interview. On 5.11.41Bensmann was instructed to to introduceBEDAUX to a certain RrOLessor Endrou ofriedrich-Wilhelmstr.12, BerlinyF'rom the above it seems not unlikely that asBEDAUX'S company had fora long time beenclosely associated with the Ango-Iranianand had presumably rationalised the wholeCatalogue ReferenCE:KVI4/1924 yaoconcern according to the BEDAUX system; theGermans thought that he might ivethemuseful information at a time when they hopedto conduct a pincer movement in the Mid East.They would obviously have been anxious toprevent any destruction of the oil wells, andif the had had it in mind to drop air-bornetroops it would have been of great value toLem t O have full information about the keyoints. This was in fact the mission ofMULLER who visited the area in the autumn ofthe following year.. His purpose was toprevent a possible scorched earth policy by thBritish.ilt. was of course in August 1942 thatPersia was occupied by ourselves and theAllies, but at that moment things were lookingvery y-ugly-both in the Caucasuszand in Libya.TAR is not quite SO certain about. runningJOB and is even contemplating the possibilityof sacrificing Dragonfly and puttingJOBortrial. JOB when first arrested still deniedthat he had been working for the enemy. After24 hours at the: Oratory Schooisoin solitarypnfinement he confessed thatahe-hadsecret thatno in the handle of his razor and in aakey.e did not however say nything about thejewellery. When-asked -about thishe deniedthat it was for that purpose: It wasonlywhen he was shown the address to which he wasto send-it that he finally collapsed: Hisexcuse xix for not mentioning. it beforewasthat he had intended to keep it for his own usCussen told me about his latest. leakage-caseenealaeHes A Dr. RAWDON-SM eference:kv49gzas been employed bytry O1 Supply and left to take up otheTHIS IS A COPYOtHEMEN ALTAEINOEPARTMENT ONDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958employment, handeaa great dea of informationconcerning deficiencies i our tank construc-tion to Ronald Hyde,T'angye's friend on the"Evening Standard" Hyde passed them on toWilt'red Roberts M.P., whose secretary, havingforgottenito poast the documents back to Hydebefore going on-leave to lreland, gave-therto a Censorship representative to put in thepost for her. it was in this way that thecontents of, therdocument were discovered.Cussen is going to talk rather severely bothto Hyde and RAWDON-SMITH. The idea wasthat when Wilfred Roberts asked awkward ques-tions in the e-House the Evening Standard wouldhave the necessary background in writing up:the debate.Little dame tosee me today.. Hehas-now-been He has now-beenmade D; N.s1. N.s 1. Ottawa. He is working in veryclosely with Mills and is anxious to help inmaking-up-deception-plans: He is having alookat B:lARoger came: to talk to me about M.He:hasHebeen rather disturbedaiby-a-recent-casewhere M. put 3: agents andon to a stateless RuSSian who was tellingeverybodyf that he was an gent of the OGPU.In fact this man had posed as an agent of theOGPU on no less than 3 different occasionsand andwa was thoroughly well known to the Police.What Hoger feelsiisthat M'S organisationshould not be allowed to pursue cases in thevoid. He should bring cases to the notice ofsections s-.concerned and accept their rulingas to future conduct. M. lives more or lessGataleguetRelerenge:ksV/At94y very much out of42touch with the work of the office, and there-fore becomes somwhat of a dnager. Roger isI think going to register rather a strongprotest.Tommy Harris has concocted a very good anony -mous letter which has been posted in Eireto the German Minister. lt contains some quitereliable information which has been dulypassed on to Berlin. TARintends to use thischannel for deception.DMI rang me up about du BOULAY who hasapparently been posted back to duty with theIrish Guards at Lingfield. DMI has asked usto put a check on his correspondence.November 30thI saw Moylan who was very friendly and readilyagreed to take the name of any of our charac-ters off the Camp 001 List. I pointed outto him the undesirability of these namesappearing.discussed the case of JOB with TAR. Isaid that I did not think that it would bepossible to liquidate JOB and still continueto run Dragonfly. If it was Of paramountimportance to keep Dragonfly we should haveto give up the idea of the prosecution of JOB.Dick seems to be getting on well with hisplanning at CUSSAC in spite of numerousdifficulties. We are making an offer of 6interrogatas and if Kemeth can get them NeCatalogue Reference:KV/4/192will train 6 others at the LRC.Jock Whyte came to tell me about a charactercalled STILES who has been acting as a stoolpigeon in various British P/W camps in Ger-many. STILES has just turned up in Stockholmand relates that he has made a sensationalescape. lt is proposed to give him anopportunity of telling his story on arrival.There is considerable evidence from clan-destine letters from P/WS about STILES'Sactivities but we may have some difficultyin producing witnesses who are atnthe momentin Germany. We shall probably have to internSTILES under lUB pending Court Martial.Abbott is leaving as from tomorrow, and is pirgoing to join Swinton's staff in West Africa.Frost has also left as from today.It has been decided that Dixon shallreplace Pearse in East Africa, the lattercoming into Ops. section here in MadDermot'splace.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/192