The National Archives(c) crown copyrightCatalogue Reference:k :KV/4/196Image Reference:1283Dalton or someone even more to the Left Inightinsist on examining our records and that ifthey were not confined strictly to peopleadvocating the overthrow of. the constitutionby violence the whole dept. might be inserious trouble. I said that this was aproblem which people. had cons tantly in mindfor the last 25 years but that such difficulties as had occurred had been overcome fairly easily. The general form was that theLabour Party were far more interested to makeuse of our services-than-the-ConservativesAs regards the records it was true he mighfind a trace of James Maxton who was at onetimeon the executive committee. of the Leagueagaist Imperialism. This did not however meanthat we were following James Maxton about allover London. We were merely interested inthe organisation which financed by Sovietmoney-was-working-for-the-disrupti theBritish Empire. If we did not follow theouter constellations of the Cominterri weshouldnot really be informed about the majorpartor its work. zI then said that in SO faras dynamite in records was-concerned- he wouldfind far more explosive material in the GeneralRegistry at Scotland Yard than he would in-in-the-sense-that-il-it-were-a-case-0fusing blackmail the Commissioner could do farbetter than we could.Finalater then asked about my experiencesthe Yard and was anxious to know preciselywhy I had left it. I explained to him thediffi culties we had about the records,an howSir John Anderson-had finallyruled that theywere all to be kept in a special secretregistry notopen to S.B. This had come aboutowing to two o-S.B. officers-having sold infor-mation to the CP and the Russians. I alsoexplained that the policeb their their-upbringingand training were not particularly good atCatalogue Reference:KV/4/196353apprecmating the background of movements likethe CP and the IRA. They were much more con-cerned about individuals who had broken orwere likely to break the law. The othermainreason for our transfer was that MI5 werestudying subversive movements in the Forcesand to do SO properly they had to make a stuayofthe whole movement. There was thereforensiderable duplication. I then told Find-later that in my view the best solution forthe proper collection,collatior and distri-bution f-intelligence would -be to put SISand ourselves under the same head. I realisedthe aifficultes but I thought that in any casewe should have to sub-divide_within theorganisatior on offensive and defensive linesand that this Sub-division-should give-some status on the continent. My views onthis have already been recorded. I alsodiscussed the ques tion of -ministerialcon controland gave my reasons for thinking that bothourselves and SIS or the joint organisationshould come under the CID or the War CabinetFinalater thought possibly the Chieis ofStaff might be better. Lastly I told him thatI thought CE,subversive movements and securityShould hang together. On the question ofecurity I told him about the case of MOLKEN-TELLER pointing out that ii there was leakageof information in Ankara it could make non-sense of our work bere.May 30thMelland came to see me about his future. Hefelt that perhaps he ought to-sign-on for-year but wondered whether at the conclusionof that period there might be an opening forhim in this dept. I said that we should bevery pleased to consider it when we knewprecisely-,what our. charter wouldbe.- itataloguerReference;keWa9bne I did not thinkthere would be a career which would recommendTHIS THISISAO COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION356(4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958Mos 2000itself. On the other nand if as T hoped wecould get a wider charter giving us some scopeon the continent it was highly probable thatthere would be an opening.came to see me apout Viv soldagentHe has taken outnaturalisation papers in Canada ana cannot getthem for ranother year. Meanwhile he wishesto retain his bogus status as a Britishsubject. I suggested to B-B that he shoulago and-see-Hili of the H.0. who. -already knowsabout the case.Air-Commodore Merer came to see me. He-hassucceeded BuSs, as Security Intelligerce,Air Ministry. He struck me as being good:I had previously met him on a Junior JICcommittee meeting which he hanaled very well.I-tolah I-tola-himthat. tha-t it would be helpiul if fromtime to time he could let us know reciselywhat the A.M. wished to keep secret,both bothas regards the order of battle ana secretweapons.35 came in. He is back from Lisbon for afew days. He thinks that within the nextnonth-he-ought-to-reap-afairly-gorly-good-harvestfrom those Germans who are anxious about t irfuture. AS regards interrogation of prominsent Nazis he said that he did not thinkhe could do any good in a military area but thatback hereh might in semi-oIficial surround-ings be able to extract quite a lot Of infomma-tion if he were leit alone for a couple ofhours-with some of.the leading personalities.He told me many stories of his deceptionwork in Lisbon.D.G.held a meeting to discuss the future ofthe LRC. Baxter. had prepared an analysissbowing who were at present in the LRC andHCatalggbe Refereneexy/4t196 quite clear that397many people are still being brought here whoneed not really come to this country at all.Quite a number arrive illegally onAmerica aircraft. Only a very small percent-ge are of interest, though quite a numberhave been collaborating with the Germans.We came to the conclusion that we wanteda camp to hold these people until they couldbe deported to their own country or somemeans of preventing them from coming. Weshould still ho ever require the OratorySchools. We are to discuss the whole questionat the H.0. tomorrow.Tommy Harris has got his OBE whi'ch will bea great source of pleasure to all.Cavendish-Bentinck rang me up about the caseof Carl von LOESCH who was formerly attachetoRibbentrop's Dienstelle in this country.He ihaso come into possession of the secretarchives of the German F.0. They had beenphotographed and at the last moment it wasdecided to burn them VonLoesch managed tobury them and the SD who were doing the jobmerely burned the empty boxes thinking theywere burning the archives. The films arenow in this country and von Loesch's presenceis required to elucidate them. He is by birthaBritish subject. I explained to CavenuishBentick that if we wonce got him here we mightnot be able to get him out again and hemight be an embarrassment. He is going tofind out whether by virtue of his service inthe German Army von Loesch loses his Britishnationality, or whether he would be liableto prosecution as a renegade. In actual factwe should not proceed against a character ofthis kind but his presence here might causedifficultiesCatalogue Reference:KVI4/1963Keith came in to see me about the case of vonLOESCH. He as ed me to let him know Caven-dish Bentinckis final decision. He tola methat he had been up to Beriin for the signingof the armistice with Keitel. He had haa tofish Keitel out of the dining room where hehad been having a heavy lunch of caviar andchampagne. He was not clear whether he hadbeen lunching separately or with the Russians.The Russian Commissar haggled for about 3hours over one word in the final document.Keith in his usual rather uppish way expressedsome surprise at this. The Commissar replied"Russia has been fighting Germany for 5 yearsand therefore 5 hours was a matter of no sig-nificance." Keith replied "We have been fighting the Germans for 6 years ana the soonerwe get it over the better". KennethStrongI gather was a little shoCked by this remark.At Flensburg there was an amusing interviewwith Jodl. We had issued to our troopsan elaborate plan relating to their conductin Germany and giving full details as to nowthe country was to be occupied and governed.The code name for this plan was "Eclipse".Jodl apparently opened the conversation bysaying HI have reaa your plan Eelipse. I thinkit very good ana I shall see that it is carrieout to the letter". A copy of the documenthad evidently been captured somewhere inthe field. The joke o1 it was that Joal haaclearly read and studied it very careruilywhereas our officers knew very little about it.The French I gather are behaving extremelybadly. Le Juin wrote such an insulting letterto Eisenhower that he passed it on to theChieis of Staii in Washington They decidedimediately to stop all further lease Lendfor French rearmament. The French are constan-ly writing rudenotes to the effect that theyare now entirely in control of affairs inFrance and that the things about. which weCatalogue Reference:KV14/193sask are none of our business.May 31stBurt came to tell me that Fish wouild beleaving shortly to join BOAC.I attended a meeting at the H.0. with the DGBaxter and Dick Butler. We had an analysisof the cases at the LRC. It was Decided thatwe-would firstattempt to get the FO tostop the nationals of allied countriescoming here to join allied forces. It wasaccepted howeverthat- a certain number. ofpeople would continue to come and would haveto be segregated until we could get rid ofthem. In future allied govts.would be toldthat anybody released to them who did notjointheir- forces- ces-should-be-returned-.to-thLRC to be held pending repatriation.. It wasagreed that we should only wish to examine avery small percentage of people and ourinstructions to SCOs should be amendedaccordingly. Newsam took the-viewthatitwas undesirable in future to allow arrivalsat the LRC to drift on to the labour market,and-that-until-we-could-arrange-for-thproceed direct to their countries instead ofgoing via the UK they Should remain in semi-aetention. at the LRC. Meanwhile effortswould be made to get those already there awayas soon as pos'sible. We gave notice that theSCOs would start being demobilised as fromJune 18th. This apparently came as rather ashock. The H.0. who-have never liked--the SCO:and who a short time ago were pressing forthe liquidation of the LRC are now ratherworried about the future, as theywil. bethrown back on their own rather meagreImmigration staff. Lastly we discussed thequestion of establishing closerco-operationThis was generallyTHIS I A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED360IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958Reoawecomed. We begin hy giving a shortshatcourse to senior I.0.S. and then incluethe ports among the places to be visited byour RSLOS in their areas.Milmo came to talk about SCHELLENBERG whosearrest is expected. He plans to bring himback here. We thought that in all the circ-umstances probably 020 treatment would-b be thebest, and that U 35 might possibly have agoat him later.Hampshire whom I saw later thought thatpossibly he and Caroe might have a preliminarycanter in Germany.. This will be considered.June lstI welit over to see Cavendish Bentinck withHarry-Allen.The darryA The JIC have put memouontheir proposed combined Intelligelce Organ-isation for approval by the Chiers OI Staff.It is rather a wne-sided document and the reis a proposal to form a Security Committeebetween the 3 Services to -aavise thesecurity matters. We Saiathat we thoughtthere ought to be a Security Service repre-sentative-C entative-on-this-committee. he-document isto be altered accordingly. I took theopportunity of saying that in general Ithought the memo was a bit one-sided andCthat there was a general tendency to regardsecurity as merely theimposition of restric-tions oof one kind or another. In actualfact the Security Service was to a largeextent aeproducing agency for intelligenceItold him of the LRC and 20 products, andother sources, and that on the CI front they hahad really produced the bulk of the intelli-gence. I also emphasised that militarysecurity did not really amount to anythingall What had really counted in thi's wartafalogueiReterensekV1o we had covered for361the 3 Services in this country and on thecontinent as members of the CI staff. All theLeading positions in SHAEF were held by ourofficers, and we had in all provided some 80-100 people. These were matters which ooviouslyhad never dawned on Cavendish Bentinck before.The main trouble is that we have never beenproperly represented on the JIC,I lunched with Garbo today to whom I said goodbye and thanked himwarmly for the services hehad rendered. He is leaving about t e 6th or8th of this month, having got his Bolivianvisa. Incidentally it cost him E18, althoughit was marked "gratuit". the sum was saidto be dueto the Bolivians on account oftelegrams ete. Quite obviously the wholeamount was sticking to the fingers of theConsult who had only had the opportunity ofissuing 13 visas since the beginning of theyear and obviously wanted to make the mostof any opportunities coming his way.Roskill is leaving us. He seemed to thinkthat our policy with reg ard to the Italianshad by and large been justilied and that hadthere been an invasion here quite a number ofthem would have been on the side of the enemy,including the 100 confirmed Fascists stillin the I.0.M.McIver has just returned from Aandy and broughTim Airy back with him. Tim is clearly a sickman. McIver thinks he has done extremely welland set up a very good show The positionout there was misunderstood by OC and tre reis in fact very little to be done in Ceylonfrom a security point of view. The place iwnot abase for operations as haa previouslybeen thought. It is merely a heaaquarters.Catalogue Reference:kV/4/1963-Courtney is apparently an unqualified successand has been maae acting head oi the War oomby common consent and approval. Unfortunatelyhowever he cannot be promoted and some figure-head wiil have to be found. Dixon is sugsesteaI do not feel very enthusiastic about thisproposal after his performance with COSSACbut if Courthey was at his elbow he might beall right. Finney is to join the party asliaison with DIB. Relations with SIS appearto be extremely good.The Jae Ministerin Berne seems to be veryagitated about the future of Japan and isurgently counselling his Govt. to make peaceand save what is possible out of the wreckage.otherwise he thinks Japan will inevitably gothe way of Germany. He warns his Govt. againstwishful thinking about allied designs.According to SHAEF C.I.summary of the 27thMay the apprximate totals of arrests reportedto date are: GIS,including Gestapo, 1636;S.S. and para-military, 1087; police including-Kripo 270; Party officials 3139; otherO Iicials 196. According to Skorzeny, onlyin parts of northern Germany had there beentime to establi h any semblance of a Werewoliorganisation. Screening O1 large numbersof P/Ws and displaced persons returningto France,Belgium and Holland has beenhandled superiicially. Consequently thenumber of suspects and collaborators dis-covered has b cen small.The final report on Ilying bombs ana roCketsindicates that there were 663 incidents dueto rockets and 92 due to flying bombs duringthe first quarter of 1945. The rocketincident at Urpingt ton on the 27 th Mareh wasthe last incident of its kind and the flyingbomb attack on the 29th March was the lastCatalogue Reference:kV/4/196363attack O any variety during the war. Thecause of this was the allied aavances inGermany and Holland. On the 3ra March whenactivity was renewed after a pause, the mark 2flying bomb was use apparently partlyconstructed of ply-wwod ana having an increasedrange, launched from landing bases in Holand.Most of these had radio-ranging apparatus.uring the whole period of the Ilying bombattacks 9251 bombs were reported in operation,0890 crossing our coasts, 4242 destroyed. Therewere 2420 incidents in London and 3403 elsehwelCivilian casualties are reported as: London5375 fatal, 15258 serious. Elsewhere 462 fataland 1504 serious. Service casualties were:London 207 fatal, 280 serious, elsewhere 95fatal,197 serious. The worse incident was atWellington Barracks on 18th June 1944, where58 fatal and 20 serious civilian casualtieswere caused and 63 fatal and 48 seriousService casualties. During the whole periodof long-range rocket attacks, 1,012 rocketswere reported, 517 falling on London,53elsewhere, on land, and 58 in the sea.Civilian casualities are reported as: Lonaon2511 fatal,5869 serious. Elsewhere 212 fataland 575 serious. Service easualities were:London 30 fatal and 56 serious,elsewhere 1 fataand 23 serious. The worst incident was atNew Cross Road,Deptford on the 25th Nov.1944when 160 people were killed and 108 seriouslyinjured.. During the period 12th June 1944to 29th arch 1945 enemy action of all Kindscaused the following house aamage: Lonaon,2 29400destroyed and 1,255,000 damageu. Elsewhere2,202 destroyed and 165,000 damaged.The JIL have issue a paper on our future con-duct in relations with the Russians outsidethe diplomatic field. No longer is informatiorto be given gratuitously. We are to sayCatalogue Reference:KVI4as the Russians that the question will6uhave to be referred to London. There will bea delay of several weeks at the ena of whichwe shall say tha provided the Russians areprepared to showuus SO and so, we ShaII beprepared to let them see simitar equipmentof ours. The same will apply to captureddocuments, German war plants etc.etc. Itis emphasised that only in this way can wecommand any respect. The present policyof bust handing out information does us nogood whatever. It enas by our beingtreated with contempt.I am going on leave tomorrow till June I7th.-Catalogue Reference:KV/4/196