The National Archives(c) crown copyrightCatalogue Reference:k e:KV/4/193Image Reference:65L7cdown in the ar Book and in our letter toDMI. The D.G. then rather calmed down andsaid that I must not resent criticism, andthat he did not wish to become like FelixCowgill, head of an organisations of whoseworkings he was unaware. fe then passed onto other things.Nth Dick Butler and Charles, after somedifficulty, have got the D.G. to agree toletting Charles,myself, Horrocks and DickWhite form a small committee for consideringthe Lost-war organisation. The committeeis to be entirely informal and we shall letthe D.G. know the result of our deliberationsin due course.John Senter came to see me about the vettingof their officers who go into the field.He said that Archie Boyle would undertake toscrutinise every case very carefully fromour point of view, and that wherever therewas a doubt as to whether an SOE agentgoing into the field had too much knowledgeany depts. work, he would refer the caseLO us. Senter then discussed the case ofGILBERT.THIS IS A COPYIN ORIGINAL DEPARTMENT DOCUMENT RETAINED3 OF PUEBLIC RECORDS PUBLIC UNDER LICRECORDS SECTIONTHEACT 1958.LeoCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193111THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.Qoc00Foulkes came to see me befor'e leaving forNAfrica, where he is going going as aninterrogator. He has done very well at theLRC.The DMI rang up to tell me that he now hadmisgivings about ISPAL material being sentto Hunloke in view of the suggestion that hehad a Jewish mestress. He wanted me toconsult C. I saw C. later in the evening.He said that until the cuestimof the Jewishmistress was cleared up he did not wishHunloke to have access to ISPAL I saidthat it would be necessary for me to informMaunsell that there were allegations againstHunloke, and that meanwhile he would haveto be kept out of the picture. I sent aclear the line telegram off the same day.I showed C. a draft letter to Cadogan aboutthe Polish general KUKEIL who according toOrange is in touch with the Germans on thesubject of Polish resistence movements.Some negotiations are apparently going onthrough Red Cross channels. U. was interes-ted in this as he had certain donfirmationCafalogue about ueRefereHceTf4/193 the RedHethought the moment was richt to send the122letter to Cadogan and asked me to let himhave a copy.Admiral Dunbar-Nasmith, V.C. V. C. has seriouslyblotted his copybook. He summoned a meetingof some 50 ship-builders, gave them a peptalk and said that he would be wanting theirservices for repair ork in connection withSecond Front operations. le was then askedwhen these services wouldberequired. Hereplied "Between you and me it will be some-where around May lst". This diclosure wasevidently a little to much for one of theship-builders, who reported the facts tothe SCO at Lovestoft, who passed iton to us.I believe the Admiral is to receive a logan-berry from their Lordships.C. told me that the P.M. tackled him aboutthe Irish question which arose some daysago, and accused him of putting a spoke inhis wheel. C. replied that he was onlyconcerned with the diplomatic cable side ofthe business, not with the security angle.This rather cenfirms that the P.M. wasconsiderably irritated by the memo preparedby me and Capel-Dunn.Atithe time Stewart was with him the P.M. wasdiscussing the visitors ban with Pug Ismay.IIsmay tried to reason with him. He saidthat at present the Americans and had theirmistresses down at Bighton. The P.M. replied"A jolly good thing. Very good for themboth". Tt is obviously going to be verydifficult toconvince the P.M. of the necessitycatalbetebReference:KVI4/1913Gen. Grasset rang me up this evening aboutour proposal to restrict the entry here ofenrolled and unenrolled allies who came fromLisbon, Gib. and N. Africa. I explained to himour point of view. He said there weredifficulties. but he was generally sympa-thetic. He hoped that if there was a meetingon the subject he would have an opportunityfor airing his views. I assured him thatthis would be SO.The P.M. has put his gold and diamond penthrough the visitors ban suggestion. Therewas a stormy meeting at which the CIGS beganby saying "Prime Minister, I am not askingfor this - I am demanding it". It was notlong before he discovered that he was demand-ing in vain. The P.M. was about to turnthe whole thing down when the usual suggestionwas made that a committee should be formedto look into the whole question of thesecurity of Overlord. The committee is toconsist of the Minister of roduction, Minis-ger of Aircraft roduction, Home Secretary andDuncan Sandys, none of whom of course knownything about security. It is to con-sider (1) the possibility of withdrawingfor the time being fromr foreign diplomaticrepresentatives the right to transmit anycommunications other than those censored byBritish autho ities or to leave the countryafter a certain date. (2) they prevention ofthe export of newspapers, (3) more strengthenedsurveillance of ships and aircraft leavingGt.Britain or Ireland and complete preventionof all contacts with enemy or neutral count-Catalogue Reference:KV/4/193This IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENTIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS(74ACT 1958ries and (4) the detection of secret enemywireless apparatus and increased precautionsagainst espionage. The effect of thevisitors ban in giving increased securityis to be re-examined in the light of thereport on the 4 questions enumerated above.Findlater Stevart is to assist in thecollection of material ior this report.February 12thThe D.G. buried the hatchet this morning aftoour meeting yesterday. He asked about thesecurity of the air lines to Lisbon. I saidthat we were fairtyyh happy about them butthere were nevertheless obvious opportunitieWe had in fact had a case of a woman inHythe giving a letter to a BOAC pilot to takto her sister in Lisbon whose husband was aPortuguese trading with the enemy."ethered has seen GILBERT who does nd onche whole make a bad impression. It ishowever impossible to get at the tnuth andwe. cannot butrecommend that he should notagain be sent into the field.Grogan came to tell me that the MOI had forsome unknown reason refused to give us accessto paess reports sent out by foreign journ-alists, unless we could first prove to themthat there was a real security reason.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/19The D G. held a meeting on Overlord Security115when it was arranged between us what sectionsshould be asked to prepare papers for SirFindlater Stewart's meeting on Monday.The D.G. has written a general preamble out-.lining the work of the office which heproposes to hand to FindlaterStewart.February 14thMaunsell has come back with a somewhatpetulent telegram about Hundoke. I read thisover to DMI. He suggested that we shouldhave a meeting later with C.Sniper received a wireless communication-about the l0th Feb. but reception was poor.BYutus is still trying to persuade theGermans to send him a new wireless set andif possible a new photographic apparatus.the possibilities of dropping material inFrance are also being considered.According to Artist, HANSEN, head of Abt.]has been very favourably impressed byTricycle's last report. Great efforts arexpected from him. Lisbon has instructeathe station which is to re eiveFreak's trans-missions to use their very best operatorsand take every care because news of thehighest military importance is expectedthrough this channel. Artist has stated that3 people, none of them agents, are to besent out throughTeicycle's escape route whenhe retuens - to Lisbon at the end of the month.Again according to Artist, the Germans wantitelogoleeferteceack4igg3Feb.20th, which isnbearlier than what was previously arranged.Plans are being made for Peach to leave forLisbon in the course of the next few dayswith a certain amount of traffic which shouldestablish him in the eyes of the Japs as acompetent agent.Hitler and Ribbentrop have been trying toexplain away the present position of Germanyto the Japs. They pretend not to view theprospect of the Second Front ith any gr vealarm. They make out that it is only beingundertaken by us on account of Russianpressure and that it will not be a very bigaffair. They think that they will be ableto deal with it effectively. Such anoperation was not possible on a large scalein the near future and would probably takeplace in June; small scale operations werepossible at any time, and would probably becarried out before that time. The possib-ilities of peace with Russia were remote.The interpretation of the reports of meetingsbetween Ribbentrop and the British whichappeared in Pravda were merely a Sovietmanoeuvre towards getting a Second Frontstarted, Hitler and nibbentrop believe thatTurkey is trying to keep out of the warbut pressure on her from the British andAmericans was strong. Britain and Americawanted to use Turkey as an air base and haddemanded permission for bombers to make useof Turkish aerodromes and Turkey had refusedand equipped her aerodromes with machine-guns. Thereupon Britain and America hadsent experts to Turkey by way of assistingCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193the Turkish Air Force. Turkey had finallyagreed to let a small number of such person-nel enter the country. Meanwhile Turkeywas employing delaying tactics in givingout that she could not enter a war withoutcertain munitions which Britain and Americacould not easily supply. Germany did notfeel particularly anxious about Bulgaria andRoumania. Ribbentrop intimated that whenRome had been occupied the Germans had obtain-ed possession of a great many Italian dip-lomatic papers and that these showed thatCiano had got together proof that he had fromthe fiest been opposed to participation in thewae and had thus prepared for taly's defec-tion. What was particularly disgracefulwas that Ciano had falsified accounts of whathad passed at discussions with the Germans.Hitler attributed Germany' present positionto the failure of the Italians. He blamedthe Italian Navy for not giving sufficientlyactive support in the maintenance of theTunis bridgehead. This led to the landingsin Sicily and to the collapse of -taly.Hitler had originally intended defending tkthe line of the Appenines but owing to thebungling strategy of the British and americanshe had been able to hold the south italianfront which had been intended to be a tempor-ary one.The number of divisions sent as reinforcementsto Italy and the Balkans had reached 35.Theise divisions had been pledged to the Easternfront. However ithad been necessary to makeCatalogue Reference:KV/4/19328increased preparations in the West. He hadhad to make up his mind to give ground in theeast bo avoid jeopardising the western frontin any way. The war on the eastern frontwould be continued on this principle. Hemight order withdrawal from the northernsector or from the Dnieper salient. Heannounced that there would be no break-downand if the opportunity presented itself heintended to go over to the offensive inthe west. He had 7 divisions in Finland,12 in Noray, 6 in Denmark, and 62 in Franceincluding Belgium and Holland, of which 30were mobile reserve divisions. Included alsowere 4 S.divisions and the Hermann GoeringDivision. All the other divisions could notbe described as first class. He had a longcoast line to defend and it would be impos-sible to repel any and every landing at thewater's edge. It was his intention to preventany enlargement of the bridgehead or theestablishment of a Second Front in the truesense. When asked whether he knew wherethe landing operations would be carried outhe replied that he had to confess that he didnot. He thought the most effective placewould be the unglish channel but immensepreparation would be required for that andthe difficulties would be very great. Hethought therefore that they would have abetter chance in going for the relativelyveakly-defended coast round yordeauxor #somewhere in Portugal. He had madepreparations to meet the possible eventualityof a Portuguese landing, but he wanted thismatter kept strictly secret. He did notCatalogtearefetencKi4/9s Spain, but took ai7avery poor view of Franco. Referring to theBreprisals against Britain Hitler said thesewould be carried out chiefly by means ofrockeb guns Preparations were nearly completeand experiments had shown that they werehighly successful. They were effective asfar as a line drawn east and west in thevicinity of Birmingham. He would not say whenthe bomardment would begin but thought thatthe rockets would have considerablesuccess against the mainland of Britain.Besides this bombers had been got ready andand had begun their raids on London. Byall the above measures he hoped eventuallyto regain the offensive. Hitler wasworried about the activities of the fartisansin the Balkans. Things were not going toowell. Equally his submarine campaign hadnot been particularly successful. me hopedto improve matters by magnetic torpedoes, byincreasing the speed of submarines and byproviding additional A. A. guns.The D. held a meeting to discuss our paperon Overlord. +t was decided that ickButler and Harry Allen should representthe office ar Findlite Stewart's Committee.In the aternoon the H.O. had meeting todiscuss the P.M.S paper. I was asked toattend at the llth hour, apparently on theassumption that our views Nould be incorpora-ted in the H.0. paper. Newsam was I thinkrather surprised to find that we were puttingin a separate paper. We then discussed themerits or the ban. My suggestion about hoteland boarding house keepers being allowed toCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193Isodemand Identity Cards was quite sympathetic-ly received by Newsam. On the whole theH.O. gave the impression of feeling that theare fighting a losing battle.February 15thlilmo and I attended a meeting at the d.0.with Maxwell in the chair. Others presentwere Gen.Grasset, Col. Carlisle, Major Dru, 3representatives of the Air Ministry and arepresentative of the F.0. We put forward thesuggestion backed by the H.0. that as manyrefugees coming here either as refugees orfor the purpose of joining the allied forcesshould be diverted to NAfrican The F.0.undertook to make enquiries as to whether theFrench could be induced to accept these peopleWe also asked whether embodied troops couldbe kept from coming here as reinforcements.The. Air Ministry said that the variousintegrated allied squadrons did need replace-ments due to casualties, but that thereoblaly we re enough over here already tolast for 2 or 3 months. They did not howevewish to have a gap in their training programmif this could be avoided. As regards air-borne troops, Gen.Grasset gave the ratheralarming news that it was proposed to putone Frenchman into eery sticky of airborne trodropped. This means of course that theseFrendhmen would have to be briefed some timebefore the operation and would t least knowsomething about the target which they weredatdregee RteReretnteeakvi4/493 these circumstancesthey become definite security risks and shoulTISIOACORORIGINAL DOCUMENI RETAINEDroIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIG RECORDSACT1958asfaraspossilhoweverwe fear most were the trained pilots, this inview of the fact that assignments had been givento a number of agents to pick up a plane andfly it back to occupied territory. We had beenconcentrating particularly on people who hadleft occupied territay after the total occupa-tion. There was no one to spe k as regardsnaval requirements but I gather that the Narewill not allow Frencamen who come out ofoccupied territory to go to the LRC.The meeting broke up on the understanding thatthe F.0. representative would find out thereactions of the French in N.Africa to thesuggested acceptance by them of refugees fromLisbon and Gib. a and that the W.0. and hirMinistry would look into the whole questionof reinforcements and see what they could doto cut down their requirements during the next6 months.After the meeting Milmo and I had a discussionwith Maxwell about a wider interpretation of12(5a) to cover the more dubious LRC cases.nyone in. this category is first to go to tlI.0.M. and the applications we put in willmake it clear. that we are only asking for atemporary precaution until about D plus 30 whencases can be reviewed. Maxwell agreed to theprecedure suggested and is quite prepared tosee it made retrospective if werhave any strongcases where poeple have already been releasedfrom allied forces and are still active.J.C. and Ronnie Reed came in to tell me aboutCataloguerRefgresseswetisrant him to go back totLisbon and this view is supported by SIS.. Theargument is that theGermans are already lookingforand his mother. and that: if he weretaken he might be forced to talk, and possiblyto compromise Artist, although in fact hecan have only a suspicion that Artist may beworking for us. He knows that Artist offeredhisservices but thought they were turned down.I cannot help feeling that this case has beenrather mishandled. There have been endlessdelays throughin Lisbon not gettinginto touch with Artist. - Personally L. thinkit is a pity thatdoes not go back.Hecan only be an embarrassment to - us here as wecannot give him any thing to do.The Press announces that Charles BEDAUX; on being informed that a Grand Jury: was to inves-tigate whether a charge lay against himunder the U. U.S. S. espionage laws, committed suicideat Miami.I dined with Walter Bell, Hoare and Col.Carterof G2. who was formerly in Panama and tookan active part in what was knownas the GOUGHcase. He was quite frank about the amateurway in which the whole thing had been handled,and fully realises that the more PhillipsOppenheim and promising a case looks at theoutset, the less likely isthere to belany thingin it.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT T.RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSCatalogue ReferenceACT/1958:1958250February l6thAt the weekly meeting Dick made a statementabout the forthcoming amalgamation.of the:Ba]Inf. and B.lReg. A compromise has beenreached with Horrocks and files will be madefor all the leading personalities in theAbwehr. The registry is designed SO as togive a maximum amount of intelligence to alook-up and in fact to a certain extentapproximates to the system that we had beforethe war. We do not wish to make the systemtoo rigid and it was explained to all presentthat they should bring to notice immediatelyany cases where they thought they were notgetting proper service. In this way wehoped to create the best possible formoregistry to meet our needs.ISOS this week shows that as a result of theannouncement of Erich VERMEHREN' defectionto the allied side (he was employed at Ankara)the Abwehr and S.D. have been called upon toinvestigate possible ramifications of thecase in Lisbon, where VERMERHEN'S motherPetra, the journalist, has been living.She is a member of the German I.S. andhas been interviewed by the local S.D.Shehas left by air presumably for Germany.Arising out of this, the Germam I.S. had beenwarned by Portuguese contacts that theiractivities have been betray.ed to the Alliesby a British agent in Berlin who is said bythem to have access to German I.S. corres-pondence and by a houmanian in Lisbon namedBAGOMGUERefellerecelkat/tat93ac pretiously worked(&in the German I.S. and according to thePortuguese contact had been responsible forrecent leakages to the Allies about Canaris'smovements and about the activities of HansBRANDES.The S.D. in Lisbon are being sent instructionsto report on allied invasion plans and onthe progress of negotiations between spainand Portugal on the one hand and the U.K.and U.S.A. on the other.The Einz Marine agent RASTLER previouslymentioned, who was thought possibly to beidentical with a Spaniard named de GONDRA,now apears to be a Frenchman. It seemsunlikely that hr ever came to this countryand probable th t he went to N. Africa where heppears to have been accepted in Algeirs asa French reserve officer. He is expected toretun to Madird on a permit granted by theNational Committee of Liberation on about the15th February.The usual flow of inaccurate reports allegedto be coming from this country continues.Milmo talked about the case os ABEN who seemsto be an S. D. penetration agents.Grogan mentioned that arrangements are in trairfor transferring the .list to the C.S.L.Brock had a good story which L gather has somefoundation in fact, of an SOE officer of Rightwing tendencies, who was induced through aCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193E (5member of some Greek resistance movement tomeet the Mayor ofAthens who asked him if hewould collaborate with the Germans in suppres-sing the communists. He apparently agreed, ama meeting was arranged at which representativesof SOE and the Gestapo were present, armed withtommy-guns. The SOE officer eventually flewback to Cairo in order to obtain instructions.History does not relate the sequel to thisfantastic story.I had a meeting with DMI,C and Brig. Kirkmanabout Hunloke. DMI asked me to correct mytelegram to Maunsell where I had referre d to"allegations" made by the W.O. to the effectthat Hunloke had a Jewish mistress. He thoughtthe word "allegations" was a little toostrong. Apparently there are only rumoursbrought back from Mid East by 5 officers.Personally L cannot see the difference betweenrumours which lead to the withholding by highofficils of the W.0. of information from asecurity officer which he needs in order toperform his ork, and "allegations". I saidthat I thought it was essential that the ma/matter should be cleared up or that Hunlokeshould be removed. D.M.I. said he wasworried about the information reaching a widercircle and thaught that some telegram might besent from Padgett through the W.0. rather thanthrough Maunsell and ourselves. Meanwhile hethought I should telegraph to Maunsell andask what arrangements would be made for thereception of the information and for its safecustody. I said that I had no jurisdictionSfoglreiRefereneedktpaigsince he was under theTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION63 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.Qoc 20o0It ias rather an ordea but everyboay ade'verykind speeches. Most people were fairly tight,in particular Tin-Eye, who struck a ratherAngerous note in his speech by referring topeople who, in contrast to myself, went aboutin red tabs but were not really soldiers. Hewas taken up on this rather later in theevening by Victor, and at one moment it lookedif there might be a stand-up fight. Makingthe usual gesture with his hands, rinp-yesaid "Now I am going to give you a snub".Victor replied. By telling him to keep hisPalethorpes quiet. At this stage the D.G. drewup; evidently interested in fanning the flames.Horrocks did not mend matters by giving anaccount of his o7n wir service, but theargument eventually became SO incoherent thatthe party groke up without any serious incidentu35 latt tr Lushn lday-February 17thI attended rindlater Stewart's meeting from10-1, when we discussed diplomatic communi-Cations, communications between allied H.Q. inis country and overseiis agencies, wirelesssecurity, the infiltration of agents,internal security and the timing of securitymeasures. Prsent were Herbert and Francis ofcensorship, nyseld,nthony and Dickbutler, Crowfrom the F.0., Vivian, and Percy Black fromSHAEF.While the risk of leakage through diplomatic:telegram and bag was a serious one it wasrecognised that total stoppage might seriouslyEattalogases aference:KV/6A893 reciprocal measuresand prevent the S.A.C. from getting informationI&military authorities and had been head ofSIME for 4 years, L felt that he might resentany enquiry by myself as to whether he knewhow to carry on his business. I thought thatany such enquiry should be made more appro-priately either by the W.0. or by C. who wasthe custodian of the sources. It was finallydecided that D.M.I. should telgraph to Padgebtand that C. should telegraph to Teague.T told the D.i.t. that meanwhile Mnsell hidgone up to Palestine in order to make enquiriesabout Hunloke.I attended a meeting which lasted for 31 hoursunder the chairmanship of indlater Stenart.Almost every Govt. dpt. was represented. Find-later explained that he had been ordered toput up a paper for the Cabinet Committeewhich was to look into the whole question ofthe security of Overlord, and in the lightof such additional points as they might seefit to recommend, a decision should be reachedas to whether the visitors' ban would givefurther security and was justifiable.Most of the ground was already familiar, butcertain measures to impese further delayson male, telegrams, etc. were agreed to. heco-operation. of the Minl of War Transportin agreeing to send their ships designed forthe peninsula vi N. Africa was extremelyvaluable contribution. More delecate mattersof radio security and diplomatic cables andbags were left for a smaller gathering.hfategge RTeYer Yi4fave a dinner for me atthe de ark Hotel to celebrate ny C.B.E.186from the continent which he regarded as vitalto the conduct of future operutions. Wethought however that the problem might beeased ifthe Swedish Air Line was stopped.It was recognised however that this mightpossibly caused the Snedes to withdraw facil-ities from BOAC. As an lternative tototal stoppage, we recommended a gradual delayon telegrams We had Originilly calculated on5 or 6 day s, but since the briefing periodin fact to be D-14, there might be diffi-culties in holding the position for SO longaperiod. ommunic tion between allied H. Q-in thi country and overseas agencies was aconstint source of anxiety and it seemed thatlittle could be done bey ond ensuring cyphersecurity. A paper from the Chiefs of Staffwas now in Washington, suggesting tht allallied govts. should be approached and askedto conform to our procedure. As regardswireless security we pointed out that RSSkept watch pn all foreign stationsof the Abwehr and S.D. handling two-way trafficand that in addition they maintained a generalsearch. It did not seem possible that theexisting personnel and equipment could do more.S.S. did not think that an illicit st tionwas operating in this country at the moenentbut it was pointed out that their observationwis sucject to certain restrictions. Theywere looking for Abwehr procedure, whereas anagent might use British official procedure,hich would be a matter for detection by armySignals, who were ill-equipped to meet the task.TheSecueity Service however had a second stringto their bow in the case of agents dropping bypacatalageeReferenaejkV/6u19 get notificition fromTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION13 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.Fighter Command of the aect IT wice it Weethought an agent had been dropped. This didnot however provide against the possibilityof an agent haing landed by rubber boat.Attention was drasn to the possibility ofleakage of information over police and railwaycircuits. This matter was however being dealtwith by the Reid Committee. It was agreed byall that the broadcasting of messages indicating safe arrival of refugees should besubjected to a month's delay. At presentthe delay is only 14 days. On te questionof infiltration of agents suppoet was givento our recommendations that refugees andun-enrolled troops should if possibl bediverted elsehwere for the next fe months.Herbert drew attention to the fact that todraw a line anywehre in Englind and think thatyou can present by censorship methodscommunication beteen one side and the otherwas an illusion. It had been clearly demon-strated in the case od the I.O.W. whereconditions were far more favourable. In factit was found that people who worked in"outhambton worked in Cowes and people whowor'ed in Cowes lived in Southampton. Thesame would seer to apply to an increasingdegree if any attempt was made to censorcorrespondence going to and from the bannedareas. The most that could be d ne were snap-checks and prosecutions in ally cases, whichwould act as deterrent.Dick and I had a word with Hopkinson who is bacback from Lisbon. we has been given the low-CataloolBeferriceikw4rlogut Tricy.cle in cuisehis assistance is required.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAE RETINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(903 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.J.U. came to tell me apoucheisa definite decision that. he should not goback.though distressed, has acceptedthe position with good grace. Steps areto be taken to get his mother over here.Victor told me that the measures which I havepreviously mentioned for diverting magnetic-lly ntrolled.aircraft. are not possible owinJo a miscalculation. It was originallysuggested that a huge copper wire should beplaced all along the Kent coast and that bymeans of generators the erth's magnetic pullcould be changed. This would have had theeffect of turning the aircraft away fromLondon towards the North Sea. The Frof.(R. V. Nones) and others have been working onthis on the basis.that 200,000 kilowatts wouldbe required. This appeared to constitute thewhole output: of Battersea Power Station andwould have meant. that a large part of indus-try and lighting would cease. The P.M. whowas in N. Africa was informed and decided thatin spite of this difficulty the power shouldbe used against controlled aircraft. It wasater discovered that something had gonewrong with the. arithmetic nd that a naughthad been left out, The whole scheme has con-sequently been abandoned.Geoffrey Wethered tells me that theletter whichI signed to SOE on the subject of GILBERT hscreated a tremendous upheaval in SOE. Archieboyle and the Security sevtion support us inour views. Gubbins takes the line that eitherGatalogoeReteaeecekeaAe9eILBERT or locked himup. The fact is that from the evidence avail-ableit is quite impossible for anyone to saywhether GILBERT is eight or wrong. There ishowever a strong element of doubt about thecase, and in our view he should not be allowedtoretuen to the field. Equally we considerthat LOUBA the other gentleman in the case,is extemely doubtful. He is however beingsent back.TAR is rather in favour of the release ofthe Little Man and his son. Personally Iam opposed to this until after D. day.Lennox came to ask me whether if a suitableopportunityarose he should say anything toCripps about the delicate nature of theinformation that was: coming before him: I saidI thought it most undesirable that he shoulddo anything of the kind, since indlaterStewart was in charge.-and it to go back tohim that the Security Service were butting inbehind his back he would not unnaturally beextremely annoyed.At Cecil's request I had a talk with Sir JohnStephenson and told him about our suggestior(OtoFindlater Stewart this morning not tointerfere in any way with the German cablesfrom Dublin.February 18thThe minutes of the two meetings on the securityof Overlord which have been held under thechairmanship of Findlater Stewart reached usatutogue Retereokcetravnggning. On the wholethey seem fairly accurate, but there are certain('2points which we wanted to amend. One of themwas the question of advertisements where wethought the dangr was not sufficiently empha-sised, and the other was under the headingof Radio Security, where we felt that perhapsthe possibilities of catching a spy eitherthrough RSS or by the tracking of aircraftwere placed too high. There was no mentionof rubber boats.I went with the D.G. to the Cabinet Meetingon Overlord security this morning. OliverLyttleton was in the chair, and others presentwere Herbert Morrison, Stafford Cripps,Duncan Sandys, Findlater, Whiteley of COSSAC,Herbert, Cadogan and Newsam. We started withthe paper on Findlater's first meeting.As regards American mails it wasdecided thatHerbeet should be sup lied if possible withmore personnel, but that he should in any casetransfer a large number of people from AmericanCensorship to N. Ireland censorship in order tobring the latter up to as near 100% as possibleIn order to compensate for this loss on thecensorship of American mails it was decidedno delay them for a period of weeks. Mailto our P/WS are to be delayed 3 months and asimilar delay is to be imposed on letters fromthis country written by tt lian P/Ws, some ofwhich are now to go direct to Oyitaly. Thequestion of paraphrasing telegrams was raised.Herbert pointed out that a certain amount wasalready being done, and that it was notpracticable to do more.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/193The Army are to be asked to cut down theirbriefing period if possible to 10 days or less.The PM is to be asked to make a speech onsecurity.The question of telegrams to neutral territorywas discussed in some detail. Duncan Sandyspostulated that the enemy might have beenbuilding up his order of battle by sendingplain language code telegrams to neutralcountries, and thought therefore that allprivate telegrams to neutral countries shouldbe stopped. Herbert said this would have theeffect making a spy use commercial cover. Todeal with this problem it would first benecessary to have a White List, to which hewas opposed in principle, and secondly toarrange that other commercial telegrams weresponsored by some govt.dept This questionhad been gone into no less than 3 times andwas thought to be impracticable. Oliveryttleton took the view that such an arrange-ment would not only constipate the whole P.O.machinery but that of most govt.depts.s as wellI said that while L did not wish to be com-placent, I could say that the building upof the order of battle by means of plain lang-uage code telegrams over a long period was notthe form of the German I.S. as we knew it. Idid however think that there was a risk of aplain language code telegram,giving The targetand date of Overlord. The most dangerousperiod would be after the briefing had begun,but this could be covered by a 14-16 days delayon all telegrams going to neutral countries.atasguerfeferennge.kvangse see that mail goingE 24to our Commando units in Yugoslavia is censoredin Cairo, if this is not already being done.Press telegrams were discussed and the pro-cedure Wa explained. Stafford Vripps did notattach much importance to the statement in thepaper that press representatives had beenvetted since from his personal experience hethought that Freddie KUH was an extremelydangerous man. He thought he was the type whowould place his journalistic career before theallied ceuse. I said that our experience ofKUH was that he got to know everything ofimportance, almost, at least 4 or 5 days beforeanyone else and that he was not above gettinground censorship rules if this was technicallypossible. We did not think however that he wasany thing in the nature of a German spy. He wasmerely a highly intelligent and perhaps some-what unserupulous journalist. The opinionof the Committee was that he ought to beremoved. The suggestion was first made thatas he was an American press correspondent, with-in the zone of the armies, it was for theSupreme allied Commander to make the move.sisenhower had dismissed journalists from theN. African area and therefore presumably coulddo it here. The Home Secretary here sounded anote of caution. Were we going to hand overto the S.A.C. powers of deportation which Nereat present vested in the Home Secretary? Thiswas generally considered a serious snag andit was agreed that the position should beexplored, and that the M.O.L. should be consul-ted,Catalogue Reference:KV/4/193Oliver yttleton said that he proposed to makehis first report in the following form (1) thering round Britain and measures agreed, (2)extrame asures proposed, and (3) remaining gapswhen 1 and 2 had been put into force. Theremay be an annexed report setting out certainaspects of 1,2 and 3 in greater detail.I attended the Second Meeting of the WarCabinet ommittee at 4 this afternoon, at W chwhich the D.G. was not present. We continuedto examine Findlater's first paper of 17thFeb. The proceedings rose progressivelyto what seemed to me to be a high pitch ofinsanity.With regard to private telephones, telegraphand teleprinter (para. l(c), it was agreed thatin the case of the 7 circuits hired by nes-papers in Eire and N.Ireland, a skilled P.O.operator should be placed alongside theoperator of the newspaper company as has beenarranged in the case of the Press Association,Exchange Telegraph and Daily Mail. All news-paper operators for theEire and N. Irelandcircuits are to be vetted by ourselves.It was agreed that the export of all newspapersto Gib! should be suspended on a given date andthat a ban should be placed on the export ofall provincial newspapers. It was felt thatit would not be possible to ban the export ofthe principal dailies to the continent butthat steps should be taken to explore whetherit was possible to block out advertisementsfor the foreign editions. The general viewCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193176was that this was impracticable.With regard to travel by air, as far asService aircraft were concerned it was agreedto tighten up the regulations concerning thecarry ing of letters by crews and to publicisepenalties. All air lines to Eire are to besuspended except those entirely under BOACcontrol. The .B.Transport line to Sweden isf possible to be suspended. The F.O. are toseek advice from the British Minister inStockholm on the possibility of reprisals,since the Ministry of Production attach greatimportance tothe continuance of our ownservice owing to the ball-bearings and othervaluable material which is being brought by airto this country. If it is not possible tosuspend the A.B. .Transport line it is recommendethat the crews should be segregated abd housedin buildings to be constructed on the aerodromeat Dyce. They will not be allowed to proceedoutside the area of the drome. I pointed outthat the normal procedure was for someone fromthe London office of .B.Transport to visitthe crews, and that it was always possible foryuch a person to give thm information orcorrespondence. The Committee thoughtthatrovided this individual was vetted andapproved by M.I.5 such contac could be allowedThe Committee considered that from a givendate all passengers and crews, whether maleor female, should be subjected to a strictsearch before leaving the country. I pointedoutthat this was a fairly drastic measurewhich would doubtless meet with a storm ofprotest specially #here British subjects wereCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193aconcerned, that accommodation would have tobe provided and that both men and women searchewould have to be provided. MI5 were askedto look into this problem and report further.I pointed out that it Nas always open to theSeedish authorities to send out one of theirdiplomats who could leave without an exit permiand who would be normally immune from search.He could also carry out information about theoperation in his head. As far as the per-sonnel were concerned, we had been relievedof some anxiety through the death of to whomYe regarded as slightly suspect. le had nospecial reason for regarding the remainderof .B.Transport with any degree of suspicion.The meeting then went on to indlater's secondpaper of the 17th.The suggestion was put forward that for aperiod of a month or 6 weeks all neutral dip-lomatic communication in cypher and diplomaticbags should be suspended. Allied bags mightalso need consideration. Cadogan was askedfor his views. He said that we might sufferreciprocal treatment and that unless it Nerrpossible for the Americans to varry our traiticthe matter would certainly be serious. Hewould however explore the position. I said thatof course I could not speak for C. but thatfrom such knowledgr as I had of his organisa-tion his efficiency would be yseriously impairedif communication from Sotckholm, Lisbon andMadrid were suspended. This would react onus from the C.E. point of view. I doubtedwhether it Nould be possible for the AmericansCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193E RSto carry his traffic. It was suggested thatpossibly his business could be conducted byair. I said that the volume and urgency of itwere such that I doubted whether this would bepracticable. Certain operations which we hadim hand would be seriously hampered. Whiteleysaid that SHAEF would not wish to be deprivedof information coming from the continent towhich they attached great value.The suggestion was then made that the whole ofthe diplomatic corps should be removed fromLondon and segregated somewhere in the northof England or in Scotland. I said that if thiswere done it would be necessary to keep alldiplomats incommunicado since they derived acertain amount of their information from theirown journalists. Cadogan, who viewed thismeasure with some apprehension, said that hewould look into the matter and report further.The D.( spoke to Morrison after the meetingthis morning, and showed him to examples ofthe .P.getting holding of MULBERRY or PLUTO.In me case of MULBERRY, a man who had beenworking on the job was extremely perturbedbecause he could not get a dredger. He wasvery much afraid that he would not be able tocomplete his job by the scheduled time and thattherefore the 2nd front would not be able toopen. He would like if possible to go to theMersey and bring a dredger round by sea him-self. So worried was he about this that hereported it to the Party with the suggestionthat Willy Gallagher should ask a question inCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193aatheHouse This is an interesting exampleof the Red Flag becoming the red, white andblue. The reporting of PLUTO was perhaps moremalicious. The t eouble and danger lies in thefact that the C.P. .encourages its members topoke their noses into all sorts of secretmatters. This can only lead to the dissemin-ation of knowledge and his clearly highlyundesirable. It does not however provideany argument for the visitors ban since theC.P. would not send out agents to discoverthese matters but merely rely on their membersto come and report to them at headquartersif they saw anything of inerest to the RussiansMorrison was very quick to make the pointthat these leakages were rather an argumentagainst than for the visitors ban. It isprecisely what E had told the D.G. previouslyon two occasions. The D.G. also showedMorrison an even worse potential leakageth ough an ogrganisation known as "MASSObservation ". In a directive for Jan. 1944issued by this ogganisation and marked PriorityA, people were to be asked to describe in asmuch detail as possible their feelings aboutthe 2nd front. They were to say where theythoughtnwe would land, how soon we expected toopen the 2nd front and their fears and hopesfocussing on the 2nd front.I dined with J.C. and Brig. Williams,B BGSI, 2lstArmy Group, who is a Merton Don and Monty'sstar Intelligence man. He went through thewhole of the Liby an campaign and N. Africa andalso the campaign in Italy up to and includingSalerno. He said that the morale of our troopsCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193uDwas at a very low ebb when Monty came out toCairo. They felt that they had been badly ledand that their equipment was poor. Thefighting quality of the troops was howeverextremely good considering the conditions-that prevailed. Monty's first success atAlamein was the turning point. The Germansdid exactly what he had calculated that theywould do. He had encouraged them to maketheir advance over the soft sand north of theQuatra depression by planting false maps onthem. These maps were left in a burned-outtank, andh according to von Thoma, nommelbased his action upon them. Had the Germans,instead of turning north, gone straight on, thethere is ho doubt that the Bth Army would havebeen in very grave diffi ulties. Therefollowed the advance from Alamein. I askedwhat the gun-frontage was and was told thatthere were 600 guns to 3,000 yds. This ofcourse is not a very great concentration ascompared with actions like the Battle of theSomme or Paschendaal. Contrary to my expec-tation I was told that field-guns still didnot fire at a greater rate than 4 rounds pergun per minute.The P.M.'s first visit was not a very greatsuccess. The feeling of the 8th Army was oneof great depression and what they reallywanted was new leaders and better equipment.+hey did not appreciate whatythe P.M.had doneor gone through, and were generally ratherself-centred in their outlook. His secondvisit was a great success. The King's visitwas a moderate success, and somewhat hamperedCatalogue Reference:KVI4/193by the fact that he was suffering from gyppytummy.Williams saw quite a lot of von Thoma and alsoof Messe, the italian. Von Thoma was verybitter against Rommel. He had reported toRommel 3 times that the italians had given wayat Alamein. Rommel would not believe him andordered him to ret nnoitre. it was duringthese reconnaissances that he was captturedHe said rather bitterly "Perhaps Rommel willbelieve me now".Von Thoma did not know that he had had aNew Zealand division opposing bim. In fact,tthough it seems almost incredible, he did notknow where N.Z. was. Still less had he knownabout the Maories, whom he regarded as savages.He was most insistent about the wrongnessof ouremploying such troops and he imploredWilliams to take steps to have them withdrawnfrom the front.Williams had a long discussion with Messe aboutthe battle of the Mareth Line. he asked himwhy he had decided to stand at warethrather than at Aquarit. The latter wouldaccording to Williams have been an extremelydifficult position to take. Messe said thathe entirely agreed. The trouble was thathis orders came from Rome and Berlin ind he hadnothing to do but obey them.Williams also had long talks with the Germangeneral von Nebenstein, of whom he had a highregard. He said that generally speaking theGermans had put up an extremely efficient andCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193waJvery clean and chivalrous fight. This had SOimpressed the British troops that they regar-ded the whole business as rather like a gameof cricket. It was only when they got toItaly and when they saw the ruthless way inwhich the Germans tre ted the civil popula-tion that their attitude began to change.illiams had a high regard for the ItalianIntelligence. He said that they had made farmore intelligent deductions from the informatiothat they received than the Germans, particu-larly with regard to the attack on Sicily.I asked Williams whether he could confirm JohnBooth's story about Tunis. he said that itvas absolutely true. TheGermans had thoughtthat we were going through with our armour ata certain point and had concentrated a largenumber of 88's. These had been spotted byaerial photograph. H concentration of 600British guns had been brought up and had com-pletely wiped out the German defence. Ourarmour had then gone through and fanned outP right and left.Williams told me a very interesting storyabout the Russians. When he was in the deserthe had attached to him a represent tive of TASScalled VASILIEV. VASILIEV came to see him andasked him when he would be allowed to see theP/W interrogations. Williams told him he wassorry but that he could not see them. VASIL-IEV then repeated his question and was toldagain that he would not be allowed to see suchCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193reports. He asked to whom he should appeal.wa.s told that he could only appeal to Williamsand that his appeal was rejected. He thensaid "Thank you. I shall be able to repo t thaI have done every thing possible to obtain thisinformation but th t it has been refused to me"Later on a Soviet military mission arrived inItaly. At the head of this mission was Lt.Gen.VASSILIEV, Williams said that he was verypleased tl meet him again and to see thathe was now dressed as a ut.Gen. he askedhim if he would like to see the P/W reports.VASILIEV replied that he would and he wasimmediately given access to them. The missionwas rather in the n ture of an inspection by ahigher military authority. The impression wasgiven that they had come to the +talian frontin order to see that we were doing our jobproperly. Although the members of the missiondisplayed quite a high degree of intelligenceour methods seemed to be quite incomprehensibleto them. On occasion they asked the mostextraordinary questions. One of them was "Howmany guns do you have per thousand metres?"Williams said that this depended on the situa-tion in any particular area. the Russiansthen accused him of holding back and tryingto mislead them. He assured them however thatthis was the correct answer and said that hepresumed from the question that they had afixed ratio. The Russi ns replied that thiswas SO. Williams then asked them whether hewas correct in assuming th t as they have totu n out enormous numbers of gunners withcomparaticely little training they found iteasier to adopt uniform system which workedCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193o4owing to the preponderance of their armamentsand man-power. The Russians replied that thiswas in fact the reason. For the same reasonthey had their divisional, corps and army zonesfixed according to a regular pattern. Theysaid that otherwise they would not be able tomaint in touch on SO large a front in a battlewhich moved SO fast.hehussians were entirely at a loss to under-stand how it was possible for the head of theAir Force and the CinC of the army to reachagreement without some supreme over-ridingauthority. They imagine that when the AirForce was called upon to carry out a task inconjunction with the infantry they might notcomply. They had to see the system in opera-tion to believe it, and as luck would have ita call was made from the infantry and answeredby the AirForce in a matter of minutes. Not on!that but the offending abtteries were wiped outThe Russians were deeply impressed. The factis that theRussian A my is worked on a totalit-arian mechanised line and they find it difficulto believe that any other system can work.hey went away quite impreseedand Williansthinks they will have given the 8th Army a goodchit to old Joe.I asked Williams about the Anzio bridgehead.I had imagined that a bridgehead landing mustbe a far more formidable operation than thegeneral public seemed to think. He said thatthis was so, that Salerno had been a very nearthing. In fact on the 14th Sept. they thoughtthe game was up. The trouble Was that on thatCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193905occasion the troops had not dug themselves in.In the case ofhthe Anzio bridgehe ad the lessonof digging in had been rather too deeplyimpressed upon them. The result was that theydid not capture the high ground which they had.intended to take. They were sugfering con-siderably in consequence.We then passed on to I.B.matters. Williamssaid that he was somewhat worried aboutthis problem. He did not know much about ithimself. He had found matters in italy highlyunsatisfactory. Amgot had generally made amess of things ind there was virtually no civilsecurity machinery. He did not think thathis present GSO1, IB, oyer-Miller, was up to hisjob, and was looking round for someone to replace him. He had heard about Niall MacDermot,and had already made some suggestion to SHAEFwhich had not been very well received. Hewanted to know what I thought of MacDermot.Isaid that from what I had seen of his workhe was extremely good, very intelligent andvery energetic. I then gave Williams an outlineof that we had been doing in COSSAC and ageneral outline of the work of the whole offoffice. I thought ti was highly importantthat he should meet Dick and nave arr inged withhim to dine next Thursday. As 1 saw thepicture, Dick and MacDermot's work in SHAEF waslargely over and it was necessary then toexplain and elaborate in greater detail thepractic 1 measures necessary for organising IBin lower formations. If therefore Williansdecided to take MacDermot,i Nould suggest hishaving Dick as an IB adviser to 2lst Army GroupCatalogueReferenceKV4/9s been adviser to SHAEF.6Williams thought this might be an extremelygood idea.We talked quite a lot about theGerman IS, andits various weaknesses. He seemed to havecome to the same conclusions as ourselves.We also discussed TAR'S deception unit.Williams does not think a great deal of Wildit has a high opinion of Strangeway s.Hesays that Wild works rather day to day whereasStrangeways looks much farther ahead. Heregards Str ingeways as being extremelyintelligent as well as very brave and practicalas a regular soldier.I explained to Williams what the proposals werewith regard to TAR'S deception unit and I amgoing to arrnge for him to meet TAR next week.February 19thCurry came to see me about his future. Heseemed to think that he had better stay inOSIS at any rate for the present. I agreedthat that was the only course to adopt.In the afternoon I went over to see Arnold-Foster and Viv. in order to give them a pictureof yesterday's Cabinet Committee meeting. Ihad previously spoken to C. and told him thatI thought that he should have a representativeat any futureneetings. Arnol-Foster did notseem to think that a total stoppage of diplo-matic telegrams would seriously affect SIS NorkCatafogfe catafogtfeRefereerceyranngscided on reprisals.1o7He thought that they could work on theirtransmitters about which they could argue forsome considerable time, and that if they didfinally have to count them off they could useAmerican communications. Arnold-Fosterarranged a meeting beteen Himself, iv. andTed Maltby, to review the reports of FindlaterStewart's meeting where the pesition of RSShad been put down as a result of informationsupplied by myself and Viv. I gathered laterthat Maltby approved of the statement exceptthat he wanted it made clear that it wasin the present circumsta inces impossible toobtain another 100 sets and operators or totrain the latter, and that even if this werepossible, the increase in efficiency wouldonly be very small.February 20thThe D.G. asked Findlater Stewart to come overand retiew certain points that he had put downwhich he felt argued in favour of the impo-sition of the visitors! ban. Findlateragreed with most Of them and then gave usa general picture of how this whole questionseemed to have gone wrong in the Cabinet. Hewas convinced at the beginning of the meetingthat all the ministers with the exception ofthe P.M. and Home Secretary were in favour ofthe ban. The thief of Staff began by say ingthat he was not asking for it, he was demandingit. The Home Secretary said that although hedid not believe in its efficacy, he was notgoing to die in the last ditch about it. TheCatalogue Reference:KVI4/193wsP.M. however was obviously against it fromthe outset, kept on shaking his finger atFindlater across the table and saying thatif one man got through the whole game is up.This was a kind of red herring across the wholeproceedings, since the argument was that ifyou can reduce the number of people who cansee things of operationa importance, youwould correspondingly reduce the number ofpeople who would talk about it. There wouldclearly be residents who come up to Londonevery day, who would do a certain amount oftalking, but the more the numbers could bereduced the better. The second argumentwhsch apparently never got the chance of beingheard, was of course far the most potent, namelythat if you keep the are clear of visitorsthe spy would be much more likely to stand outagainst the background of the resident popu-lation who were known to each other and tothe police. The Home Secretary, seeing thatthe P.M.V nas on his side, began to try out anumber of somewvh specious arguments aboutthe policetbeing diverted from their more impor-tant duties and the hardships inflicted on therockney who wished to spend his weekend atsouthend or Brighton. The rest of those presentfearing a final decision aginst the ban,resorted to the well known expedien of suggest-ing that a committee should look into the wholequestion. Hence the Cabinet Committee and theendless discussions about Overlord security, Nhiwhich in fact originated from the SecurityService advocating one additional and quitereasonable measure, which, had not the HomeOffice decided to dig their toes in, would neverCatalogeRReterEREE:KVi4/193e security Executive.It became a Cabinet matter as soon as theChiefs of Staff came into the picture andtelegraphed to the P.M. at Marrakesh. Theygot an unfavourable reply and Findlater hadfrom that moment to take up the running,and produced his first paper for the cabinetdiscussion.February 21stWe resumed discussions at the Cabinet committeeat 11 this morning. e dealt with diplomaticcommuniations, when it Nas decided to stopcables, bags and couriers ex-UK destined forneutr ul countries from a date to be specifiedlater. This was b include Lire bags andcypher communications. It was not clearwhether there was to be a stop age also ofincoming telegrams ind bags and no opportunitywas given for raising this point. It Nasagreed that the German and neutral cables whichare routed through this country from Dublinshould be llo ed to continue and that bags sshould also be allowed provided it could beensured that information vas not insertedhere while the bags were in transit. Theargument was that Eire should be treated likeother neutrils and that ve did not allow thecables and bags sent via this country to go on,the Eire Govt. might feel disposed to givediplomatic representative in Dublin firectfacilities by ireless indmby ybag thoughships sailing direct from Eire to the Peninsula.Roger tells me. that the Transport workers Unionhave blotted their copybook. At a generalCatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/19321021meeting they discussed the allocation oflabour for certain secret tasks to be carriedout on the south coast including Phoenix. Thisappeared in their minutes, a copy of whichthey sent to the br nch of the union in Dublin.Mercifully this copy was intercepted byCensorship. The matter has been taken up Withthe Home Secretary and it is suggested thatCussen should investigate to find out whatIurth r distribution has been given to thedocument.I had a long talk with Victor about orangesand onions. It seemed to me that since we hadreason to believe that a 5th bomb had beenplaced on bo rd one of the ships, we were tak-ing rather a heavyresponsibility in sayingthat no special steps should be taken to locateit. As being the only experienced dept. insabotage, ought we not perhaps to have takencharge at the outset rather than allow theNavy to employ all sorts of methods. e.g.probing the crates, which in fact we knew to bequite useless. While L agreed with Victor thatrobably the action or lack of action was theonly course, I think we ought to get theposition clear. Victor is going to prepare amemo on the subject.I had a discussion with Grogin, Trevor-ilson andBrook-Booth about bringing heyallies into thecensorship picture. They would have to set upcensorship units after the allied occupation andit seemed desirable that they should have thenecessary training. This implied certaineatalogue Reference:keV/4/193 elt that these riskswould have to be taken but agreed that we shouldnot give them the 7 special tests, at any rateuntil after D.day.Artist has put in two very interesting reports.He emphasises the extent to which the Germansare relying on Tricycle to given them reportsabout the date of the landing in France Hethinks that Tricycle should speculate on thebasis of information that he has receivedfrom the Gen.Staff circles, but should makecertain reservations, since a report with areservation is more easily believed by theFremdeheere than categorical statements.Artist can arrange for such a report to appearmore plausible through getting it confirmedby BRANDES. He says that BRANDES is quiteprepared to repeat the contents of a messagereceived by him from ricycle as one receivedfrom other sources. BRANDES is well thought ofin Berlin although in Artist's opinion hisreports are based on the "constructiveimagination of his sub-agents". A reportenmanating from Tricycle and repeated byBRANDES will receive, IS a confirmed report,the highest degree of credibility which anAbwehr report can get in the eyes of theGen. Staff. Further, if the event does notmaterialise, confirmation by BRANDES would SaveTricycle from being accused of deliberatedeception as in such a case a change of enemyplans would be assumed. BRANDES would nothave knOT ledge of this double game, but wouldbe rateful for the good tips. This would notbe unfair treatment of BRANDES because if heknew the teuth he would probably want to joinCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193912in the game. Apparently this business ofconfirmed reports is common practice in certainAbwehr circles of the more unscrupulous kind.According to von Karsthoff, recent events inSpain have practically ended the relations ofthe K.0. with official >panish circles. TheK.0. has been told that unfortunately,owin toEnglish pressure, it will not in future beable tobank on the support of the Spanishauthorities. It is even feared that Spainwill demand the dissolution of the K.0.and will expel all known members of the Abwehr.In view of this critical situation preparationsare being made to maintain the I.S., and cashreserves of 1500 pesetas are on their wayfrom Berlin. Endeavours will be made towin over diplomats for Abwehr work in spiteof the present prohibition of the German E.0.The chances of the success of the futureorganisation are not estimatedot be very high.Artist may be asked to play a prominent partin the shadow organisation, as his n me hasna been mentioned in any of the complaintsfrom the British.anaris's reutation hasin the past beenla gely maintained though the importance ofhis panish connecticns. He may thereforefare badly in the future.With regard to the observationnof shipsin the Straits of Gib., the proposed replace-ment of Abwehr men by panish individualsis only making slow progress and it is notpossible to gain a reliable observation ofCatalogue Reference:kV/4/193shin traffic prior to April lst.2'2It would certainly be a pity if the Abwehrwere to lose ground at the expense of the S.D.There is a definite advantage to us in keepingthe Abwehr in position owing to its relativeinefficiency.Confirmation of Artist's report is containedin a Jap B.J to the effect that the head ofthe "Organ" in Spain, namely Alcazar deVELASCO, has been told by the resident ofthe Cortes that in view of the new law tocondemn to death any spaniard who has committedany act such as violates Spanish neutralityhe may be in serious danger. He should there-fore take temporary refuge in France beforethe law in question was promulgated. Fromsimilar material it is also clear that earlyin February a decision was reached by theGerman F.0. to reciew in co-operation with theOKW the compass and functions of the Abwehrin neutral countries. It is hoped to ascertainwhether thee risks entailed on the diplomaticside are like to outweigh any adv ntages to begained from Abwehr activity.It seems that the Americans have weighed in hreue|heavily on the espionage front in Spain andhave drawn attention to the activities of KOBBEwhom they hold responsible for the loss of acapital ship and one cruiser in the Pacific.They have also pointed out to ranco that theAxis was making skilful use of Spanish diplo-matic organs and demanded a strict enquiry intothis matter. Apparently alcazar de VELASCOis not greatly alarmed. He takes cover underCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193214the fact that he was appointed in Suner's timeand with the full concurrence of Franco, to behead of the Press Office of the bpanish Embassyin London. Franco is therefore himself somesort of accomplice.It seems there is some anxiety about an ItalianPAULUCCI who was the person who originallyplanned the bribing of the "Organ" and isnow thought toxe have gone over to the enemy.Mebruary 22ndI had a long talk with Spooner about the caseod STYLES who has got a year's imprisonmentwith hard labour. Spooner had mentioned twoPoles, antoni STARUSCKEWICZ and Edmond ZIOL-KOWSKI, who had come through by the same routeas STYLES and had been examined at the LRC.As there seems no doubt that STYLES got awaywith the connivance of the Germans I thinkthe case of the two Poles should be reviewed.Herbert has just come back from a visit to anAmerican unit in the south-west of England.hre found them extremely responsive and verykeen to learn. H few of them had attended ourcourse in London, and there is no doubt thatMI5 stands high in American counter-intelligencecircles.I attended a Cabinet meeting at 3 this after-noon. After reviewing certain matters affectingshipping and communications by allied govts. itwas agreed that as far as possible refugees,Catalogue Reference:KV/4/19315recruits and unenrolled allied personnel shouldbe diverted to .Africa and elsewhere in SO faras this is possible. It was further agreedthat indlater Stewart should look into thequestion of the danger of leakage from British.agents introduced into Germany or OccupiedTerritory. Finally the committee discussedthe ban on visitors to the coastal belit.Morrison said that the effect of imposing a banwould be to reduce very substantiallythe areas available for holidays. He did notbelieve that the ban would add very much tosecurity since the greatest danger arose fromindiscreet talk by persons residing in the coas-tal belt. The police force have been greatlydepeted and it would be impossible for them toenforce the ban completely. Indeed the addedduties placed on them by the imposition of theban might make it impossible for them to carryout other more important security measires.These arguments seemed rather specious. Anyinconvenience to the public is not really aconsideration when SO much is at stake, andit might be argued that during the Overlordperiod the checking of identity documents shouldbe the most important part of police duties.So far from adding to theirtpoubles it shoulareduce them, since they would have fewer peopleto challenge and any doubtful persons Nould bemore easily distinguished. Morrison producedfigures obtained from the MWT which were notparticularly informative. Findlater Stewarton the other hand produced figures which hehad obtained from the Ministry of Food. theyshowed that 200,000 people a week obtained foodcards in the banned area. These people there-Catalogue Reference:KVI4/193916fore went for periods of longer than 5 day s.It had to be assumed that there must be at leastanother 100,000 who would be going down forweekends. These made a total of 1, 200,0 permonth or roughly the equivalent of one-thirdof the total population which is estimated atabout 3,500,000. It was not of course possibleto say how far the figure of 300,000 per weekwould be reduced theough a legitimate channel.seemed however likely that it hight wellbe reduced by something like 50% The D.G.made a very good speech emphasising that themain purpose of the ban was to make a spy standout. If the area was filled with trippersbivouacking on the downs or filling up theboarding houses and hotels a spy would have agood cover. Duncan Sandys was in favour ofthe ban anyway, Oliver Ly ttleton was waveringuntil the D. G. made his speech and StaffordCripps was inclined to thinkthat the ban wasworth while if all the other precautions wereadopted. He came right over when he heard theD.G.'s speech. Apparently this parteular angleof the problem had not bee presented at allto the Cabinet. The P.M. had completelyclouded the issue by persisting in his theoryunat if one man got through it would completelynullify the effects of the ban. As he went outMorrison tapped the D.G. on the back and said"You old scoundrel".Kellar tells me that there isynow Ispal 3, whichwhich appears to be communicatic betweenZionists and their various contacts in Europe.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/193I saw Mountain this afternoon, when we discussedthe document purporting to have been writtenby D'ASTIER and circulated to resistance move-ments in France. This document reached Mountairfrom a rather dubious character called ThurloePrior who was sacked from the Army for conductto the prejudice of good order and discipline.He also has a rather unsavoury business reputa-tion. Prior has a friend in the FrenchMilitary Mission whose name has been given aas "Estienne". The latter was worried aboutthis document since it referred to lists hichwere to be drawn up of French collaborationistswho would be bumped off on D.day. Individualassassinations were not permitted but the localresistance committee, backed by popular opinion,was authorised to carry out the executions.The French officer thought that this wascreating a blood bath and wished if possibleto take such action as would prevent such astate of affairs. Geoffrey Wethered who sawhim gave an assurance that the informationwould be passed to the proper quarter and thatthe informant's name would be safeguarded. tecould not however say what action theauthorities would take. The informant haspromised to give further information if itcomes his way.David Grey, the American Ambassador inDublin,has made his demarche. Dev gave him a flatrefusal, which was really all he wanted.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1931'8February 23rdLipstick has received a postcard which undoubted-ly comes from the Germans, but which theCensorship failed to intepcept. it is not atpresent clear whether Lipstock realises fromwhom the postcard originated, but he showed agreat reluctance to admitting receipt of it.Finally he said, uhconvincingly, that he believed, had come from the Cat lans.The exchange of messages on Freak's radio isnow working properly and the receiving stationis passing on the messages to Berlin.Balloon conducted Tricycle on a tour of mostof Kent, including coastal areas in the courseof which no identity papers had to be producedat any stage by either of them.Bronx has received nearly 1300, apparentlyfrom the Germans, during the last few day s.Theexact significance of these ayments is notquite clear but at least ElO0 must be inrespect of bonus and salary, and efforts willbe made to make her pay it over.Sniper has received a message which is diffi-cult to decypher but apparently it refers toradio-controlled rocket gliders.The Germans are attempting to send a wirelessset to Father in India, or. alternatively to getinto communic tion with him by letter. Thisarrangement is being made through the inter-mediary of an agent in Istanbul. It now appearsCatalogue Reference:KVI4/193a19that this agent is controlled by SIME and isknown to them as Blackguard. India are verydoubtful whether they can risk ying up Fatherwith an agent controlled by SIME but we areadvising them that we do not think anotheropportunity of getting a wireless set toFather is likely to arise.TAR and I went to see waxwell about the case ofSnow and his son. The H.0. were suggestingthat perhaps the son could now be released.We explained the position to Maxwell and saidthat in our view both Snow and his son musthang together as a case and that we felt itwould be unwise to release either o1 them atthe moment. One should be quite prepared toreconsider their case immediately after thelaunching of Overlord. Maxwell agreed.At the weekly meeting today ISOS disclosedthat the S.D. in Lisbon has received informationthat a certain individual hho may possiblybe Br zilian will arrive in Lisbon at thebeginning of March on his way to London. Heis to stay a week in London and will thenreturn to Lisbon where he will get into touchwith the S.D. It is not possible to identif,this individual on present information. TheGerman I.S. station in Lisbon has been informedby Berlin that Einzwirtschaft is willing toallow its own agents to act as couriers toAbwehr agents in London and America. TheseEinzwi. agents can take money, ink and instruc-tions to such Abwehr links provided that theyare not enlangered by sodoing. there are asusual many reports purporting to emanate fromthis country but all of them are untrue.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/193220Stamp told us th t NBEKERMANS has now disclosedthat he sent 8 or 9 letters in secret ink toan address in Barcelona which was not on theWatch List. However the face that the lettersgot through is somewhat disquieting, and thequestion ismbeing taken up with Censorship.If the information of NEUKERMANN is to bebelieved, there was nothing of importance inthe letters, which were mostly inaccurateSclater mentioned that ceetain en clair Polishsignals believed to be Polish military signalshad been picked up by RSS in Scotland. ThePoles who have been questioned about this arenot particularly helpful. It is not of courseceetain that the messages were being sent fromGt.Britain. In the corrupt form in which theywere picked up they are not particularlyintelligible.I gave the meeting a short account of thebattle of the ban.Bill Younger came to see me about an Americanwoman employe by M/S.who had been aproached byO an American officer, presumably someone fromOSS with a suggestion that she should goto Stockholm. the idea is that she shouldmake tentative approaches to German business menin order to start a defeatist movement inGermany. I said that she would have to make upher own mind as to whether she accepted thisjob or not but that the proposition struck meas being a particularly futile one. Thereis not the slightest point in trying to convertGerman business menabout the futility of theCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193alpresent struggle. They are already converted.They are however an extremely small minorityand more or less impotent.Roach and Warden came to see me about theGILBERT case. Rather reluctantly 1 agreedthat GILBERT should be housed somewhere inthe Midlands. The RSLO should be informed andalso the local police in order that we shouldat least know if he absented himself fromthearea. I said that L was in fact just asworried about LOUBA and his associates asI was about GILBERT, but that it was quiteimpossible to express any definite opinionabout these cases unless one had access toeverybody who had had anything to do with them.Evidently the Security section of SOE havehad a considerable truggle over GILBERT andhave not had much help from their country sectioIt is the same old trouble of blind faith ofthe man who runs an agent.Paddy Barry same to see me about the enrolledallied personnel ind the possibility of gettingthe Services to send them to N. Africa for thenext 6 months. He thinks it should be aJ.I.C. matter. I told him that the questionwas of some urgency as we now had powers tolock people up if we were in doubt but thatwe did not wish to lock up more than necessary.It was however essential that we should see allthose who had come out of occupied territoryafter the total occupation of France.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/193992February 24thI had a talk with Jo Archer and TAR about thepresentation of the Spitfire leakage case. TARhas undertaken on the basis of Jo's reporthis own and Fish's, to prepare a note whichwill not disclose secret sources and will putthe case in its proper perspective for presentat-tion to the Chief of the Air Staff who isinterested; the report vill also go to MAP.I had a talk with Arthie Boyle about thearrangement between MWT and the Sredish Legationto carry one ton of freight to Sweden in MTBSwhich are collecting ball bearings from Gothen-berg. Archie agrees that the freight oughtto be examined. He suggests that Ne shouldapproach the MT and propose either that theyshould pack the crates or that they should beexamined in the normal way by Customs. Thematter is now of some importance in the lightof the suggestion by the Cabinet Committeethat diplomatic communication should be cutprior to Overlord. If this is done theSwedes may well regard the SOE boats as aconvenient channel for communication.I then talked to Archie about the GILBERTcase. He said that his section had had abattle roy al with Gubbins and had won. dewas quite frank about the difficulties whichhis section encountered in etting to thebottom of cases of this case and thoroughlysympathised with me when I said that itseemed almost impossible to get at the fullfacts. while I was there Geoffrey WetheredCataBguerRefereAte:kv4/ig3enquiry had come to279Jo Archer from the Air Ministry about theGILBERT case. The A.M. had been asked tosend over aircraft to GILBERT'S successorand wnted to know our views. Archie saidthat we were at liberty to report to the.M. our findings on the GILBERT case. Inthe light of what we said they would haveto make up their on minds. it seemed tome that if we had doubts about GILBERTwe sh uld equally have doubts about hissuccessor. One must assume that if GILBERTwas wrong the Germans knew all about hisorganisation. Their only reason for keepingit in being would be to watch those who passthrough it and round them up at a suitablemoment. If therefore they found thatGILBERT was not returning they would takesteps to deal with subordinates unless theywere in German pay.Kenneth came in in the afternoon. I tollhim about the possibility of Niall MacDermottaking over Hoyer-Miller's job. He seemedquite pleased with the idea. He said hoeverthat from what he had heard it seemed doubt-ful if Williams would be able to acceptour offer of interrogators from the LRCowing to establishment difficulties. Ishall have to go into this, as it seemsimportant since unless we have a propersection on the continent we shall be floodedout here with undesirables.yI attended a meeting at Norfolk House withFindlater Stewart in the chair. The purposewas to go thnough the draft report of thealalogestreferencesaviarnggensation was caused22when Crowe who was representing the F.O.stated that the proposal to sever diplomaticcommunications had not been understood byir nlexander Cadogan. He had thought ththe proposal was to stop communications 10days before the operation and to inform theneutral governments if we wished to continuethe stoppage for a longer period. Theonly answer to this was that either Sir nlex-1ander or Sir Urme Sargent or both must havebeen asleep. The F.O. also said th t they wereopposed to the ban on the 2,000 Norwegians.they were however in agreement with thestatement provided it was made clear thatwe agreed to accept them if they were trans-ferered immediately to Canada. Findlatersaid that he had consulted Sir J.Stephenson 01of the D.O. who had no objection to thesuggested treatment of Lire bags provided itconformed to the tretment of other neutrals.Dick and I dined with Williams BGSI. Hisconversation about his experiences in N. Africawas SO entertaining that we did not reallyget down to much business. He said howeverthat he had more or less made up his mindto take MacDermot provided he could passhis medical. This I am sure is a good step.He also expressed his intention of coming into see TAR in order to discuss the deceptionunit.One story he told us was interestig. HeHad been with a forward tank reconnaissanceunit at about the time the Germns landed atAgheila. Nobody would believe for a longCatalogue Reference:KVi4/i93 Referencetime that the Germanso landed. Williamsafter cruising about in the desert decidedto return along the coast L road. When doingSO he passed another tank on the road but didnot recognise its markings. It was onlyafter it had gone several hundred yards thathe ealised that it was a German tank. TheGermans too hadfailed to recognise him.They then tunned round and fired at eachother but both missed. It was only thenthat the German landing was confirmed.Williams also talked about w.S.S. He hadgiven a lecture at B.F. on its use. Montyhad in fact had early intimation about theGerman dumps of petrol and ammunition. thesehad been effectively dealt with by the Airforce. When hesaw Von Thoma, the latter wasconvinced that the information regardingthese dumps had been given by Aral spies.Williams has a great admiration for Tedder.He said that had it not been for thepolitical issue Teader would have made afirstclass Supreme Commander During theworst moments of the desert fighting he kepthis head in the most remarkable way. Itwas of paramount importance to stop Rommelfrom gettingoi at the time when he reachedAlamein. MSS showed that he was short ofoil but that he was expecting to get suppliedby tanker at Tobruk. Tedder gave ordersthat at all costs these tankers were to beknocked out. it was really a suicide jobfor Wellingtons but was completely successful,and probably did more to prevent Rommel'sadvance to Alexandria than nything else.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/193February 25thI had a talk with Burt, when I-told: him thehistory of our report about STOCKMAN and thepolice. This became necessary since it seemethat Skardon had got on to the case of MossSimmonds, a deserter who bribed the policemarwith 150 when he came to arrest him. Thereias an obvious danger of the lines getting CIcorssed. I reminded Burt of the time whenhe had spoken to me about the invdsrigationinto corruption at the Yard. I said thatI had n t told him at that time as I feltthat in some ways it might embarrass him.I thought now hovever that he should havethe full story. As he knew, Ned Reid fromtime to time received reportsfrom banks aboucurious accounts. Investigation had shownthat transactions were almost invariablyconducted by black marketers. We had pro-duced a report on this subject to Sir Alexan-der Maxwell, stiting that we had no particu-lar wish to conduct enquiries of this kindwhich were outside our sphere but we wereot anxious that other bodies should startmakin enquiries with banks or using tele-phone checks since they would probably spoilour legitimate business. It was arrangedtherefore that Sir Charles Teggart should beappointed by the Min. of Food to invesitgateand that we would pass the information tohim, since he was a person thoroughly accus-tomed to handling delicate subjects. Wegot on to Stockman and kat it soon becomeevident that considerably bribery and corrup-CataloguefRetereneenky/4ga9ng on. Having amasseda good deal of infamation we submitted aTH1S IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENTIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.report to Sir Ttexander axwet. He hadcalled in the Commissioner who passed thereport to Sir .Kendall. We had sincebecome aware that a certain amount of/IHForma.tion was s:going back to .crooks. it seemedtherefore that whatever arrangements SirNorman had made were not likely to producethe best results. I asked Burt what he Old ldhae done if he had been Sir Alexane Maxwell.He said that having informed the Commiss-ioner he would have made arrangements forsome outside body to conduct thecenquirysince it was obviously impossible for theYard to conduct the enquiry themselves.He said would, havesr a talk withChief Inspector Barrett who had been placedin charge with a view to findingout how farpeople were aware that M.I.5 had been supply-ing the information and also that specialmethods were being employed.Burt told me about the case of a policeofficer called Hill. I said that as faras I knew we had had nothing to do with thecase. He said the effect had been ratherdisastrous. Evidently the police hadtapped in on the telephone conversatopm,of which they had take a record. This hadbeen played over to some 6 or 7 police officerwho had talked about it, and, the informationhad clearly got back to the crooks.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/193228I attended a meeting at Norfolk House whenwe discussed the dangers of SIS and SOEagents going into the field. EindlaterXpIained that the ministers desired to beassured by the various Services responsiblefor sending agents overseas (a) that no agentwas given any information about the forth-coming operations which was not absolutelyessential to his mission (b) that in caseswhere the agent must be given some informatiorthe Service concerned would consider care-fully whether the advantage to be gained bysending out a man outweighed the possibilityof leakage which might result if he werecaptured and (c) that all possible precautionswould be taken to ensure that agents about tole ve should not be in a positior to obtaindangerous information either by visits tothe south coast or in conversation withinfommed persons e.g., any allied headquarterGen. Whiteley pointed out that SHAEF felt thatthe agencies concerned should decide them-selves what information should be given toagents and that all such information shouldbe referred to SHAEF before any action wastaken. SIS said that their agents never getanything that ould indicate the target. Theywere more or less spread out overthe contientand were concerned solely with the supplyof information. SOE said that none of theiragents had any knowledge of the target or dateand that wherever they were going they Nouldbe given identical instructions of a generalcharacter telling them what they were to dowhen the time came. In fact instructionswould not be given to them until after .day.Cataogue Bath ogueReference:kV/47193 SISand SOE agents get periodical leaveand there is a certain chance that they maypick up information. At the SOE School atBeaulieu nobody is allowed outside thegrounds except for the purpose of two exer-cises, one in Boumouth and one in >outhamp-ton. As it is possible these agents mightsee something important in Southampton, SOEare asking us to look into the question.ol.Neave of OSS said that all his workwas carried out through the agency of SISand SOE. The Committee felt that althoughwe could be reasonably satisfied about theoperations of allied headquarters, theexistence of lines between France andAlgiers controlled by the French NationalCommittee consitued a danger of seriousleakage. Although these various assuranceswere given I personally felt far fromsatisfied about SOE agents going into thefield and also about allied agents who areeither directly under their control orthose who are pproved by the allied headquar-ters. They are supposed to be searched butin fact this is extremely difficult, andif done really thoroughly would obviouslycause appalling friction. The only reallysatisfactory measure would be to close downoperations of all these people for 2 monthsprior to D.day.Tricycle is ready to depart but has to waituntil Saturday for a plane.Freak has got through satisfactorily. Thefact that the enemy put two stations on tothe iob of receiving his traffic confirmsCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193230that they regard it as of the greatest impor-tance.Treasure is leaving by air on Satuaday and hopeto bring back a W/T set.The Mullet and Puppet case still goes on al-though Berman who was running it in Brusselshas been sacked. His successor is one Wernerthom Hamlet hopes to meet in the near future.Bronx has received another monthly payment,with an additional +100, of which 150 is forexpenses and 150 as a bonus for hard work.Lipstick has given an explanation of thecircumstances in which he received a postcardfrom Spain which was at first accepted assatisfactory. In view of information whichhas now been received regarding Lipstick'sactivities in connection with the Catalanorganisation in the autumn of last year,there are further grounds for doubt as tohis integrity. This case is being veryclosely gone into. There is no doubt thathe has been indiscreet as a result of whicha number of his Catalan friends havee beenarrested.February 26thThe Garbo netork now consists of about 24agents, some conscious and some. unconsciousbut all notional. Steps are being taken toCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1932get them placed notionally in various partsof the country where they may provide usefulinformation about Overlord.On the 19th February re orts on Crossbowshowed that up to the 15th there was evidenceof repairs to or intentions to repair some28 out of 73 sites which had been assessedas Class or B on that date. The delayimposed on the enemy 's building or repairsby bombing has been considerable and up todate it has not been possible to detect anycomprehensive or consistent repair policy.The construction of supply sites has reachedan advanced stage but there is no evidenceof the arrival of pilotless aircraft com-ponents on supply sites.There have been four fairly sharp raids onLondon during the week, one bomb alling atthe bottom of t.James's St., causing con-siderable damage from blast, which now seemsto be far more widespread. Victor's flatwas danaged. He was lucky to be sleeping inthe country. These attacks were the heaviestsince May 1941 and all were of shortduration. Provisionally it is estimatedthat 120 bombers operated over land on thelst occasion, 95 on the 2nd and 150 on the3rd. Probably a larger proportion than onrecent occasions reached London. H.E. andI.B. were dropped more or less simultaneouslyand the first attack caused 48 fires in Londonand 24 outside, in the 2nd, 606 fires in Londoand 50 outside and in the 3rd, 235 in Londonand 534 outside. On all these occasions thedock area received little attention. There NaCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1932232was no great concentration at any one borough,but on the whole W.London reveived the mainweight of all these attacks. Casualties inLondon were, lst attack 182, second 216 and3rd 29. The minor attack on 21/22nd Feb.was made by 15 ircraft which except in asingle penetration as far as Beckenham opera-ted over southern and E.England had didnegligible harm. Enemy losses in aircraftamount to 20, roughly 52%. The Germansassess this figure as somewhat higher.February 23thThe D.G. told me he was going to see Cripps ona matteryeonnected with Overlord. Hentended to have a fairly frank talk with him,I said I thought te was important, in addi-tion to giving him a general review of ourwork, to torpedo the Home Secretary's argu-ment about the police being diverted tomore i portant duties. The D.G sent for mewhen he returned. He evidently told Crippsa good deal. Cripps is entirely sold onthe question of the visitors' oan and willpresumably support it in the Cabinet.I saw C. and took him the document aboutFrench resistence movements which we hadreceived from the Frenchman giving his nameas ETIENNEE C. sent for Claude Dansey whosaid that he had also had a copy of thisdocument through an informant in thiscountry, who had something to do with theresistance movement formerly known as theAlliance. The head of this organisationCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193had been caught and the network had beenbroken up. It now seemed from the seconddocument received that the Germans weretry trying to revive the Alliance and use it asa means foe penetrating other resistancemovements. Dansey said that this was quiteplausible and that in fact manuel of theFrench 2eme Bureau had pproached hima short time ago on the subject of theAlliance. Dansey thought that the Frenchdocument purporting to be written by d'Astierwas probably a genuine one. He thoughthoever that it was slightly curious thatwe should have both received a copy. Itmight be that it had been released with someulterior motive. He did not know the identityof ETIENNE andI promised to give him a des-cription in case he had got the documentfrom the same informant.We then had a general talk about resistancemovements. C. expressed the greatest anxietyabout the activities of SOE and the alliedgovernments. He is quite sure that they areall penetrated and that in fact there waspractically no resistance movement on thecontinent outside the communists. He showeremea Sitrep indicating that 25 tons had beendropped in France during the last moon period.Accompanying this report wasa map, markingwhere the arms had been dropped but indicatingthat not 25 but hundreds of tons had beendropped. C. thought that most of the armswere going straight to the Germans. He knewin fact that a French Commandant who hadlnnded the other day illicitly had beenarrested with about 60 of his onfederates.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/193a3uThis matter had been reported to Algiers.We know of course of the case of GILBERT andLOUBA. C. told me that he had blown uprecently on the whole question with the PM.He had really let himself go and the PM hadtold him that he was orejudiced against SOE.He said that he was nothing of the sort. Herealised the difficulty of their task butthat equally he realised that the majorityof the material got into wrong hands andthat they were penetrated up to the hilt.The effect was to make his work far moredifficult than it was already and also tocompromise the French military organisationof Gen. Revers. The General had got a verygood idea of how the Germans were going tomeet an attack and where their concentrationsof rolling stock would be. He had made plansto put this rolling stock out of action. Inview however of the activities of SOL, theGermans were making wholesale arrests. Theyhad instituted a new pass system which would ppin-point anybody who was not doing regularwork in the factory and they had introducedsome dozens of railway NOrkerS to take overthe whole railway system. C. doubted there-fore whether there would be any resistancein France at all except-by the communists.The PM eventually told him to sit down andnot to get excited. He did owever saythat he wished to be kept informed of anyother facts which came to C's notice aboutresistance movements and SOE.I went to see Sir John Stephenson in orderto tell him about SEMPILL.As we expectedCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193SEMPILL had made a fool of himself in Canadaand has got mixed up in politics and madesome indiscreet speeches. The High Commiss-ioner in Canada is anxious to get rid of him.Stephenson did not see what action could betaken for getting him home unless we coldpossibly find out what companies he represntedIf the chairman of the company was a suitableper on the S. of S. might then approach himand see if he could get SEMPILL recalled.Vincent Massey isin Ottawa but Stephensondid not thinkthat he could ask him to inter-vene.He told me that Grey had been to see Devand got a rocket. He was followed shatlyby Maffey who was not at all well received.Dev got very excited and S id that ifnecessary Ireland would fight. Maffey tol himthet there was no need for him to be upstage.He was merely being asked to give thelegations their marching orders. If he didnot see fit to do SO that was that. Dev'snext movemwas to send for the Canadian HighCommissioner. He protested that he wasbeing pestered with notes by the Britishand Americans and tried to enlist Canadiansupport. He did not however get much help.The Canadians said that while it was perhapsa pity to address formal notes on this sub-ject he thoroughly appreciated the Bri ishand American point of view. They were aboutto undertake an extremely vital operationwith the Germans at their door. He thoroughlyunderstood their representations and anxiety.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/193236February 29thI had a meeting ith Brook Booth, KemballJohnston and Philby about the Case of KUKEIL.The leter that Ne sent to the F.O. had beensent back to SIS for comments. Dansey hadmade i number of a somehat vague kind anddefinitely inaccurate. Kim lad no evidencof improper activities by KUKEIL although heknew him to be strongly anti-Russian.Kembal Johnson vas very confident about orangebut said that he would try ind press him forfurther details. Meanwhile Kim is going todig round in Broadway.Kemball Johnson,BrooK Tooth and I thendiscussed te CERVELL case and the inteerog-ation of the Czeca officer Knorr. Plant whohad left for Stockholm on the 23rd to seeNordenskiold, was going to draw the latter'sattention firstly to Cervell's relatiunsvitl the Bristol Aircraft Co. and secondiyto the indiscreet conversations he was avingwith a Czech otfic r On the subject of thecond Front. simultaneously wita thisaction it had been proposed that e Shuuldon the one hand severely interrogut Bartlettand on the other try and extict i confessionfrom the Czech officer Knorr. lie C me tothe conclusion that there asynetning furtherto be dene about Bartiett who hs lreadyreceived a rocket from Freemn of MP andapparently is a much chastened man. eagreed however that there might be consider-catafogue gueRrelerece:Kv493l get Faddy Barryto talk to Knorr. This Nas arranged.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED27IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958. becHarker had a meeting about the B.1 B. Reg. Inview of the recent bembing of London thereyas a onsiderabhe feeling that eiter itshould be housed in the basement and a consid-erable duplicatior of records and cards carrieout or that it should be moved bodily toBP. We should undoubte ly be in seriousstraits if it were to be out of action evefor a period of a fen months. The matterwas left open for final decision afterfurther enquiries had been made about theaccommodation.The D.G. has written a nde on the one man'aspect of the ban. The P.M. at the firstmeeting of the Cabinet had stressed the pointthat if one man could get into the area thewhole purpose of the ban would be nullified.This of course was a bad red nerring sincewe are alwys up against the one man. Thememo is unfortunately full of references toIndia including the P.O.W' S visit in 1911.While his arguments are perfectly sound, theywould I think carry more conviction if theywere based on spies in England instead ofterrorists in India.March lst.J.C. and Ronnie Reed came to see me aboutfor whom they want to find Some sortof employ ment. L rang up Lennard Ingramsand suggested that J.C. should go round andsee him.Catalogue Reference:KVILTAR tells me that a crisis has arisen in the238Garbo and Tricycle cases: The troubleis that Artist has once more been poking hisnose into Kuhlenthal's affirs and haseviently convinced himself that most ofK'ls agents are under control. This of courseincldes the Garbo n tnork. He has there-fore suggested that as Tricycle is havingrather a difficult time with Schreiber Neould back him up by planting similarinformation through Kuhlenthal. We cannotof course admit to Artist that we have nocontrol over K'S organisation Somehow oroteer ve shall have to ride him off. Mean-while Tricycl is apparently anxious to haveIan Wilson to hold his hand. he are there-fore sending him to Lisbon by the next plane.At the weekly meeting ISOS showed that, pre-sumably as a result of the publicity givento the arrest of 'REILLY, and KENNY inEire, the Abwehr in wiadrid and Lisbon havebeen given instructions bhat no furtheroperations are to be undertaken in Eire.Another urgent request hs been made to theAbvehr in Italy to provide civilian clotheswell as army uniforms and equipment. Theseare to be sent as soon 3S possible to Francefor special operations. it has apparentlybeen impossible to obtained the requiredcivilian clothing in Germany since all sparestocks are reserved for bombed-out people.Presumably these clothes are required forspies or commandos, to be used either hereprior to D.day or on the continent after theoperation has begunCatalogue ReferenCe:KV/4/193oThe D.G. and I went to see Findlater Stewwartbefore the Cabinet meeting in order to clarifyour views. IE seems that the whole questionof the ban is is more or less in the lap ofthe gods. Ve have tried to think of all therational arguments. the trouble is thatwe may be faced with the irrational.Burt had a long talk with about a meetinghe had ith C. I.Barrett who is investigati..corruption at the Yard. He was quite con-vinced that Barrett had no intimate knowledgeof our technique. On the other handhe was certain that Barrett and his assistantsould get nowhere in clearing matters up.Evidently the ground has been well fouled, andeven if one started again, using a differentorganisation, the chances of success wouldbe somewhat remote.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDWN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONO3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958. poccoo ooThe D.G. and I attended a meeting of the Cabin.et committee at 6 his eveing, in case weCatatogueReferenee:KV/4/i9sr of fact we sat out-Side in the lobby stoking the fire for 12 hrs24oat the end of which Bridges came out to saythat the discussion did not appear to be makinmuch progress and that our services would notbe required. Before the meeting the partyassembled in the lobby. Ernie Bevin cameup while we were talking to Findlater. Heseemed to think that a great deal of fuss wasbeing made about nothing. He said that duringthe last 4 years he had moved hundreds ofthousands of men and their families from onepart of the country to another. He had beenurged by his colleagues to seek the approvalof the House before taking action but hadrefused to do SO on the grounds that if youonce talked to the House about it there wascertain to be trouble. He had never had amurmur from the workmen who took the wholematter as part of their contribution to thewar effort. He realised that the questionof the diplomatic communications was hobittricky. I said that the F.0. were likely tobe a bit sticky. He said "Oh yes, but thenyou see they belong to the same union". Bevinthen said that his experience of the presentCabinet was that if you were prepared to missthe first train you might catch the secondor third. He was clearly alluding to thesuggestion put forward at the first meetingof theCabinet when the P.M. was adamant thata committee should be formed to look intothe whole question. John Anderson also talkedto us He seemd to be more than usuallypompous and back in his old mood of thecautious P.U.S. He thought the problem ofthe ban presented greatdifficulties. Hewas not stay ing for the present meeting asCatalogue obviously Reference: Reference:KV4/193 the whole question would have toucome before the full Cabinet. 1 gave him ourpoint of view about keeping the area clearof holiday-makers in order that the spy shouldstand out if he tried to camp out or take aroom at a holiday. He seemed to think theremight be something in this. He left us sayingthat we had his sympathy for what it was worthMarch 2ndTAR, Mockler-Ferryman and Roach came todiscuss the ETIENNE document. M-F broughta note by Robin Brook of SOE. Brook evident-ly thinks that the document is basicallygenuine although he doubts whether d'Astieris the author. At the time it was writtenAndre PHILIP was in charge. The documentspurports to be issued by the head of theresistance movements in France, but thisdoes not preclude the possibility that itwas drafted in Algiers. SOE are on the wholefairly satisfied with its contents since itseems to indicate that they are concernedabout fighting the Germans as well as seizingpower, and liquidating the collaborationists.The only possible motive for the documentbeing planted would be to encourage SOEto let the French resistance movement havemore arms. SOE have rather been taking upthe attitude that as the French were moreconcerned about civilian matters it was notmuch use sending them arms. As soon as wecan identify the informant we ypropose to senda copy of the document to the F.O. and alsoto SHAEF.I saw Hunter this afternoon and told him thatCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1932u2he would have to dismiss one of his watcherswho has been taking somewhat indiscreetly ina public bar.Joe Lynch came to tell me about an Americanjournalist, William David BAYLES, who wantsto go to Stockholm for the Sunday Despatchand Sunday Times. He was formerly with theMarch of Time and is reported to have beeneducated in Germany. It is said that on hisway here from America he dined at the GermanLegation in Dublin. He has been refused anexit permit to Stockholm.It is reported that in last night's raid onStuttgart we only lost 4 pl nes.We had a meeting with the D.G. today at hichit was decided to move the B. 1 Reg to Blen-heim.At 3 p.m. we had another meeting under thechairmanship of Findlater Stewart on Overlordsecurity. He told us what had happened atyesterday's Cabinet Meeting. apart froma certain number of minor points raised bythe M.O.I., we had been isked to discuss thepossibility of corridors for the civil popu-lation extending throughout the area down tothe sea. For obvious reasons this did notappear to the meeting to be a reasonablesolution. The coup de gracerwas given whenCon produced a map showing all works ofimportance from the Wash to rands End. itwas evident to all that there could be onlyabout 2 places where it would be possible forCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1939u3a very limited number of pe ple to spend aholiday and that it weuld be almost impossiblefor the police to keep holiday makers withinthis area.Even Newsam appeared to beconvinved.As regards diplomatic telegeams, the meeting,with the exception of the F.0. and D.O.,took the view that the F.O.S suggestion tosuspend diplomatic communications 10 daysbefore the ope ration, or to try any kindof cat and mouse business was quite unworkableand even dangerous. The meeting felt that itwasla case of all or nothing and recorded theiviews to this effect.As regards Norwegians, Crow of the F.O. saidthat the F.O. had committed themselves andwere not anxious to go back on their word tothe Norwegians. I explained that we had justhad a meeting with the H.0. and Services witha view to minimising the traffic passingthrough the LRC in order that during thiscritical period our examinations could bemore thorough. If we were now going to haveforced on us some 2.000 Norwegians, theeffect of any assistance that we might getfrom thr Services would be nullified. Itwas urged by the MWT that 500 Norwegians wererequired. They admitted however that thesepeople would be put in the pool and would beemployed on anyship going to any destination.There was clearly a security risk even if thepeople were vetted. The view was then expres-sed that if the Norwegians were drafted intoCatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/1932xuthe Forces they would be innocuous.I saidthat this was far from the case.They mighteven be very dangerous since they wouldobviously have facilities to move about inmilitary areas. We could not stop them fromsending telegrams or writing letters insecret ink. My view wes recorded andwill be discussed by the Cabinet Committeeon Monday.TAR has been told by SHAEF about what wouldappear to be a rather serious French leakage.A short time ago 'Astier submitted to SHAEFa plan for the Second Front SHAEF thoughtit was probably a ballon d'essaie in orderto find out what our plans were. Somethingvery nearly approaching this plan appearedin the Evening Standard on the 25th Februarywith a statement to the effect that it hadbeen onsidered by Eisenhoer and Montywho were examining the proposals. I gatherfrom Fleetwood Hesketh who has been handlingthe matter for SHAEF that the plan waspassed through SOE. I have asked for fulldetails.March 3rdLoudspeaker reports that in the recent heavyRAF raid on Stuttgart during which 4 bomberswere lost. the target was missed by severalmiles, and certain fires werey started invillages which gave rise to the usual reportsthat fires could be seen many miles away.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/193u5About 120 Crossbow sites are known to theRAF. Some 90 have been interfered with. TheAir Ministry consider that the Germans havein no sense given up the idea of Crossbow.German aircraft coming over here at nighthave A.I in their tails. This enables themto take evasive action against our nightfighters. I gather that we are fittingsimilar equipment in our bombers.The raids by the USAF the week before laston fighter production plants in Germany areconsidered to be the most successful airoperations of the whole war, and that if goodweather continues they will have a cripplingeffect on the German aircraft industry. hight-er cover is possible all the way in to thetarget, the fuselage of the Mustang beingfilled up with spare petrol tanks, quiteapart from auxiliary wing tanks. This cannotunfortunately be done with a Spitfire.The Mustang was designed by the German Jewwho was Willi Messerschmidt's principaldesigner until he was kicked out by the Nazis.This plane was considered to be of no interesby the nir Ministry and handed to BritidhArmy vo-operation. -ubsequently theE ackard engine CO. made Merlin engines underlicence from Rolls Royee incorporating thisin Mustangs which are now very hot indeed.Fortresses carry no block-busters, only 500ton bombs and an occasional thousand pounder.They carry a 100 lb incendiary which is con-sidered to have devastating results. TheCatalogue Reference:KVI4/193Lunew British petrol-sprinkling incendiarybomb will come into operational use in thenear future and is said to be far superiorto any other incendiary bomb at present in useHarris's bombing operations on Berlin havebeen suspended for the moment and he has beenforced to conentrate on aircraft assemblyand manufacturing centres such as Schwein-furt and Augsbug. Rhe Air Ministry now con-sider that a raid is only successful when pathfinders can actually see their target as wellas using H2S. That is to say unless theycan look over the edge ofthe aircraft and seea town it is rare for a raid to be a suecess.reipzig was the most successful raid for aconsiderable time, two thirds of the townhaving been completely destroyed.Mockler-Ferryman, Roach and TAR came to seeme again about the French document. RobinBrook of SOE had seen it and was of the opin-ion that it was genuine and was being putabout by Giraudists who did not approve ofthe policy. He thought the document was ofimportance and should perhaps be shown to theF.O. He also thought that we should ascertainwhether it had got i to the possession of OSS.As regards the means by which it had got intothe field, if in fact it had, it was explainedthat political documents which were carriedout about once a week in a sutcase wereonly very desultarily examined at the aero-drome. It is thought however that such adocument would almost certainly have caughtthe eye of Dismore, who is responsible forCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193censorship. it is never possible to takecopies of these documents since a Frenchman isgenerally present during their examination.People are asked whether they are carry i ingdocuments and their pockets are emptied but-there is no thorough search. The S ame appliesto other nationalities, and of course tnePoles are allowed to carry out sealedpackages which are privileged.Harry held a meeting on Overlord, When veran through the Cabinet Committee's document.Newsam rang up to say that he entirely agreedwith us about beinging Norwegians to thiscountry. For once Ne find ourselves on thesame side of the fence as the 11.0.I have told Hunter to sack Munro, thewatcher who has proved unsatisfactory. Sometime ago Munro falsified his expenses and nowhe is boasting to barmaids in pubs about hisNork.Jock Why te blew in in his golfing kit and capto tell me a long and to me incoherentstory about a British deserter who hadarrived here from Poland with 1,000 Americardollars given him by the Germans. His nime n meis JFFFEREY S.We have had 877 people through the LRC duringthe month of February.The Americans have been over Berlin for thefirst time in daylight.Catalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/193248The Abwehr are speculating about the SecondFront and are not very wideloi the mark onpresent decisions.March 4thI asked Jock Whyte to come and see me today.I said that I had heard by a side wind thathe was leaving us and I hoped that he wasnot handing in his resignation with a serioussense of grievance. This used nim to blowup and abuse the arganisation. He saidthat he had come here on the understanding thapromotion went according to length of service.1 said I knew nothing of any such arrange-ment and asked nim were he had got his infor-mation. He said from Well. He then said thatlots of people had been made t.Cols. becausethey had to do a job There such militaryrank was necessiry.. I learned fterwvardsthat he had TAR in mind and that the laststraw had been TAR's promotion to D.B. (Iflength of service is the criterion for pro-motion in his mind, then TAR in any case hasbeen here longer than Jock. It just showshow wide of the mak old Jock is and howmuch he has blown himself up in his own esti-mation. The fact is that he is only fitted todo a very straightforward routine job underfairly close supervision. He simply has notgot the capacity to do more and never willhave. I did not attempt to argue with nimand my temperature remained throughout at98.4. I told him that I had really wantedto discuss his successor and to ask nim nisviews about Isham. This only caused a furtherCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193outburst in which he said he ould not recom-mend Isham or anybody else to have anythingto do with .Division. I then said that ifthat was his view further discussion was notlikely to be very profitable. With this hestumped out and slammed the door.The reactions of the highranking German P/Wsare very remarkable. Bassenge thinks ita sign of our very good breeding that wedo not reproach the German F/Ws with the raidsin the same way that we did not make themsuffer reprisals for the shackling of BritishP/W in Germany. Von Thoma is of the opinionthat these raids are in the nature of nuisanceraids xxias and will have no effect on theoutcome of the war. Gen. Cruwell retires tothe avatory when the barrage begins. Gen.Bramer, who is being repatriated, made avery nice speech to the Commandant before hisdeparture. He stated that now he was goinghe could reve l to the Commandant that he had25% English blood. He had not done SO beforein case the Commandant should think he wishedthereby to get special treatment. Every timehe looked out of the window and saw his veivery smart guards he was proud of his Englishblood. When the Commandant had left he madea fur her speech to a BAO. Having formallyreminded the BAO that he had been commanderof the Afrika Corps, he stated that he wishedto present him with a mementoy not only in hisown name but in the name of all the officersof the Afrika Corps has a token of their gratitude for the British gentlemenly(sic). Hethen gave the BAO his armband "AfrikaCorps"Catalogue Reference:KV/4/193250from his uniform with the remark that noteven Arnim was entitled to wear that. Cramerwas not atlall looking forward to his inter-view with Hitler. He would however have togive a full report on the last days in Tunisand on his stay at No. l1 camp. About thelatter he could say nothing but good. Hewould however tell Hitler the truth aboutvon Arnim, whose behaviour in the camp wasthe worst possible propaganda for theGerman Army, and Cramer apologised for itto the BAO. He regarded von Arnim as an"office general" and not as a fighter.Cramer's personal vanity had not left him onarrival at the station which he was surprisedto find still standing. His garrd wasstopped by a policeman, and the BAO explainedthat they would have to drive in as a Germanprisoner was in it. Cramer took exceptionto this and suggested that the BAO might haveexplained that a German Genera was there.Cramer refused to have his German batmanin the same carriage or a British privatewith a rifle. He had finally to be remindedthat he was still a P/W. Cruwell has decidedthat he can make himself ill enough toqualify for repatriation either by takingcold baths which make him very nervous, orby scratching the esszema on his leg andtransferring it to his whole body.Tricycle heft for Lisbon on Saturday and hasalready had an all-night interrogation fromSchreiber. This has evidently made him alittle nervous but he seems to be doingfairly well. Karsthoff is taking Tricycle'sCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193information to Berlin.Treasure left onthe lst March.A German P/W N.0. has obtained the followinginformation from a tank specialist who hasdriven one of the new so-called "beetles"which appeared in the Anzio bridgenead.In the tank, which is fairly close to theground, there is an explosive charge. Thetanks are steered by remote control fromtheir base towards the enemy. You do notneed to watch these tanks, as it films whatit sees in front of it and this is automatic-ally reproduced by vireless at the tank'sbase. The remote control base cannot seethe tank, which may be behind ahill but theycan steer it. The explosive charge can bedetonated by a time fuse which will operatelong enough to enable the tank to turn andwithdraw.March 6thI had a meeting at the F.0. with Cagogan,Viv., Orme Sargent and Loxley, on thesubject frstly of the diplomatic cyphersand secondly the Norwegians. The realpurpose of the meeting was to discover ifpossible some alternative to the competeseverance of diplomatic communication whichcaused the F.O. considerable anxiety. Viv.put forward the view that it was irguablethat as nothing had gone wrong with operationTorch, the Germans were jyst as likely to beconfused about verlord. I felt that therewas a distinct difference here, since UverlordCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193goCU noxit JO51 mi Dinwas actually being mountedrf from thisecountryand there was.much on the ground which wouldgive the whole show away, whereas Torch wasonly a case of embarkation for an unknowndestination. iv.also put forward a viewthat it was better to know what informationthe enemy was getting in order that you couldplug what was wrong and divert-what was rightThis argument is at first sight quiteplausible but it postulates that we readeverything, as in fact we do not. We falldown on the two most important lines, namely tSpanish and Swedish, both of which havedirect contact with the Axis. The F.O.hoped that it might be sufficient to imposea delay during the briefing period.o Cadogantook a grave view of the possibilitiesiofretaliation.03 bivosineb 913 Jri JWe then discussed the 2,000 Norvegianse Viv.was far from helpful. He suggested that SISshould do an immense amount of preliminary.vetting in Stockholm and expressedvthe viewthat these Norwegians who had ibeenatothelumber camps some of them for 18months, werenot likely to be very dangerous. This:encouraged the F.0. tourge us to takesasmany as possible, merely because they want toget themselves out of a rather awkward situation, which it is fair to say is not entirelyof their making. The whole suggestion started18 months ago when Air iiarshal Bowhillasked the Americans if they could supplytransport. At that time the Americans said nCatalogue Later paatz ana a Norwegian Admiral. They9wever Reference: ion was revived by253had in fact fixed up an arrangement to bringthe Norwegians -here without ever consultingthe F:0: rFourselves: Faced with this faitaccompli the F:O. more or less endorsed theproposal. It was only at this stage that wehad the story.I went direct from this meeting to theCabinet Committee where both these problemswere again discussed. The Cabinet endorstheir previous recommendations that diplo-matic telegrams, bags and couriers shouldbe suspended at least 60 days before theOperation.As regards Norwegians, Viv. again intervenedbut i fought the case as best I could. TheCommittee agreed that we should take as manyas we could consistent with security, - butthat the details should be worked out betweenourselves, 0. and F.O.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.ful02000Catalogue Reference:KV/4/193asunsTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958tudeVivian Seymer came to see me. I had askedhim to call as I thought he might, if he waswilling, take on Jock Whyte's work. He seemesuite keen to do it and I left him to thinkthings over. He told me the story of hisdemobilisation. Before the A.D.school wasdisbanded he had under him 2 ut. -t.Col.s,about Col.20 majors and 180 captains. The captainswho were the cream of those who had passedthrough the school and then had been broughtback, much against their will were postedto units as Lts. to serve under people who theythemselves had trained. The ut. Cols and majorswere sent to Woolwich where they have beenkicking their heels for 3 moths. Vivianhad to attend a course in map reading which heCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1938>had done 28 years ago at the shop. Exaspera-ted at having nothing to do he eventually gotthe Ministry of Reconstruction to apply forhis release. The only anxiety to the W.O.when they boarded him. was that he should makea declaration that he was leaving voluntarily,SO that they would not be obliged to give hima gratuity. for his 4 years hard work. Havinggot his discharge he joined the Home Guardto serve as an A. A.A. A. gunner. ile is 49 andA.] fit with a D.S.0.,M.C. M.C C. and bar to hiscredit. This is quite typical of the A.G. abranbh of the W.O. who do nothing but -shoutfor man-power and when they get it keeppeople hanging about doing nothing.MARCHTEI attended the J.I.C. meeting today when theytook our paper suggesting that the Servicesshouldrcut down as far as possible on theirrequirements of unenrolled allied personnelwho ep on coming here from N. Africa. Anumber of these people had come out of Francesince rhe total occupation and had to beexamined.. We were anxious to keep the num-ers as low as possible in order to inteerogatethose who have to come more thoroughly. theJ.I.C. took the view that refugees should goto N. Africa, that unenrolled personnel shouldbe diverted to N. Africa and that the forcesshould cut down enrolled personnel as far aspossible. As regards the last categorythey could not commit themselves, as it seemedto be a matter for SHAEF. to decide. it wasCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193256agreed therefore that a further meeting shouldbe held on Thursday when SHAEF should beasked to be present.I had a meeting at the d.0. with wvewsam, Warneof the F.O.,Kirk and Jeffes. We agreed totake 200 Norwegians and to pass them throughthe schools at 25 per week. This number tobe stepped up if we could obtain relief fromthe services. Alternatively we could take2,000 and put them into the I.O.M. underconditions similar to those imposed on enemyaliens and British Fascists. These peoplecould not beexamined under a period of about 220 months, and there would obviously begrave repercussions. The F.O. wished to m kethis offer to the Norwegians but said theywould paint it as black as possible since theyfelt it could only end in trouble.A Belgian called JAMOTTE has succeeded ingetting through the LRC. His name came up onan ISOS service which had only just beenbooken, although it was some 4 months old.Herbert had the nme passed over the recordsrnd found that the man had come through theLRC with a bad chit some time ago He hadbeen pissed on to the Belgians with a warningand as a result of observation kept by themhe had been arrested owing to hissuspiciousconduct.I boud the D.M.I. that I had had a telegramfrom Maunsell in which he said that Hunlokehad been completely white-washed. He wouldlike therefore to bring him into the ISPALCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193267picture. GOC alestine was thoroughly satis-fied, and SO was the C. in C.I have just heard about LEUKACEVIC, a Jugoalavwho is arriving here in the suite of KingPeter. According to ISOS he contracted atreaty with the Germans some time ago andin fact agreeddto collaborate with them againsthe Partisans. The indications are howeverthat the Germans do not altogether trusthim. The question arises as to what theyare going to do with him when he gets here.Crossbow reports for March 4th show that therate of construction and repair of the ski-sites has been considerably reduced. Theaverage delay beteen the time the site isrendered Category A and the commencement ofrepnirs is 14 days and in the case of Cat.B sitsites 24 day s The enemy appears to coneen-trate his resources on the most advanced sitesrather than spreading them over a largenumber. Priority in repair work is givento launching points which are heavily camou-flaged. Reports on production are still vagueand do no more than give an impressionthat stocks of pilotless aircraft may amountto about 3.000 with a monthly production of1,000. It is likely that various modivica-tions will have to be introduced.March 8thyEfforts are being made to trace JAMMOTTE who wawas in the Belgian gendarmerie and has nowjoined the Belgian forces. He has poughtCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193158himself a typewriter and is reported to betaking an interest in aerodromes.One of B.lA's agents has received a plainlanguage code which is to indicate the sectorof the coast at which the Second Front willbe opened. The telegrams containing thiscode are supposed to come from the Guarant'yTrust Co. to the Banco Espirito Santo and thecode lies in the amount of money demanded.I gather that the reaction of the bank wouldnormally be to tell the client to send hisown telegram. However there mightwell becases where the bank would perform thisservice. There is on the other hand nopossible machinery at present in force forpreventing anyone sending a telegram to abank in Lisbon which purports to come from abank in this country. This is quite a seriousmatter since Censorship does not provideagainst such a contingency. Telegrans ofthe kind described would probably be senton without question. I asked Grogan to lookinto the matter and let me have a report.Srogan said that he had made arrangements inview of the NEUKERMANNS case for all Barcelonaletters to be tested.Dick gave the meeting a talk about the I.B.side in relation to the Second Front.Kembal Johnston and Guy Burgees came to seeme about Orange. Burgess has ascertained thatCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193saOrange got his information about KUKEIL fromthe Swiss M.A. who got it from the Polish MA.Burgess raised the question of range'sfuture. He has the opportunity of becoming-editor of the Suricher Zeitung. This giveshim considerable financial advantages. Onthe other nand in many ways he and his wilewould prefer to remain here. In order to tiothe balance it is proposed that ve shouldpay Orange his expenses when he throws aparty which provides us with information.This I think we should certainly do, asthere is no doubt that Orange snouLd proveextremely valuable to us particularly in thepost-ar period.I had a long talk with Join last night. Hetold me that almost every detail of Crossbowhad been worked out from aerial otographs.It had even been possible to say wherethemagnetic apparatus was inserted since thishad to be done in a wooden building. Everydetail of the contruction of these sitesis known and although the German camouflage isnow extremely good it is on the wholesomewhat doubtful whether the Germans couldconstruct the site without our knowing aboutit. Most of the details that have been workedout by photograph have been confirmed by anindividual who has actually been employebuilding a ski-site in France! John israther appalled by the germ n defences whichseem to consist of explosive mine-fieldsbehind which are gun-emplacements which areagain surrounded by anti-personnel mines.Catalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/1932 26e boBeyond this there is another mine field.IfAir-borne troops were dropped behind thisdefence line they would be up against thesame difficulties as those attacking fromthe front. The trouble about destroying aminf-field by aeril Nbanbardment is that suchan operation is only likely to be partiallysuccessful. It is not possible to do itsystematically through taking photographsnd checking up since the mines can SO quicklybe replaced.I went to see Loxley about LEUKACEVIC. Weagreed that it would be best in the firstinstance to approach King Peter's entourageand find out what story LUEKACEVIC had toldhis own people. We should then be in abetter position to judge whether he should belocked up.I asked Reggie Gibbs to come and see me aboutthe Speingbok case. He told me that to thebest of his recollection Thurston had askedhim whether he could see our file. Knowingthat it contained Felix's letter ibbs toldThurston that there was nothing on the filethat,wa not already at SIS and that since it Vwas their case he had better make applicationto them. This story had got somewhat magnifieinto a refusal by SIS to tell them any thingabout Springbok. SISsay they never intendedto keep from the FBI information about Spring-bok except th t which related to his finances.On the other hand there isa letter in ourfile in which Felix says that it would notbe appropriite to discuss Spingbok's case withtheF.B.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/193btDickson came to talk to me about his position.He says every thing is going on as usualand that he feels very worried about thewhole state of affairs. I told him that Lhad not made any recommendations about hisbeing run by B. B.L because was waiting fora decision on a matter of policy with regardto the running of M/S whichhad been taken upby Hollis. Dickson told me that he had just.managed to get 6 fire-watchers into theSpanish Embassy. They ought to be quiteuseful if there is any trouble.March 9thI talked to Burt about the STOCKMAN case.I thought that possibly if he was willingto express his views to the D G. on thehandling of current cases the D.G. might feelinclined to tell maxwell that in his viewnothing would be done as long as the Yard triedto clean this matter up themselves. Thework would obviously have to be done by anoutside body. Burt was dead against my ayinganything. He said that if nything did Leakout about his having expressed such viewsit would be the end of his relations withNorman hendal and the Yard.Brig. Crockatt came to see me about the caseof a man called CAMPBELL, an escaped P/W who,according to Lemon has been describing hisexperiences to CERVELL and others. M.4.9wanted to prosecute. I said that this wouldbe impossible but that we should not mindCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193162CAMPBELL being given a reprimand on perfectlygeneral lines. He could be told that it hadome to the knowledge of the W.O. that hehad been talking about his experiences and thatif any more reports teached us he would findhimself in serious trouble.Unfortunately I did not get an opportunityof talking to Crockatt about Jock "hyte. Ilearn however from C. that he had been toldby someone, presumably C ock tt, that we weresacking an extremely good officer named Whyteat a very critical moment. This officer wasliked by all and had been doing valuable work.There is of course a lot of malicious propa-ganda being spread about the place by Jock, butI have no doubt that we shall be able to liveit down. I told C. who was at pains to affirmthat it was none of his business, that JockWhyte was a man of small capacity on whom Lhad never been able to rely. Infact shouldhave been glad to see the last of him morethan 4 years ago.I went over to see Orme Sargent about theLEUKACEVIC case. Peter woxley and Ward werealso present. Orme Sargent has a typicallymanner and outlook. He clearly had notstudied the papers and began by treating me asa somewhat crude policeman who Wanted to geteveryone locked up. I ended by shouting himdown and explaining that at the moment we werenot suggesting any such course. We felt thatthe best thing would be for the E.0. to approaapproach the King or someone in his suite andask them to give an account of LEUKACEVIC'SCatalogue Reference:KV/4/19373activities during the last 6 or 8 months,as disclosed to them by L. himself. if ittranspired that L. had disclosed to his ownpeople that he had made a treaty with theGermans for special purposes, this info mationcoupled with the MSS information that theGermans did not want L. to leave Jugoslaviawould go a long way towards clearing mattersup. If on the other hand L. had merely toidhistome people the same story that he hadtold the Britidh authorities in Mid East,the case aginst him would look fairly blackand in our view he would then merit internmentand interrogation. Orme Sargent seemedinclined to "get rid of him quietly". I saidI thought that this did not really meet thecase. Obviously he would be an embarrassmentif he were at large in the Mid East and if hegot back to Jugoslavia he mightobe a realdanger. Equally we did not want him wanderingabout here. He had therefore much better belockedup.While we were talking Crow and Eden's privatesecretary bounced into the room, their faceswreathed in smiles, and said that they want-ed to give orme Sargent the latest tipabout the Norwegians. they mentioned thatthe P.M. had lunched with the King of Norway,and had decreed that all the Norwegians wereto come here and be rapidly examined by theSecurity Service at a higher rate than 150a week. I told Orme Sargent that it was quiteimpossible to do this unless the services couldgive us some relief. Orme Sargent tried tominimise the i importance of the Norwegians. ICatalogue Reference:KV/4/193told him that we had more than 20 Norwegiansubjects up at 020, that it was more thanprobable that he.batch from Stockholm wouldcontain two or 3 spies that we had hadtwo cases of people with instructions to sendtelegrams in code and that the Germans werestepping up their activities in this countryto a considerable degree. It was quiteppossible to carry out any sort of examinatit the LRC in under one day per man perofficer. The average period for gettingthrough the LRC was something like l0 daysI spoke to Loxley afterwards. He said hethought that we should write afull-dressletter of protest to the S. of S. It certainlyis pretty futile sitting roundLa table forabout- weeks to consider a lot of panicmeasures for the security of Overlord and therto have the front gate opened by the P.M.over a cup of coffee with the King of Norway.It is a great pity that this great man cannotkeep. his fingers off a number of minoe problem-5 with which he should never be concerned at allCtold: me that the P.M. was very annoye atche Cabinet meeting because the SecurityService could not deal with the Norwegians. Igather that no decision was reached aboutdiplomatic cyphers.Bronx has justreceived her monthly paymentfrom the Germans of 198. She has the plainlanguage code on the Guaranty Trust previously$9413ich L need for mydentist' means invasion in a week's timeORIGINAL DOCUMENT RE2ED2bsIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SEION3 (4 OF THE PUBLC RECORDSACT 1958Atlantic. E70 means France, and Belgium,N.E60, N. France and Bay of Biscay, E50 Bay ofBiscay , 140 Mediterrancean, 130 Denmark, E20Norway, rway,l0-the ElOthe the Balkans. In case of invasionat several places, these sums added togetherare to be given. for example "Send 130 plusE8O and the rest as soon as possible"Garbo is preparing to carry out another Pl;Dream.T'he Abwehr have told Tate that they have noonewho can assist him in getting bomber reportsfrom the Cambridge district, but they aremaking enquiries from "other depts. In viewof the nature of the two questionnairsrecently received by Lipstickfrom the Germansit is considered that he is not at-presentcompromised,e although the danger of his beoomingSO as a result of theCatalan roundup stillexists.I had a long talk with lan Wilson, who hasjust returned from Lisbon. He seems -- to thinkthat the position both of Tricycle and Artiseis fairly secure at the moment. He hasmanaged to lay Artist off from poking hisnose too deeply into the affairs of Kuhlenthalby expressing the view that K. like ustro, isone of those peple who make up most of theirinformation.has succeeded in - amking contact withmariaUX, a German journalist whom he knewformerly in Brussels This ought to make aeatalogue Referencek/Ahli93206March l0thoiand BuckmasterWarden/of SOE came to see me about GELBERT.Buckmaster is evidently at his. wits end toknow what to do with GILBERT who is bored togears at Stratford on Avon and like to blowup at any moment. The proposal had been putforward that he should operate as an ATApilot. I said that if we considered that hewas too doubtful to be allowed-to go backinto the field, flying: an aeroplane was thelast job we should wish him to do in thiscountry. I said that on the evidence avail-able I did not see how anybody could ld-possiblyclear GILBERT although he might be entirelyinnocent. Personally T felt that LOUBA andROGER were quite as suspicious if not more SOBuckmaster then. said that LOUBA had-beenresponsible for blowing up and seriouslydamaging ceetain factories. I asked whetherhe was quite sure that LOUBA had committedthe acts of sabotage. re-they not perhapscarried out by communists. LOUBAmight.wellhave cashed in on the incident in order tolild -himself up in the eyes of the British.I just could not believe in Col. HEINRICHand his relations with LOUBA and ROGER? Atthis stage Buckmaster said "Presumably youdo not think anybody ought- to go into thefield at all". I said "Well, frankly; in thepresent cicaumstances I don'th. I am sorryfor Buckmaster who is obviously very over-worked and harrassed, and I promised to do whI could to think up some job for GILBERT.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/193COPYORIGINAL RETAINELIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) F.THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958DoorI understand fromCecilrthat there IS now aproposal to cutk off all Eire telephonesfrom this country.Nordenskiold,has writtena note to CERVELL telling him to watch hisstep, and CERVELL has made an applicationto go and see Plant.Newsam rang up about the Lorwegians. He ha.has had a letter from Cadogan say-ing that atlunch with the King of Horway and the NorwegianP.M. and Foreign Minister on March 9th,the P.M said that he thought the rate of 150a week far vetting Norwegians was not enoughand undertook that arrangements should be madeto increase it. He asked the Foreign Secreayyto see: that this was done. The Norwegiansapparently said that if our difficultieswere due to the limited number staff capableof carrying out the aecessary-examinatiorthey could certainly help by-providing suit-able Norwegians for the purpose. Cadogan alsosaid that one of the reasons why the Norwegi answere anxious to get these men out was thatthe Americans had promised to make over-anumber of ships to them and they had not themen to man them without these reinforcements.it is quite interesting that the -Norwegianshave come clean on thispoint.March llthI hear that the visitors' ban has at lasteatalogulerreferenceokViaregsion of diplomaticcommunications is however still in the air.268I arranged that Geofirey Wethered should takeover Jock Whyte's work until can get VivianSey mer into the saddle.Newsam rang up again. He wants to have ameeting at ll next Monday. I said that wewould come prepared to see the 2,000 Norwegiansbrought to the I.O.M. where the Norwegianauthoeities could assist them to full up formsWe would then say what people we wanted tosee. Unless there were any special groundswe should not ask for them to be sent to theLRC. Probably we should only examine about10% and the remainder would be releasedwithout any examination at all. We couldnot possibly do more and the responsibilitymust lie with those who had given the.orders.We should say SO in a formal letter to theS. of S. Newsam seemed to think this was allright.According to Artist the Chief of the GermanGeneral Staff, Zeitzler, has had access toTricycles latest reports but is inclined toexpress doubts about their authenticity.Apparently what is wanted is more detail.t is interesting th t reports of this kinddo in fact reach and are considered by theGeneral Staff. Kuhlenthal has also expresseddoubts about Teicycle's reports. Artistsuggests that we should pass simil r reportsto those submitted by Tridycle through Kuhlen-thal. This would give added authority. itseems that as a result of the enquiries beingmade into the K.0's in neutral countries, acompromise solution will be reached reducingCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193the personnel of the Abwehr at the expenseof the S.D. There is a drastic reorganisationof theAbwehr in France and BeIgium owing toinvasion prospects. Brussels station is to betr ransferred to Wiesbaden leaving Abt. IIIbehind. Dijon is to be transferred to Stutt-gart, Bordeaux to vologne or Wiesbaden. TheFaris Abwehrstelle is to be re-named KeitstelleWesten and to remain in situ. All Meldekoepfeare to go exacept the Bureau Wiegand which isto be kept open for the sake of Tricycle.Leitstelle Westen is to be much smller thanueitstelle Paris and the spare personnel isto be transferred to Wiesbaden. Stationsin France and Belgian will leave behind theirshadow organisations. Brussels claims to have25 men, Bordeaux has frankly said they havenobody, Paris had 4 at present, working on mainsets. These are to be replaced by batterysets as soon as possible. In order to runthe shadow organisation and presumably forother Abwehr duties, Abwehrtrupps are to beformed from the old Abwehrstelle. these willconsist of 6 men un uniforn attached to ICof the General Staff of the A.0.K. There willbe two Abwehrkommandos attached to the ArmyGroup in France.March 22ndI returned to work today after flu.Cyril Mills is back from Canada on a visit.He seems to get on well and to' have had nofurther trouble with Security Co-OrdinationAll his dealings in Washington are with BartyBouverie, who is more than helpful. he toldme that he had tipped off D.S C. about SEMPILLCatalogue Reference:KVI4/193This IS A COPYORIGINAL ORIGINAL DOGUMENTRETANEIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION270(4) OF THE PUBLJC RECORDSACT 1958.but had received a note tom Dicktothe effectthat Bill Stevenson knew SEMPILL"nell and thought him entirely beyond anysubversive activity of any kind. This ofcourse is not exactly the point. The troublewith SEMPILL no is that ne is grossly indis-creet and has a knack of saying thr wronghing on every possible occasion. Further-nlore, he is not in the Western Hemispherein order to further the cause of the Knightsof St. Columbus, but rather to do some businedeals in connection with post-war aviation.It is probably in this connection that hehas become acquainted with Stevenson.Vivian Seymer came to see me and have fixedup his appointment in place of Jock Whyte,who left on the 15th. the general view.seems to be that Jock made very heavy weatherof his job, which was conducted in the usualsomewhat muddle-headed way. If Seymer doesnot find that he had got enough to do he willassist Geoffrey Wethered. He also intendsto continue his job in the Home Guard.Oving to an oversight Dennis Fage has sent usa copy of a men series of messages whichappears to relate to Russian espionage inScandiria. Enquiry Snows that this serieshas no" reached 280, and wasy issued to allthe other recipients of ISOS and ISK with aspecial note from SIS that on no account wasit to be sho'n to MI5: It seems to me that tthis procedure on the part of SIS is bothCatalbgulelReferencenRV/4/r9sOne have a pight toknow precisely how the forces of R.S.S. arebeing disposed. This is part of Dick's dutiesas chairman of the RSIC. The RSIC has toassess priorities but cannot possibly do sounless it knows how the personnel and equip-ment of R.S.S. are employed. R.S.S. is thetechnical- tool of ourselves and SIS and notan SIS body as most people in that organistion seem to imagine. Secondly if themessages disclose Russian espionge methodsthey are certainly relative to the studiesof this dept. ~astly it is highly unsultingto MI5 fora letter to be circulated to otherdepts. implying that we are not the sort ofpeople who can be trusted to handle confi-dential papers.I learn that Felix is going to the Burmese Frontwhere he intends to unfurl the Section V. Tagpreparatory: to the opening of Stage B. Hetakes the view that the war in the west isover.The Norwegian.abusiness has been settled.Theyare to be housed in the IOM where they willbe examined by Norwegian E. offcers. smal(percentage of those who appear suspect willbe sent down to the LRC. We are making itquite clear that we cannot accept the res-ponsibility for this arrangement which hasbeen forced upon us. Meanwhile there are660 people at the LRC and nothing appearsto have been done to stop the flow. Moylan,when challeneged with this at FindlaterEatdlogteReferenee;kvpardgshat he did not knowth t there was a system of visas for these272people. Jeffes has now telegraphed out. Allthis ought to have been done weeks ago, whenMilmo and I had a conference at the H.0. atwhich Maxwell,Nev Newsam Moyland and restigewere all present.The question of diplomatic telegrams is stillin abey ance. No decision has been reachedas to whether they are to be stopped. Mean-while they are being staggered. Thevisitors ban is to take effect on April lst.I saw Dickson, who came to talk about hismemo on M/S. I said that L would like, withhis concurrence to discuss the whole questionith Hollis, when he returned on Friday.I felt there were only two courses open,either for me to tell the D.G. that L didnot think Dickson's show worked very well inM/S and should come directly under Blunt, orto have the whole position of M/S invesii-gated. I thought that if all the facts con-tained in his memo were true it would be rightand proper that the matter should be lookedinto and that cards should be placed on theO table. This however would be a seriousmatter for him, if the allegations werenot substantiated. It was difficult for meto express an opinion as I did not reallyknow the work of the se tion, which was mainlycarried out on behalf of F.Livision. Aftertalking to Hollis, I would speak to him again.March 23rdI had a long talk with TAR, who said that ArmyCatatogee RterenceRv4/1g3in that the Germans173were rying to muscle in on their commenica-tions by using their procedure. The Case isnot yet proven, but it would not be surprisingif there were something in it. i gatherhowever that there is evidence to show thatthe Germans are finding it much more diffi-cult to get information by means of W/T intel-ligence, which is on account of the generaltightening up that has been going on as aresult of our representations some monthsago.TAR and Phipps visited the SOE school atBeaulieu and have come to the conclusionthat the schoo! should be removed to a linenorth of theash to the Bristol Channel orthat certain of its outstations, from Whichactivities in the Solent can be observed; shoushould be closed down, and that exereisesin Bournmouth and >outhmmpton should cease.We carried out this enquiry at the requestof SOE and as a result of Findlater Stewart'scommittee which has had to give an assuranceto the Cabinet that the necessary precautionshave been taken to see that agents going intothe field were not in possession of vitalinformation about Overlord.ol.MeLeod G.1 Counter-Intelligence SHAEFcame to see me. We had a general discussionabout I.B.matters and covered most of theground. He evidently is most grateful forall the assist once that we have given and seeseye to eye with us in almost every particularHe was mostly concerned about the C. C. I. BureauCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193224which is to be established in Germany afterthe Armistice and is looking round forpersonnel. He had his eye on Stopford. I-said that we should be very pleased to letStopford go if the D.G. approved and that wealso had others in mind. He wanted theBureau to have all the necessary ingredients.He was most worried about most secret materialI said that what he would have to guard againswould be little blanketted bits of informa-tion. It would be essential for him to havethe raw product and for those who had to actupon it to see it and study it. He wouldprobably have a battle about this. Heentitely agreed. I said that I was the lastperson to wish to perpetrate any 5/6 warfareIn fact I had been fighting against it forsome years. I personally had the best ofrelations with C. but we had had considerabledifficulty with some of his subordinates. whoheld very strongly to the view that ifpeople had to make use of the material they shshould know all about it. any other coursewas dangerous.He then talked in the highest terms aboutGwyer and his work. He was very anxious tohave him as the collator,collector anddistributor of intelligence at SHAEF. Hethought he had entirely the nght mind forthe job and was second to none. I said thatprovided the D.G. agreed, I should be delight-ed to see Gwyer take up the position.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/193277March 24thBurt came to see me about some pornograpnicphotographs which he had obtained for SOEwho are arranging to have them dropped overthe Japanese lines. They have on the backof them a statement to the effect that anyJapanese surrendering with one of these photo-graphs will be given reasonable conditionsof internment. Burt wondered whether thiswhole scheme was approved in the highestquarters and whether if not we as an officemight find ourselves in trouble. I said thatI had confined myself to getting a requestin writing from a responsible officer in SOE,that we as an office took no responsibilitybut were merely rendering SOE a service.I agreed however that it might be wise to putthe whole question to Archie Boyle and pointout that if this action had not the approv lof the Govt. of India and possibly alsoother Govt.Depts. there might be trouble.The distribution of photographs of this kindwould inevitably be laid to the door of theBritish Govt. and be held up against usasa breach of the Geneva Convention. 1accordingly spoke to Arcle Boyle. He saidthat he did not much like the whole propositiorhimself but that he was under the impressionthat it had the highest approval, includingthat of the authorities in India. He wouldhowever look further into the matter and letme know.Vivian Seymer started Nork here today underthe guidance of Geoffrey Vethered.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/19327Garbo's story to the Abwehr about beingblackmailed by his courier has gone down ina big way. He has received a message ofhearty congratulations and his contact isregarded as being on a par with the highestgallantry in the field.Treasure has returned. Her wireless setis coming by bag. She had got fl, 200 anda diamond bracelet for 1300. In additionshe has brought some excellent cigars for hernotional head in the M.O.I.Admiral Burnett called here to see the D.G.He has just been appointed C. in C. SouthAtlantic. The D.G. to ld him something ofthe set-up in S.Africa, and is arranging forRyde to C l1 on him when he gets to Africa.We are arranging with the F.O. for specialfacilities on MAMBLAS.Crossbow reports of the l8th waren indicatethat the total number of ski-sites underconstruction is about 100 and not 120 aspreviously stated. The enemy appear tobe giving priority to the repair of launchingpoints and fuel store buildings. There havebeen fu therreports that the enemy is experien-king difficulties with labour. Some progresshas been made at Watten and at Mimoyecquesa report indicating the work at the latterplace on rocket launching having recently beenreceived.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/193mMarch 25thI had a long talk ith Roger Hollis, who hasread Jimmy Dickson S memo on M/S. while hefeels that it contains slight indications ofneurosis, there is nevertheless a fairly largesubstratum of truth indicating a certainlack of organisation and laxity of controlin financial matters. There is also sexwhich rears its ugly head in variousdirections. Relations between officers andmembers of the staff outside office hoursmay not directly be the concern of the dept.At the same time when the head of a sectionwho is. married is known to be living withhis secretary or another member of the femalestaff the general atmosphere within thesection is likely to deteriorate. Roger tellsme that the present discussions with tarkerand d.Horrocks are not getting very far. Thereseems to be a tendency to try and solvethe difficulty by effecting a closer liaisonbetween M/S and F.Divn. toger doesnot think that this meets the point. Metakes the t view that most of the people inM/S are not really qualified to interro-gate agents intelligently since they them-selves are not sufficiently au fait with thecommunist and fascist movements. He suggeststhat it might be an advantage if i had atalk with Horrocks after i have seen Robertson Monday.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/193226I spoke to Petch today about the finallaudecision regarding diplomatic cables.Apparently the whole question is to remain inabey ance until next month. The F.0.seem to think that it has been permanentlyshelved. It probably has until some gravebreach of security has been committed. Whenthe horse his bolted there will doubtless beattempt to bolt the stable door and therebypin-point the operation. I suggested toPetch that it might be possible withoutcausing any serious come-back to start delayitelegrams by a gradual process until D.Day.This was in Fact our original suggestionalthough it had been conceived on a basis of4-6 day s delay. If however we can step thisup to 10 days it might have a certain value.Petch -said that he would put this: point toFindlater Stewart.SSiITTwo other points have arisen conne cted withOverlord security: (1) the application of anexit permit by-two Chilean diplomats togo to Lisbon for a month's holiday. The F.0.feel that they cannot be stopped. (29helovements of diplomatstas.distinct fromService attaches. This. has been discussedat the JIC some time ago and at CavendishBentinck's suggestion e-undertook to explorethe possibilities. Two weeks ago howeverhe rang up to say that the opposition presen-ted SO many difficulties that he did not thinkit was feasible. The present situation isthat while service attaches cannot go intothe banned area, a diplomat can trave.l freely.Catalogue Reference:kv//1ge raise this questionagain.ORIGINALar:IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTAI3(4 OF THE PUBLIO RECORDSACT 1958I telephoned to Peter Loxrey about2ooeport which indicated that Bailey hadbeen talking to a Jugoslav official in Cairoand had expressed the view that theChetnikswere far superior people to the Partisans.This is as may be, but probably Bailey, whowould not -have access to ISOS material, isin ignorance of details relating to Mihailo-vic's collaboration with the Germans. Igather that Bailey will not be returning. toJugoslavia. Meanwhile LEUKACEVIC is beingsent back at Mihailovic's request in order tofacilitate the exit of 20 or 30 British liaisonofficers who are present at Mihailovic's head-quarters. There is no doubt that the Jugaslavssituation is in a thorough mess.There is evidence to show that the. trafficsupplied For deception purposes by Dudleyclarke to Tricycle has been sent on to theBalkans. We intend to carry out another PlanEream directly with Garcia ARMAS, eliinatingMUNOZ as the intermediary. Pesetas-will bepaid over directly to ARMAS 's-beotherwhen he visits Madrid from San Sebastian.By arrangement with the French Fidoiisto be posted to Algiers-and subsequentlyto W. Africa. Un this way it is hoped tokeep him out of Father's way. We planned forthe delivery of a nen wireless set for Brutusby parachute. this plan has no been abandonedby the Germans.but instead they are promisingto make two deliveries at an hotel in London.It is feared that this may be effected byTricysle, although the latter will be instructedCataroyse RBfettenceraypfotha he does not want240to be tied up with another agent.The German view of Petain at the moment is thatfor his 88 years he is both physically andmentally astonishingly alert. He is stillcapable of coming to a decision and holding toa resolve, but after long periods of strainthere are noticeable signs of fatigue andduring the events of recent times his memoryas easily failed him. In his capacity ashead of the State therefore he is to alarge extent thrown back on the support ofhis staff and accepts to a large degree theiropinions. The Marshal still dislikes Lavalintensely,holding him responsible for thefailure of the national revolution and blaminghim for not dealing more energetically withthe internal sitution. Petain is a strongsupporter of the supression of disorder andin this connection both Darnand and Henriotenjoy his confidence. the wvarsnal is bitterlyanti-Bolshevik and fears a catastrophe ifthe Second Front is successful. His principlehope is for an nderstanding between the west-ern powers and Germany which will restoreto France her freedom and independence. Mean-dile Petain does not wish to do any thing tocompromise himself in the eyes of the Americansand ourselv S.TheGermans nave informed the Japs that theiraction in Hungary was due to their distrust ofthe Prime Minister Kailay who appe ared desirousof pulling Hungary out of the war at the firstopportunity. Hungary was apparently infiltratinmore troops on the soumanian border with theCatalogue Referencekvi4/193hresult that had sent a largeasnumber of first line troops to the easternfront, was becoming uneasy about her rear.Horthy is regarded as being sincere in hiscollaboration withGermany. The Germansappear to be to some extent anxious that wemay attack Spain.March 26thI gather that Operation Anvil Nas cancelledthe day before yesterd y.I lunched today with Peter Loxley. Te dis-cussed to some extent the post-ar organisabionHe is still very positively of the opinionthat the present arrangement between ourselvesnd SIS cannot be allowed to continue. Hedoes not think that there should be totalamalgamation but he does believe in a constantinterchange of personnel as beteen ourselves,SIS EnO. and the Service Intelligence depts.He rather hoped that the present arrangementby which Eden was our minister might facilitatesomething od the kind. He has evidently beendiscussing the whole problem with Fat Rileywhen he was in N. Africa. T suggested thepossibility of our having alloted to us thepost of assistant PCO with the duties ocarrying out the liison ith the local policeand 2eme bureaux. This would seem logivalif Passport Control was going to lose itssecret service character.I then discussed the question of the reorgin-isation of the German Police Force. I gatherthere is to be a conference on this subjectCatalogue Reference:KVI4/193282RPMEOon Tuesday and L thought that ve ought to berepresented. Meanwaile ve have collectedcertain information from -Columbine and Altmannwhich should prove useful. Loxley is goingto arrange for our representation.March 27thAccording to a vire from Maffey; - the EireGovt. are stopping the recruitment of irishlabout from this country. The excuse is thatas the Eire Govt. do not kno'n what sanetionswe are going to impose they may have to keepmen for cutting peat if they cannot get coal.Maffey is anxious to mke some reassuringstatement. The P.M. on the other hand seemsto take pleasure in keeping Dev:o on: tenter-hooks. The whole effect of this course isto damage ourselves. The Americans, havingstarted the teouble are ow.easing off, givingIreland certain commodities they want: andleaving us to hold the security baby:Mloville Blane was enguiring about two Dutchmenncerning whom he had had a complaint fromthe Dutch Minister for Foreign Affairs.Baxter tells me that they. came out with aparty which was facilitated by Louis de Brayand that one if not 2 of the party are defini-tely spies. I have told Bland that we willlook ito this case and let him know theresult.Catalogue Tricycle Reference:KV/47193 who is at present in Lisbon with hisORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDNDEPARTMENTL UNDER SECTION2693 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958: 20obrother is playinggior very nigh stakes.He is telling the Abwehr that he sill not goon working for them unless he gets a guaranteeregarding his post-war future. I supposehe wants them to depesit a large sum in aneutral country. Lisbon are backing himbut Berlin are clearly a bit worried.March 28thL had a talk with Stopford about his organ-isation. He said that SiS were extremelypleased about the prospect of his neN recruitwherehe will doubtless be very useful. Tuis isratheraa good -example of no C.E. shouldreally work as one unit.Ie then talked about the case of STANTON; atemporary civil servant and journalistattached to Lord Beaverbrook's staff. Aletter had been obtainedwhich waswritten by CARLBERG to his headquarters-inSweden, .and showed that STANTON had been'giving away a large amount of information pothto CARLBERG and to he:Americans relatingcivil aviation matters. This letter-washown to Hildred, unfortunately withoutriorreference to Dick or myself. Hildred wasasked to treat it onfidentially but showedit to the Beaver, who immediately went off thedeep end and sacked STANTON. it emerged thatleakage of information f rom nis dept. hadbeen worrying the Beaver for a long time,and only a fe days previously he nd beenscatakoguetReference:.Rvi4n93ccou of a meetingthat he nad neld was cabled back to him by184Lord ialifax from "ashington within 48 hours.lalifax had got it from the americans. Sus-picion had already f il len on STNTON, butthere Was no proof. There are strong indications that talis leakage may be connected withthe leakage of other information which hes beedisclosed from Stockhoin B.J.S. STiNTON nasan in touch with CERVELL and also ithCARLBERG and tie information acquired, nichcovers not only civil aviationbut nirMinistry informition, as propibly leikedthrough the German connection in the SwedishGeneral Staff in Steckhoim. The Deaver appearto be extremely grateiul to this dept. andsomehat rattled. I hope the incident mayteach him that men he takes on a job it isnot always the wise procedure to surroundhimself with a lot of journalists. It is apity in a way that te infornation was givento Hildred before "e nad had n opportunityof passing information througn STAETONnd seeing whether it came out on the B.J.Se should then ave had positive proof o1 whatwas going on. At present we are stillAe"hait in the dark.At the D.G.S meeting today wie had a dis-cussion about Top Secret, the new regulationabout grading which are the outcome of theconference at "ashington. There is iikelyto be considerabie confusion. Under thepresent nstructions it is almost impossibleto know ho: to card one's information.actually, anything form rly Most secret shouldcatalogue athlduepeerence.kv/aprost, but after this isdone, all sorts O1 restrictions are placedTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED245IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC BECORDSACT 1958 ul ecoupon it from the point of view of itsstrans-mission from one place to another. Manythings which were formerly secret iilt not bedown-graced to confidential. Tais is perhapslogical but may again cause scie coniusion.The instructions are extreely cadly orced.In fact it youid be possible to call certaincategories top Secret, secret or conficential.The D.G. has suggested tit te shouid takethe matter up with SIS and SOE in craertat we mignt get soe sort of uniformityamongst ourselves.I had 2 talk itn HorrocKs about M/S. nadreviously talked iast nigi vitn hoperts. Isaid tat my general impression as that Dick-son was perhaps a little too neurotic, out atthe Same time there was good deil in thatne said. The atmosphere in MA/S is certiiniydeplorable, both fron ine sex point 01 viewand reanisationally. I told ilorrocks that inmy view it aas rather difficult if a marriedman, head of a section, yas known to hisstaff to nave formerly lived ith one oithe secretaries and NO to be living ithnother. Horrocks entireiy agreed. IGsaid that the facts vere known to iarkerbut that his sole effort vere corentriiecon sheilcing M. AS regiras the organisation,I told lorocks my views as LO what thisshould be on the assumption that ai taepersonnel were thoroughiy desirabie. at themoment I thought M. was an unsuitable lead,that te pearancecatalogue cataloguReferenee:kV/4/1g t KNOW gersenaiiy did286not inspire confidence, that Dill Younger wasa nice chap and I should say quite straight,and that Bingham was probably able anc general-ly speaking all right. had a high opinionof Roberts. Dickson 1 felt under betterconditions would be all right. He was cer-tainly hardwoking, keen and conscientious.Hehad moreover done very good work with theagency. Horrocks and Hollis are meetingarker on Sunday but Horrocks does not thinkthat they are likely to make much progress.The trouble is that if I take up the wholething with Harker he will probably discussit with M. Horrocks thought that as far asDickson was concerned I might suggest that infuture he should work direct to Dlunt, and giveas my reason that his present relations withM. were not condueive to good work.I saw Lt.Hill, a pupil of J.C.S. who has avery good academic record. He has been. ground-ed however owing to an aeroplane crash. He wasone of the first people to operate in anArmy Co-operation unit. All these people aregunners and their job is to direct artilleryfire on suitable targets. They appear tohave immense scope and can if a suitabletarget is found concentrate the whole ofthe artiliery of aa division on one spot. Thiswork has now been reduced to a fine art and isextremely effective. I am considering Hillas a possible recruit for B. B as he has alegal training, being a barrister in civillife.I hear that a canoe has been found Washed up onCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193262the coast of Kent.The matter is beinginvestigated.March 29thI saw Coll Bruce,OSs today, and showed himthe document relating to French resistance planfor D-day, which we had obtained some timeago though Dill Mountain, thurloe prior anda Frenchman called ESTIENNE. Bruce said thto the best of his knowledge he had not seenthe document before. He could however makesure by asking can der Stricht, head of nisFrench S.0. section. he said however thathad van der Stricht seen it he would undoubted-ly have communicated it to Robin Book of SOE.Since therefore the latter nad not seen it, itwas elear that it had not reached OSS throughany other channel. I have now sent a copyof the document to. the F.O. with nobin Brookascomments.I had a talk with Grogan and Dick Butler abouta meeting called for today by indlaterStewart. Apparently the F.0. are worried aboutdiplomatic communications in the ight ofthe suspension of airmail. I think thatthere is some slight misunderstanding. ASthe instruction stands at present there isno question of preventing couriers or diplo-matic bags from going by air mail to -isbon.On the other nand the ordinary diplomaticsorrespondenew which is theoretically privilegedand passes through the mails, would of coursebe a bit delayed as it would go by surfacecrait and would not reach the peninsula forCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193AADIN DEPARTMEN under SECHON2883 3(4)OF OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958osoat least a month. The 0: reevery anxiousthat this type of mail should go by plane.I do not see particular point - in raising anobjection.I saw A. H.Barclay, who was formerly with RSSand with the PIW.Dept. and asked him if hewould be willing to give us two hours a daypn transcribing records of Swedish specialmaterial which we are prpposing to take.He is at present working in a leatherbusiness in the city but would come hereevery evening at 5.30. tie is ready toaccept 15 a week.At the 11.7 30 meeting today MrS.Springmentioned that there is at present in Madrid aNorwegian who has been sent down a missionto this country by the Germin I.S. stationat Bergen. He was to have received a coveraddress in Sweden but a suitable one was notavailable, and according to the latest arrangement a new address nill be passed to him byblind transmission. SIS think that this manis identical with a Norwegian-name BRODERSENwho is at present in Madrid and has appliedfor permission to come to the U.K. Arrange-ments have been made to facilitate his journeyThe suggestion of communication by blind W/Tis interesting, since Treasure is not only toreceive in blind "/T but to send blind. It wilbe interesting to see how far RSS are equippedto deal with this proposition. The only otherinstance that we have had of blind W/T is inCataloguie Reference:KV/4/1939Grogan told-the meeting about the censorshipmeasures imposed by Overlord and also aboutthe latestinformation relating to theThere have been 2 or 3 cases recentlyin the western hemisphere, one affecting. aP/W in Canada who had instructions to communi-cate by this method: We are finding out whe-ther a certain percentage of the GermanArmy are instructed in this method or whetherthis-R/ had some connection with theAbwehr and -came to know about the method inthat way. Meanwhile we are considering countermeasures. It is suggested that we shouldadopt some process of neutralising any suspectlettersathe testing process is a very elaborateone. Before taking this action.W are findingout whether SIS and SOE or the FBI will bein any: way affected.Cecil mentioned that there was a tendencyby the military and also possibly by the policeto regard Irish labourers with suspicion:This is of course in view of the generalflap about Eire: - He hinks that every effortshould be made to prevent pepsecution ofirish labourers. There are no grounds forthinking that as a class they have been engigingeither in espionage or sabotage, but if theyare harrassed they might, undesirably in viewof the important work on which they are employ-ed, +become subversive and troublesome. Aninstruction is being sent to RSLOS in this sensewith a view to their smoothing foin the militaryand police.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/193The Germans nave asked us eter we can supply270them with information about the Aussian Army."hat a hope.Tate has been given the urgent assignment ofpin-pointing the A.A.defences of London.Precisely what the purpose of this iswe do notknow.Wiegand of the Abwehrstelle in Paris visitedBerlin towards the end of February, when hehad a talk with the Abwehr representativefor S.E. Europe on Hitler's personal staff. Thisrepresentative said that it was impossiblefor theGermans to win the war by force af armsbut that they could still achieve success bypolitical means. Col. Hansen on the other handwho is second in command to Admiral Canaris,stated that Jodl had expressed the same viewsbut added that the General Staff,i.e.Zeitzler Staff,i. i. Zeitzlerand his officers, did not agree and were forthe most part convinced that the war was lostboth militarily and politically. Alsoaccording to LAansen Rundstedt had expressedpessimism regarding the outcome of the alliedinvasion, although he had been given newdivisions. Hansen also said that theEeneral Staff considered that the forces onthe eastern front had sufficient reservesto defend Poland.I saw Tommy the night before last. He told methat Joe Stalin is being extremely troublesomeand has recently sent two very rude telegramsto the P.M. on the subject of Foland. Thisis rather a set-back as it was thought that hismanners nad been improving lately. The P.M.Catalogue is however Reference:KV/4/193 said to aremarked that his bellyalwas already red from crawling to old Joe. Thequestion of paramount importance is that nopossible excuse should be given to the hussiansfor making a separate peace. There is nospecial reason for thinking that they haveintentions in that direction, but there isalways a lingering fear. Person lly I aminclined to doubt whether erawling to old Joewill ever do us much good but the questionis obviously a very difficult and delicateone.I gather that Eden is likely to be leaving theF.0. in order that he may act as deputy leaderof the House. he probability is that hewill be succeeded by Cranbourne. nl ballond'essaie was put out by the Observer on Sundaylast suggesting that the Beaver should go tothe F.O. This I am told, and am relieved tohear, is not on the tapis.I attended the indlatenstewart meeting thisafternoon. It was decided that the diplomaticmissions here would have to accept the factthat their communications which went throughthe ordinary mail would suffer the samedelays as other mails, due to the suspensionof the air mail service to Lisbon. From anadministrative point of view it nould apparent-ly be quite impossible to extract diplomatic mamail from the ordinary post. any mail sent bybag however, with or without courier, ould beallowed to go is usual by plane. it waspointed out however that all this would besubject to the final decision by the Cabinetas regards the suspension O1 diploma tic communiCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193cations by bag, telegram or courier. In thisconnection indlater Stewart passed on to theD.G. S letter in which he suggested thatprogressive delays on telegrams.mgh be for-consideration. Crowe of the F.0. fought astrong rearguard action, saying that suchdelays were almost certain to become apparent8XR in a few days,with resulting protestsHe doubted whether the H.0. would be ablehold the position for as long as a monthwith progeessive delays up to 8-10 days. itwas agreed byat all that there woula be nopoint in stopping telegrams if communicationcould go by bag ecery day: On the other handit was pointed out that there was- was-not not muchsense in delaying diplomatic communicationfrom Eire up to 8 days if communications couldcontinue ontinue-from-this:country.witho country without any delayat all. rindlateri Stewart agreed that ifanything was to be done it would have. to bedone soon. He did not knowiwhat was reallyin the minds of theCabinet-o whatihad ledtheto decide to postpone the issue. He was commuicating with Bridges in order to find this outMeanwhile he proposed o-raise the question ira further note, pointingout.thatuifthe Cabinet did not make up their minds soonthey would lose the opportunity of doing SOat all, since if delays are to be imposedprogressively we should have to being almostat once unless we were going to pin-point theoperation.We discussed the question of exit permits fordiplomats who wish to spend their holidays inCatalogue Reference:RV14/193Lisbon. It was agreed that this could only beoconsidered. in conjunction with the question ofthe diplomatic cables, bags and couriers.Lastly we discussed the movement of diplomatsas distinct from service attaches. The F.O.for once seemed to agree that there would beno bjection to notify ing the diplomats thatthe restrictions on the, banned area apply tothem in the same way as to any other citigonsin this country.After the meeting Herbert raisedto questionof what are known as E.F.M. messages to troopsThese messages consist of 3 groups, and arebased on a code book. of some- 150 groups. Theaddressee's name is in one time pad. it isargued that if a spy came over here and usedthiscode but applied a different meaning tothe groups. hich normally implied greetingsor enquiries about health, they could quiteeasily use the E.F.M. system as a code. TheGerman monitoring service would merely haveto look out for certain groups. They would notbe concerned with the name of the addressee -but the sender's name which has to appear enclair would give them a further.indicatiorthat the message was one in which they shouldtake an interest. it was agreed that theE.F.M. service should be discontinued, -butthat en clair messages to troops should beallowed to continue.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.00Catalogue Reference:KV/4/193294THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3(4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.oxoMarch 3OthCrockatt of M. M.I.9 9 Caie to see me today aboutO the work of the Transit Camp. I began oytalking about Jock Whyte. 1 told Crockattthat I had reason to think that Jock had beenputting round rather mischievous informationabout his o departure. The impression Wasgiven that he had bea unjustly sacked. Thiswas not in accordance with the facts. He hadin reality resigned and I would not disguisethat this had been somewhat of a relief tous all. The fact was that he had certaindefinite limitations. This had caused himto be passed over and he had developed whatamounted to persecution mania. Crockatt saidthat he had only seen Jock Whyt te once or twicbut that all his staff had found him very easyto get on with and very helpful. said I wassure that this would be the Case, but that- thought we could give him much better servicehad got ol.Seymer to take on the job andalthough he had had nothing previously to dowith intelligence work he nad an extremelydistinguishea record and was thoroughly accustomed to talking to soldiers. Until he hadgot into the saaddle I had arranged that heshould be looked after either by Wetheredor by Caroe, both of whom had considerableexperience, and knew the M. I. 9 set-up.Catalogue Reference:kV/4/1939ousI then explained to Crockatt:: the position ofB.' I said that they were of. course. pro-fessional police officers but they weresituated in this office and directly under me,and were for the purposes of any enquiryregirded as M. I. 5 officers. It would be bettertherefore if I.9-oficers did notrefer totem as the police, since anyone interrogitecby the police always felt that ne was undersuspicion or that anything he said would btaken don and mignt involve him in proceedingssooner or later. The result was that ne wasnot particularly communicative. Crockatt saidthat he would tell his officers about this.I then went on to talk about the advisabilityof having M.I.9 reports on record at the ELRC. LRCThis I thought was advisable both from ourpoint of view and also for M. I.9's o protec-tion. Crockatt entirely agree but saidthat unfortunatelythe escape routes wererun by C. He had a posse of officers sittingat Boadway and working in conjunction withCoben. I told CrockattA about our difficultieswith the P.Sections in matters afiecting theLNC. We had begun to break then down butnot without an immense anount of trouble.I anticipated therefore that U. ould be reluc-tant to have details of his esvape organisa-tions on the Information Index. Crockatt saidtthat he would speak to Col.Neave, his repre-sentative, and sound the ground. 1 suggestedthat possibly Neave might like to go don tothe LRC and see precisely how it yas workedin order to S itisiy himself that the Index wasquite secure. Crockatt thought this an ex-Catalogue Reference:KV/4/193996cellent idea. Later Crockatt rang me up to saythat he had spoken to wveave who had evidentlyhad a word Noth Cahen. There is apparentlyno objection to our having copies of thereports. The suggestion was made that thematter should go through cowgill as being theofficia liaison with ourselves. 1 said - didnt see the slightest necessity for bringingCowgill into the picture provided the P.ectionspre in agreement. The reports were M.I.9reports and once the P.Sections' concurrencehad been received they could be sent directto Seymer. Crockatt agreed with this and veshall now receive the reports regularly. theywill subsequently go to the LRC for inclusionin the Index. Crockatt could not have beenmore helpful and friendly. L introduced himto Seymer who is going down to Beaconsfieldon Monday.Dennis Page came in to see me at my request.I wanted to talk to him about ISNOR. 1 shove vedhim a copy of my minute to the D.G. which Iwas proposing to show to C. tage said thathe thought every word of it was true andfully justifiable. I said that i was quiteprepared to let the matter drop if it wasgoing to get him into any serious touble orif he would rather L did nothing. He Said thaton the contrary he thought that it should betaken up and that L should say quite franklythat a copy of one of these messages had beensent to us by mistake. iveanNhile Page wouldreport the tragic event to Cowgill. tie Saidthat he had warned Cowgill that something ofthe kind was almost bound to happen and thatCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193197sooner or later knowledge of these messageswould come to the ears of .I.5.Guttery came to see me from the Ministry ofWar Transport. He is anxious if possible to getover some Dutch seamen from Stockholm. wresays that he is going to be very hard-pressedwhen the Second Front opens, and wants to getas many seamen as he can lay hands on. he saidthat he was hoping to get some 500 Norwe-gians but that he would be glad to be notifiedwhen they arrived and when they were releasedto the Norwegian Lovt. shipping pool. Hispurpose in getting these wOrwegian seamen isin order to get back British seamen that hehas lent to the Norwegians. +he Norvegians onthe other hand would like to keep the Britishseamen they have got and use any furtherNorwegi seamen they can get in order to getships from America. i said that we would doour best to get priority for the Norwegianseamen and have arranged With Brook Boothfor him to make the approached through theNorwegian .Office.As regards the Dutch, I said that thesecurity risk would be high and that we couldnot possibly accept Dutch from Stockholm Nith-out giving them a thorough examination. Theywere more d aingerous than the Norwegians sincewe had recently had two cases indicating thatall the Dutch escape routes to Stockholm havebeen blown and that the Germans have beenpassing agents down the If however too manyof the Norvegians do not come our way forexamination and the Services could ultimatelyCatalogue Reference:KVI4/193This IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS298ACT 1958 oc20o0releave the pressure, we ould see what we woulddo. One of Guttery's fears is that all alliedseamen sailing to their own countries aftertheSecond Front opens are alnost certainto leave their ships and proceed to their homes.He therefore anticipates large numbers ofdesertions and a considersble snortage.There has been slight trouble about Treasure.Te e was apparently challeneged by the Portugueseinternational Police and asked wny she Nastravelling on a British passport when sne hadprevicusly travelled on Frenca papers. Shereferred them to the iress Attache, sho ratherstupidiy said taut it had been done for conven-ience. the Portugese have now proachedassport Control and asked for the reison forthis rater curious move. Jeffes With greatsel-sacrifice has fobbed them off by say ingthat he is extremely sorry buL that he hadbeen had for a sucker. He nas very largenumbers of applications nd unfortunately theprevious papers about this oman did not getinked up. She therefore managed to get awayth a British passport. this had subse uentlybeen discovered and she had been recilied.uile was of course technically working for theM.O.I. The latter have been Narned that iithey are approached by the Portuguese they usttell the same story.I sawof this office about ner asso-ciation with CARLBOM the Swedish Assistant irAttache, w.lich had been disclosed on specialcataregue Refetrencek14tig3 sne ought not9ato have given her telephone number here, whichis contrary to office regulations. sier answerwhen asked for it should have been thit peopleare not allowed to ring her up at the office.This however migt have led to further questionsto which sle could have replied that she yorkerat the "ar Office. t seems that CAFLBOM thinksthat she is in the RNS He is undoubted. lyvery persistent, but whether this is dueto her personal attractions or to the factthat he knows that she is connected ith agovt. dppt. it is not possible to say. Iarned herthat some of these Swedes are verypopular, particularly CEAVELL, CAilBOM's DOSSpartly because they are very charming and partlybecause they are thoroughiy pro-Britisn.This however made it if possible more dangerousas every one was inclined to say that they were"one of us" and to confide in them. She askedme whether she should break of the associition,which for personal reasons would not Norry her.I said tat on the Whole I thought she might bewise to do SO since te more intimate heracquaintance became toe more likely was CARLBOMto be to question her in detail about herwork. She Nould then be foreed to create asort of aura of nystery round herself whichwould be embarrassing. She agreed and saidthat she would do her best to break away.Cyril Mills is Leaving for Canada tonight.The question of his comission is still incatalogue letReference:KV4/1933o0March 3lstI went to see C. about ISNOR and leit him aminute which I had drafted for the D.G. I saidthay I had on relection decided to come overand see whether I could settle the matter withC. personally rather than start a barney.C. read the note and I am quite convincededinot recall having issued any instructions nordid he appear to know much about the materialHe thought at first that it referred to ISCOTbut I put him right on this point. He saidthat they were anxious to restrict the circula-tion of Russian material because there had beenases of penetration, and he feltthat it wouldbe a very serious matter if the Russians knewthat we were taking an interest in them. Ipointed out to him that the Russians wouldprobably expect this and further that if hewas anxious about leakage he should be just asanxious about sending material of that kindto the Services as to anybody else sincewe had reason to know that there were aconsiderable number of communists in theServices, some of them in quite importantpositions. We had had occasion to get oneor two of them removed elsewhere.C. then said that in any case he entirely sawthe point made in my note about the RSIC andabout the damaging effect of the incidents ofthis kind on relations between SIS and our-selves. He did not know precisely the cir-cumstances but he thought that certainly the,Dick and myself should have been informedabout what was going on. He promised to makeCatalogue Reference:KVI4/193301-enquiries and let me know. Quite clearly Felixhad put a fast one over on him and got him toinitial some memo saying that the ISNOR shouldonly be circulated to the Services. I am quitesureethat that C. himsef does not recollect anything about it and he probably put his initialson the document at a moment when he was prettybusy and did not reliase its implications.His staff of course should protect him fromthis kind of thing and had Feter Reillybeen there I doubt whether Felix would havegot away with it.We then discussed the leakage case at Ankara.I asked what had happened. 6. Said that allthat Johnnie Dashwood had succeeded in dis-covering was that the Ambassadonwas extremelylax in his way s. He took documents homeetc. It seemed likely that the papers hadeither been looked at in the train betweenCairo and ankara or that someone had a keyto the Ambassadors box. Nothing definitehowever had been discovered. I took the oppor-tunity of S y ing how ridiculous it was to sendout people like Dashnood to conduct enquiriesof this kind, Functionally it was obvious-ly a matter for MI 5. Had we been asked, we shoshould have sent a team O1 2 or 3, one personwith knowledge of secret sources, anotheraccustomed to dealing withleak age. I pointedout that we literally had hundreds of caseswhich we were investigating daily. Lastlyprobably Burt or one of bis men. We mignt thenhave tightened up securitythoroughlyandpossibly have discovered the culprit. Theprobability was that the leakage had been takingCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193302place ever since the subject was opened twoyears ago and we were still no further. C.entirely agreed about this and said that hewould speak to Loxley, but that he realisedas I had that Will vodrington was the real snagC. thought that after the war we undoubtedlyshould have somebody in the principle Embassiesabroad who would beresponsible for localsecurity. I heartily agreed. This seemedto me a good beginning and I thought it tact-ful not to go further at that point and S ythat we should have the responsibility forconducting the liaison with the local policeand 2eme bureaux.C. appeared to be very pleased with the waythings were going on. He said that MSS showedthat probably a whole Panzer Division had beensurrounded in the Ukraine, that the Luftaifewas stretched to its utmost limits, intact toa point where bomber crews were being turnedover to fighters owing to shortage of pilots.He said that according to the latest informa-tion. the Germans were intending to fight uson the beaches in the Second Front and notwait until we had effected a landing. Theimmediate counter-attack would probably bein the hands of Rommel, although Rundstedtwould be the supreme commander. The Germans hadstepped up their divisions in ythe LOW Countriesfrom 48 to 62. There wotle also signs thatthey were preparing to withdran certain forcesfrom the Balkans.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/193303C. told me that OSS had had an approach fromthe Russians, particularly about Germa in agentspenetrating the Caucasus. This of course has bebeen the subject of protest from the SovietGovt. to the Turkish Minister. We shall alsobe supi lying them Nitn any information in ourpossession. C. intends to keep a closecontact with Donovan on this matter. He saidthat in Moscow he had not had very muchresponse in nispite of the information thathe had given.I had a meeting on the security of Overlord.We went through all the various points in theCabinet memo and checked up to see that thenecessary action had been taken.Estianne has returned from Algiers and informsus that he showed the document reputed tohave been written by d'Astier both to Giraudand de Gaulle. Neither of them appeared tolike it and I gather that there has been a bitof a row. The general feeling is th t the twobrothers d'Astier ind rassy appear to be actingon their ownand to be going rather further tothe left than even de Gaulle would wish.Various ehangees are contemplated.Dick started for .Africa but has as usualreturned from the station. He is leaving againtomorrow.We raided Neuremburg on the 30th and lost 95planes.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/193304April l6thI returned from leave.I had a long talk with TAR. He tells me thatthe Cabinet have inally decided to stop alldiplomatic cables, couriers and bags ind thatthis is to be extended to the allies,includingthe French. The only exceptions are theAmericans nd Russians. This was the re-sult of the note put up by Findlater Ste yartto the Cabinet, pointing out that the matterhad to be decided one way or another, otherwisethey would lose the chance of making a decisionat all. le made it clear that the altern tivesof progressive delays or cat ind mouse stop-pages could never be wholly satisfactory,and that if nothing was going to be done at allit would have to be done now otherwise it wouldpin-point the operation.Tricycleehas returned and appears to h ve thefull confidence of the Germans.Artist had made it clear that he knows allabout.the Garboset-up Garbo set-up and believes it to bea blind. He talks to us now on the assump-tion that the whole of Kuhlenthal's organisa-tion is under our control. seanmhile Artisthimself appears to be rather under a cloud asfar as his own people are concerned. Theythink that he is being too inquisitive,particularly about the Ostro organisation.The Germans are doing their best to isolatehim from informatoon of this kind. Whetherthis is due to jealousy or suspicion is notclear. It may be that they are nervous aboutCatalogue Reference:KV74/1933305his discovering that Ostro's set-up is largelynotional..Lipstick has been liquidated, as it nas feltthat the Germans might believe him to beunder control owing to his active connectionwith the Catalan movement which owing toLipstock's indiscretions may well have cometo their notice.TAR has come to an arrangement with Felixby which the deception section with 21st armyGroup will be attached for the purposes ofadministration and comunication to the SCIunit. The head of it will be ChristopherHarmer who will take his orders from the GSOLI.B. and head of the Ops.B section. TAR hasalso arrange with Felix taat we shall navea representative in Ryder St. when the battlestarts. This shoud ensure that if nythingconcerns us we shall get it passed on withthe maximum amount of speed.Felix has left for the USA where he is goingto set up in con junction with OSS some SectionV. orga isation which has to operate in theFar East.During my absence there have been various wire-less tests. Garbo on instructions from theGerm ns has been communicating in British Armyprocedure. He was picked up after a certaintime and after a hint had been given to RSS.He was however also picked up in Gib., whonotified RSS about certain peculiarities inthe signals. This is on the whole fairlyCatalogue Reference:KV/4/19330satisfactory. Treasure is going to startcommunicating blind and we shall see whetherthey are equally successful in her case.Tests have also been taking place to see Nhethe]spies can movemfreely within the 15-mile belt.One has been caught, but another, whosedocuments were by no means good has succeededin getting through 7 or 8 controls and hasSO far not been spotted.Two new spies have arrived. One called vanHove, a Dutchman who has made a confession,and a Roumanian called Calean. The latter seemsto be of little imnportnceGwyer came to talk to me about T.I.S. Thereseemed to be some hold-up in SHAEF on thequestion of establisnment.Washington have suggested that a further noteshould go to the Eire Govt. requesting themto expel the enemy legations. Winant has re-plied: "I hate it, Grey hates it, the P.M.would probably like it, SO what?" PersonallI think it would be a great mistake, since theDIrish are in a highly co-operative mood andhave even asked us and the Americans toestablish representation in Dublin in order tosee that all security measures are properlyco-ordinated. This we do not wish to do, sincethere would be little for these officers todo and the present system is working quitesatisfactorily.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/193301April 7thA B.J. indicates that SITTIG is aware of thefact that steps are being taken to round uphis wireless set. It looks asi if therehad been a leakage through the monitoringorganisationlOn l1th -pril the J.I.C. considered a memofrom C. in which it was recommended that inthe interests o1 the security of verlord,a total ban should be imposed on the transportof agents from this country to France and theLow Countries by sea. This ban should applyto inward transport. SOE were in agreementwith this proposal. The JIC sub-Committeenoted with approval that .and SOE agreed not tosend agents to France and the Low Countriesby sea after the 5th may.At the daily meeting Mrs.Spring mentioned th tone FUNDUS had apparently been desp atched hereas n agent on the 15th April by ir fromLisbon. There is seem possibility that thisman may be identical with a man called BENDIAwho hes come here ostensibly to buy paperwith which to print Spanish banknotes. BENDIAis under observation. Meanwhile we are seeinga list of passengers from Lisbon.Brutus has had a questionnaire about a numberof ships all of which are on the stocks. earegetting Admiralty comments. This guestion-naive displays considerable knowledge.Teresa Clay raised the question of the returnof certain Gernan ciyirians to their on nCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193308country on an exch ainge basis. Some Austriinwoman in one of the camps is collectinginformation from visitors which she intendsto take out. This has come to lightthroughthe Marita organisation. I said th thiscase should be referred to Denniston, thathe should find out when the party was to Leave,and that if there was any suggestion of its go-Ig before D-day, we should register a strongprotest. On the other hand we must"acceptit that information will reach internees Fromthe outside and that those who go back are boundto carry a certain amount with them. Thiswill be of little importance after the SecondFront opens.A settlement has been reached regarding actionto be taken here when we learn from secretsources that bombs have been placed among foodcargoes from the Peninsula. I raised thismatter with Victor before went away, andwrote to Findlater Stewart, who called ameeting of the depts. concerned. it hasbeen decided the the risk that we took in notopening all the crates was a justifiableone, and should be accepted in future.If any incident arose consideration is to begiven immediately to measures to reassure thepublic and if an explosion or an unexplodedbomb is discovered sir indlater nouldimmediately call another meeting. Meanwhilewe ire under no obligation to inform supplydepts. if information is received from secretsources about the possibility of a bomo beingon board. We shall merely act as usual inalalogeieireference.k4/1g3r ty.309The Chiefs ofStaff in Washington nave at lastreplied about the security of allied cyphers.They have suggested the writing of an extremelyweak letter urging allied govts. to consulttheir British or American colleagues. If theydid consult, the matter would be dealt withby the Cypher Security Board. the importanceof this question however lapses with thegeneral prohibition of diplomatic communicationWalter Bell came to see me. He is veryanxious for Cecil and me to meet Marlin of0.S.S. who has recently been in Eire. Heapparently thinks highly of Marlin.Melland called to urge me to allow Dick totake the appointment of head of the C.C.I.B I.B.in Germany. uring my absence there havebeen certain developments in this direction.The D.G. had suggested Maunsell, who apparentlyis not very favour bly viewed as a candidateby Jack Barrow. Mean hile Whitely has writtento the D.G. suggesting that the appointmentof the head of the Bureau should be filledby a man with MI5 experience. I said toMelland that my only anxiety was thatDick's services in the immediate postwarperiod would be urgently required to assistin the solution of the reconstruction of theoffice, and that if Ne did not plan carefullyat that stage we might well suffer for 20years. apart from this it would impose avery heavy burden on me if I had bo dispensewith his services for a matter of 2 years. However I would find out what had happened andgive the matter careful thought.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1933l0I had a talk with Bird about the B. lReg.He seems to think that things are running prettysmoothly. He agrees with me ho'wever that itneeds careful watching from the intelligencepide. There is no doubt that the mechanicalside will be vastly improved and that eardingwill be absolutely up tondate.I attended a dinner given by the D.G. for Gen.Bissell, head of G.2. Others present wereJock Whiteley, Sinclainthe new D.M.I., ben.Peabody of SHAEF,Col Shean, ol.Mc-eod, Mac-Dermot, TAR, Dick Butler,S Sir N. Kendal and Harker.Bissell made an extremely good little speechabout the hospitality which he had receivedand about Anglo-american relations. He pleudedvery strongly that we should be patient withall these young Americans who were invadingthis country, many of whom had not even seen8 shot fired, whereas we hadbeen in the toilsof war for 4 years and clearly felt the strain.He evidently had a great ffection for thiscountry and had carried away pleasant memoriesof his association with the British in the lastwar. He is an airman and has I think only justbeen doing staffduties for about 5 months.I should sayhe was a great improvement onGen.Strong. He is in any case an extremelypleasant individual, and has made a very goodimpression over here. I told him as much asI could about the general set-up here. I alsobad a longish talk with t ne new D.M.I. and alsowith Jock Whiteley,bot! of whom seemed veryeasy to get on with. The w.m.1. is 1 think agreat improvement on nis predecessor.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/19331lThere is a strong tendency here to compare ouroperations in Italy at Cassino with the vastsweeps by the Russians towards the Carpathians.This is a great pity, and cannot very easilybe corrected without giving ofience to ourallies, who are certainly making the most of it.The facts are of. course that a situation hasbeen reached on the Italian front which is com-parable to that ofthe Ypres salient in thelast W r, perhaps even more SO since theground in Italy is far more suitable fordefence. There is clearly little chance oftaking any advantage of the superiority inman power or equipment, if indeed such exists(except in the air, I doubt whether it does).The only element of surprise which can move afront of that sort is a beachhead landing,and you frequently hear people say "Wny don twe make other landings at different placesall along the coast, particularlysince wehave complete superiority at sea". +he answerthere is think that beacnhead landingsare an extremely difficult ana complex manoeuvrewhich entails the use of an enormous amountof craft and of the buiiding up of mintenanceunits and reserves, wwithout which the mechaaanised army of today is rendered powerless.We are the only people who nave carried out anysuch manoeuvre with any degree of success.The Germans have never tried, except at Cretewhere by ll the rules of the g me they shouldhave lost, ind were their casualties wereextremely heavy. The Russians tried it atKerch but were unable to make iny progressuntil the force opposing them were taken inthe rear. e ho ever carried out a highlyCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193312 3:successful landing in Sicily, through the use ofnearly 3,000 craft. We have also landed atSalerno, where for 24 hours we were nearlydriven into the sea because we failed to digin. e also successfully landed at Anziobut failed to take the nigh ground wnech mighthave had the effect of imperilling Germancommunications to such a degree that they wouldhave been forced to retire. The lessons learnedat Salerno were apparently taken too muchto heart with the result that everyone concen-trated on dilfing in at Anzio insteaa of movingon to the high ground.On the Russian front Iwas told by Jock Whiteleythat the divisional front on the German sideis 10-15 miles, that in many places there areonly pitrols and that the German divisions arefar from up to strength. In fact many of themare reduced to hundreds instead of thousands.Probably the fully equippped divisional frontwould be at le st 20 miles. When it is con-sidered that there were 27 divisions in theSecond Army holding the Ypres salient whichworked out at somet ing like a division every500 yds., it is not surprising that theRussian front is so manoeuvrable. The oddsagainst the Germans are over all about 2 to 1 inmanpower ind equipment, and when attacks aremade anything from 4-5 to 1. There is there-fore ample op) ortunity for effective strategicand tactical moves. What is remarkable aboutthe Russian performance is firstly the V stamount of equipment produced, nd secondly theirpower to follow up even tnougn resistance maybe slight. Here L think we have to considerCatalogue Reference:KVI4/193313what the Russians have been doing for the last25 ye rs. They have lived under perhaps themost rigid autocracy that the World has everknown and under conditions whicn the morecivilised nations of western Europe would nottolerate for a moment. they have thereforehad at their disposal a vast population of185 millions working under almost slave labourconditions and concentr ting primarily on thebuilding up of a war industry. It is sur-prising that they have during that period of25 years been able to transform a peasantpopulation mainly accumtomed to the handlingof primitive agricultural instruments into anationthat is capable of nanufacturing andhandling a highly mechanised army. But if thisvere to be done it could not have been carriedout under more favourable conditions. Itwould probably have been quite impossibleunder any other regime. The follow-up of theRussians and their rapid advances are undoubted-ly remarkable and are L should say attributableto their somewhat primitive toughness, to theconditions that tney have endured for 20 years,their over- over-whelming helming superiority in machines andnumbers, to their traditional reputation asfighters within their own country providedthey have the necessary equipment, and to thepenalties which they know they will incur ifthey do not put their last ounce into thestruggle.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/193THIS IS A COPY3 IN ORIGINAL (4) DEPARTMENT OF THE DOCUMENT PUBLIC UNDER RECORDS; RETAINED SECTION314ACT 1958.2od18thHollis has talked to me about a film called"Jacob Sverdlov" which Brook Wilkinson-wame to see. The film is purely propaganda forthe revolution and for Soviet hussia but is alshistorical. Altnough the Board do not like itis very difficult to take exception tohistorical facts which took place 25 yearsago. On the other hand this kind of thingmerely tends further to blur the issue andconfuse the public mind.<1R 8175MCLeod came to see me about T.I.S. and Gwyer.He -had had a talk withand withothers in Section: V who apparentlyhave aviolent hate teragainst Gwyer: Cowgiil has evensaid to Shean that he could not tolerate Gwyer'sappointment in SHAEF. As MCLeOd pointed outthis appointment has nothing to do with MI6.If SHAEF still want him and we are preparedto release him they have a perfect right toappoint whoever they like. I said that thismatter must rest with SHAEF. I was not inclinD withdraw Gwyer as candidate merely becaagehe had certain characteristics-which weredistasteful to Section V. He had proved hisworth to SHAEF who had a high regard for hisability and if they wanted to appoint him Iwould do my utmost to get the D. D.G. G. to releasehim. Mcueod entirely agreed with this viewand somewhat apologetically said it would bea great help if I would see Wniteley andgo through the T.I.S. memo which he (McL) hadput up and which he felt whitely had probablyCatalbgreaRefeneeoekVle/Iger is no establishment3e5there is much work to be done, and Gwyer andhis beavers are standing idle wnen they mightbe assisting in the 3-fold purpose of keepingthe French brief up to date, collating andassessing their reports for SHAEF and preparinga German brief.. There was also the Lutch andBelgian material which had to be integratea.Mcueod then told me that he nad seen Dirkmannsof the Lutch 2eme Bureau who had arranged fomGwyer to look at his stuff. Gwyer nad gonedown and somenow or other there had been amis-understanding and Dirkmanns had complainedto SIS. As far as he could See from talking toGwyer,Dirkmanns hd entirely gone back on whatne had previously agreed to .do. -Gwyer-apparent-ly hid no difficulty with the Belgians Lepageand Ganzhof who were most helpful. This inci-dent had, Mcleod believed, been takenup: withC. and would doubtless add fuel to the anti-Gvyer fire.Dickson came tc see me. He wants to take- on oneor two extra people who can move about profit-ably in the various strata of domestic servantlife. I told him that I considered his memoand had come to the conclusion that- that-it-would itbe likely to do him or anyone else mucnnotgood if he presented it but that i proposed topiput forward a suggestion that his part of M/Sshould be transferred directly to Blunt.I had a talk with TAn about Gwyer. TAn says thatKim is violently opposed to him and that if heis at SHAEF he will not be able to put his noseinto Section V. with any prospect of gettingany thing. The only getting over thisCatalogue Reference:KVT4/1933u63ldifficulty if SHAEF want Gwyer is to nave Hartin the Section V. war room and to instructGwyer to deal with Hart and uart only.April 19thI saw ronnie Haylo this morning. Dick Igather left N. Africa for Italy about lastMonday week SO we ought to expeet him backithin a fortnight. Hill-Dillon seems tothink that every thing in tae garden islovely and that Hay lor's services for theestablishment of a screen in N.Africa or at Baliare not really necessary. Whether he willcontinue to think SO after Dick has made hissurvey I cannot say. It is however patentlyclear that there is no adequate advance LRCsystem at all. Kim wnom I saw yesterday agreeswith t is and says that Jarvis is in a realmuddle and hopes that Dick and B-W will be ableto sort things out between them.There are now some 19 ski-sites for CrossboWundergoing repair in France. There seemedevidence of the delivery of machinery at 2 sitesLow level photographic reconnaissancehas not been able to confirm or deny thepresence of launching rails on 5 sites wherethey were suspected of being in position. Thereis evidence of high-concentaated hydrogen perox-ide at Feenemunde and t Oberraderach nearFriedrichshaven. This is probably one of thefuels used for the HS293 rocket bomb and forpilotless aircraft. Buildings similar to themain structure at Wattenn are under constructionat Siracourt and Sottevast. Propaganda both athome and abroad has given very little attentioncatalogue Reference:kV4/1933i7to the subject of retaliation.April 20thI spent the morning at SHAEF. I had atalk with Shean who showed me the establishmentfor C:I.staifs that he had put forward toWhiteley. He said that he had considered allthe jobs very carefully nd that hereg rded his requirements as tne very minimum.Privat Ly he thought tnathe would want beforelong probably 3 times as many officers."niteley has seen this document and suggesteda 20/25% cut all round. I said, and Sneanagreed, that it was quite impossible to cutT.I S. I proposed to tell the Genera so andould let him know the result of my interview.I saw Whiteley and told him that the D.G. wasrecommending Maunsell for the U.C.I.B.job.Ithought we should also be able to give nim 3or 4 other good trained MI5 officers and possib-ly ickWhite for a few months to start thething off. He seemed pleased with tne ideaHe said that he had known Maunsell in MidEast and h id worked with nim ind that newould be a very stisfactory choice.I then went on to discuss T I.S. I drewv hisattention to MeLeod's memo on establisnment andduties. I said that the work was accumulating.Mean hile a nunber of people who could begetting on ith it were standing idle. suid tthat I did net think it could possibly bedone with a smaller establishnent. He wouldCatalogue Reference:KVI4/193318only be creating a bottle-neck which wouldbe worse than useless. tt is clearlynecessary tomnave the records coming and andgoing out to some fccal point but 11 this enan-nel is to become congested it vill only lead tochaos. Whiteley entirely agreed. He saidthat he was desper rately anxious to keepestablishment down in order to be as mobile aspossible. He thought he would ge able to get hisdemands met but ne wished to be able tojustify them up to the niit. I said thatwhat werried us most was that in the meantimework was accumulating and that there was nobodyto deal with it. He did not think ne would beable to get his establishment through muchbefore May 12th. L said that if it would be ofany help to him and he did want us to supplystaff or a certain proportion of it, I would tryand get the D.G. to let him have such officersas he desired on loan. He seemed to think thatthis might be a solution and undertook todiscuss the matter with Shean and wcLeod.I then saw Shean and McLeod and told them aboutWhiteley's views. I said that I thought theyO would be well advised to strike while theiron was hot since if we had to wait untilMay 12th the arrears of work would become avery serious matter. I hope they will actaccordingly but they seem to me to be a bitchicken-hearted.SIR 8/15They then discussed with me the position ofGwyer. I asked them very definitely for theiropinion of Gwyer and whether they. wanted him.They said that undoubtedly they did, and thatCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193319they had a high opinion of the work thathe had done for SHAEF. The only difficultywas with Section V. who seemed to have aviolent hate against Gwyer. They said thatthey themselves of course knew of his some-what irritating manner, but that they hadnever had any trouble with him. He wasextremely nardworking and had never been inany way insubordinate. I said that it wasentirely a. matter for them but that if theydecided they wanted him I would do my bestto smooth out the difficulties betweenGwy erand Section V. I would firstly tell Gwuerthat he had got to do everything that hepossibly could to avoid giving the sligntestcause for irritation between T I.S. and SectionV. I would also talk to Philby and say thatif he felt that it was impossible for Gwyerto speak to anybody in Section V. would lethim have Hart for his War Room and that ifGwyer wa ted anything from Section V newould always have to deal through Hart, Whowas 1007 persona grata with Philby. Theyseemed pleased with this idea.When speaking to Whiteley L was verypleased to find that he seemed to have theright idea about the relative functions ofMI5/6. He told me that after a good deal ofonsideration he had somewhat reversed JockWhitefoord's arrangements with SIS. He wasquite convinced that I.B.matters in the fieldshould be treated on a functional rather thana territorial basis.He therefore wishedCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193320S.I.S. to be the suppliers of information andourselves to be responsible for taking execu-tive action upon it. Both organisations ofcourse being part of the I.B. .staff.I attended a meeting of the J.I.C. at whichCapel-Dunne, C and representatives of theSignals Depts. of the Admiralty,Army and Airforce were present. The purpose was to dis-cuss military communic tions of allied armiesand to devise means for censoring them. TheAdmiralty suggested that either these communi-cations should go over British Naval routesand in British cyphers or th t all messagesshould be submitted en clair and cyphersdeposited. Ttigould then be for the Admiraltyto decide whether those of non-securityinterest shouldbe communicated by the alliedgovt. over their oNn channels. Beforemaking a decision however it would benecessary to ascertain how far the Navy vereequpped to deal with this extra traffic. Atpresent the Dutch were sending some 4,000groups a day, the Norwegians communicated withSpitzbergen and USA, and the French of coursehad numerous communications about the move-ments 01 their ships. It was thought thatthe French would undoubtedly create difficul-ties. Their cyphers were weak. The Armysaid that they Nould like to adopt a similarprocedure and if they could carry them, topass all messages over British routes in Britiscypher. This was by far and away the mostclean-cut proposition. the Poles in Italywere at present communicating with London, andCatalogue Reference:KV/4/19331the French, Czechs and Belgians sent numerousmessages, it was believed mostly by cable.The question was asked whether Censorshipunder existing instructions would stop thesetelegrams. Enquiries are being made. theAir Force said that they carried a certainamount of transit traffic for allied forces butthe latter principally communicated by cable.These cables should be stopped by Censorshin.It was pointed out that it would be poss-ible for a Polish station in Aberdeen forexample to communicate with.the continent byusing its ordinary equipment issued to troops.They could also communicate with Mid East atnight. They would however be running con-siderable risk and it was not thought that thePoles are out to beat the ban. Far moreanxiety was felt about the French who wouldalmost undoubtedly set themselves out todefeat the regulations.I had a talk with C. afterwrds about thepossibility of the Swedes having an illicitwireless set. Itold him that CERVELL hadremarked that whilethe restrictions wereirksome there was a way round. There hadalso been a report of a mysterious box inthe Swedish Embassy. The situation was beingwatched by mobile units but I wanted to beclear precisely what action we could takeif a transmitter came up without damaging C'sinterests. He said that he would be seriouslyconcerned if the Swedes took away his set inStockholm, although it was at present onlybeing used for reception and not for trans-matters. He suggested that should have aCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193829talk witn Peter Loxley and see wnetner the FOcould find suitable grounds on which to argue.I spoke to Loxley who said that in nis viewthere was a perfectly good case, particularlysince the transmitter in Stockholm about whichthe Swedes apparently knew, had not beenused for transmission.YAR,Buster,Bird and I discussed the 21st ArmyGroup I.B.Brief. With the exception of one ortwo minor points it seemed quite satisiactory.The majority of them of course have beendrafted here in one form or another.I spoke to te D.G. about the possibility ofHaylor running the CCIB in Germany. I gatherfrom Hay lor tht Dick had very tentativelymade this suggestion to him in Algiers.Curiously enough I had thought of it my selfin the watches of the night. +he D.G. n sunfortunatey made up his mind about vaunsellbeing the most suitable person for the post.While I think that in some ways Maunsell isbetter equipped and certainly knows themilit ry hirarchy, there is no doubt tnatdaylor has the better brain. In any case hemight be useful if he were prepared to workunder Maunsell.Einger Lewis who is now at SHAEF nas askedus whether we could let him have some of ourcounter-sabotage divers from Gib. for workon the Second Front. It emerged in a dis-cussion that ne nad with Victor that tne realtrouble is due to the Germans having placedall sorts of iron ind concrete under-waterCatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/193393obstacles along the French coast below thelo tide mark. Somehow or other these havegot to be got out of the way. They cannotunfortunately be tackled before D.day withoutpin-pointing the target. Experiments are goingon to discover some rapid means for theirremoval by divers wno will go ahead with thelanding craft. This is clerly a suicidejob for wn ch we doubt whether our divers,most of whom are over 45, would be onsidersuitable.April2lstI had a long conversation with Kim on thesubject of Gwyer. i said that i wished himto speak uite frankly, but I nould begin bysay ing that I fully realised all Gwyer'sdi ficulties and the irritation that he caused.At the same time had a high respect for hiswork as also had Dick, many others, and mostimportant,SHAEF who were proposing to employhim. Since the work in T.I.S. was all inarrears, it seemed to be almost criminal tothrow over-board somebody who was well uali-fied to do the job. I told Kim that therewas considerable background to all this andquite unwarrantably an attempt had been madesome time ago by Felix Cowgill to get thewhole of Gwyer's information section abolished.This had been suitably dealt with, not withouta good deal of feeling. It was uite ooviouslyno business of Felix's to saw how and in whatform our Own we should use. It card was and also arrange worth noting the ISOS that fornot only had Section V. availed themselves ofCatalogue Reference:KVt4/193 members nad felt so324strongly about Felix's letter that they nadtaken the trouble to ring up Gwyer and saythat they did not wisn to be associated withit. Kim did not know anything about this.So far not one single Wod had been put down-writing to any responsible officer in thisdept. stating the complaints against Gwyer.All tht had happened was that Viyan nad Nrit-ten a vitriolic letter to Whitefoord and C.had now written to Whiteley. On neitheroccasion had any representations been madehere. What Not de. think if e suddenlywrote a vitriolic letter to Whiteley aboutFelix. God knows we have sufficient cause.Kim entirely agreed with this and thought theprocedure was utterly wrong. At the same timehe said that he was convinced that if Gwyer wasat T.I.S. there would be continual troubleand that even my suggestion of Hart beingin the Section V war roem and aeting as abuffer would not completely solve the problem.I said that thought it was entirely a matterfor SHAEF, that I nad told SHAEF exactly myviewsabout Gyer, both pros and cons, andthat neither C. nor ourselves could dictateto SHAEF in a matter affecting the appoint-ment of their own staff. if however theydecided to have Gwyer I ould wash his headin the hopes that it might prevent him fromgiving any further cause for complaint, andI would also do my best to get the DG to putHart into the war room to actyas a buffer.Soon fter Kim left MeLeon arrived to teilme that Whiteley had received a etter fromC. taking exception to the proposed appointmentGwyer I said th thought this wasCatalogue ReferenCe:KV/4/193grossly improper seeing that no representationshad been made by C. to the DG. He was in factcommenting on one of our officers to an outsidebody without prior reference to ourselves.Apart f'rom this one rather began to wonderwhether .was comanding SHAEF or Ike Lisen-hower. He then said that he and Shean had hada discussion ith hiteley, nad told him howmuch they valued Gwyer's services,/hac said thin the interests of smooth working they fourit diificult to recomend Gwyer's appointment.I gather also that U. in nis letter hadsuggested the appoinment of another officerfrom GC &c CS. I said that anybody from GC c CSwould not be of much use for some time andthat in any cse it might perh ps be a mistaketo put Gyer's women under a different headwhom they might not understand. Perhapstherefore the General should write to the DGand ask him to suggest an alternative to Gyer.I would try and see whether the DG would re-lease Heart at any rate for the next fe weeks.I lunched with Rennie aylor and broke to nimthat the DG was already set on Maunsell forthe CCIB job. I asked him whether heould be willing to serve under Maunsell. Hedid not appear to be very keen though thinkhe Nould do the job if ressed. He feels alittle that having done some very hard andfairly big jobs for 4 years tat ne would havepreferred to have complete change.Harry held a meeting on the security Of OverlorcThere did not eem to be any new points of anyimportance.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/193BlLater I went to a meeting at the FO with theDG, t which Cadogan,Findtater Ste art,Morton,Newsam, Loxley nd Crowe were present. thismeeting had been called to consider certaincases of diplom ts who either wanted to come-in or go out and Nere prevented by the b n.It was decided generally that we ought totake a strong line. Otherwise we snould beover-whelmed #ith applications. The mostdifficult cases were those of the PortugueseAmbassador who was to return to this countryfrom Lisbon, and the P.M.OI Luxemburg who wanteto come back from the USA. The prineipiereason for stopping the movements of diplom tsWas th t they would possible be able to fixup some sort of code for communication. thisof course in theory would very much apply tothe Portuguese Ambassaddr. In fact however noone thought that he would be a party to anysuch arrangements. On the other hand if hewere llowed to proceed it might create adangerous precedent. The same feelingsexisted regarding the P.M.Of Luxemburg. Itwas eventunll decided to reler these tho casesto the P.M. three Norvegians, ncluding theDefence Minister, wishe d to go back toStockholm to continue their activities inthe underground movement in Norway. Itseemedthat they constituted a serious danger batnobody knew quite how they got here or whetherthey were under SIS or SOE control. It wasdecided that this matter should be furthergone into. the other cases were turned down.They included new Ambassadord passing bet een hehere and Moscow or here nd the USA. ACatalogue Reference:KVI4/193321diffieult one was wCMillan's life. McMiilanhad telegraphed to her through the FO tellingher to come out as soon as possible nd to getthe FO to make alt the necessary arrangements.Everyone felt that if she would deny herseefthis privilege it would provide both the FOand Newsam's comittee with an excellent argu-ment if they could say tha the wife of aCabinet Minister had been refused an exitpermit from this country, and that thereforeAmbassadors and otners should not feel aggrieveif they received simitar treatment. E sugsestethat he might be approached on these lines.It was eventually decided to reier this caseto Bridges.April 22ndI saw Kim this morning ind toid him aboutSHAEF's decision re Gwyer. Iasked nim if heknew that a letter had been written by C. toWniteley. He said tn t ne did not. I saidI thought it was most unfortunate that such aletter should havebeen written and in factgrossly improper. I said that this matterplaced me in an awkward position since itwas difficult to see how the D.G. eould avoidhearing about it. He might then quite justi-fiably go through the roof. Apart from thisit could neither do our ffice nor SIS anygood to wash our dirty linen in Shaef. Kimoffered to speak to Vivian and suggest thathe should come round and see the D.G. L saidI though that the moment n ad passed ind thatVivian's presence here was likely to do moreCatalogue Reference:kV/4/193 would see whether328it might be possible to put Hart into T.T.S.as I felt that if Gwyer's girls were gcingitbe employed it might be better to nave someonefrom here to Look after them.MCLeod rang me up later: and we arranged th thiteley should write a letter to the N.G.asking for the services of an officer and 6S for SHAEE. I spoketotheD.G. andputhim in the picture as far as possible aboutTIS.and the urgency of the work to bedonethere.I Ithen told him briefly what nadhappened about Gwyer and suggested tentativelythat we might: at any rate lend Hart to SHAEFfor the next few weeks. in order to get thingsgoing until therestablishment put forward hadbeen approved by the W.O. He was as i expecteirritated by the attitude of Section V. towardsGweerhieh hefelt Gweer he felt was smdliminded, andas annoyed at being askedtoendpersennel.He thinks quite rightly that if the Army emplopeople they should pay for them. > I said thatIhad-spent-hours-on-thisprobtem and that.was just as indignint as he was. Were it notthat the matter was of such urgency and impor-anceIS should havebeen inclined to teII theArny_to-get-on-ith-itobviously-howeverwe could not do this and I hoped thereforethat he would see his way to granting Whiteleyrequest-and-to-putting Hart in-or 3 temporarybasis: He agreed to consider the matter.Hseemed fairly satisfied as regards the women bwasdoubtful about Hart.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/193OPIGNA DOUMSA32IN-DEPARTMENT UNDER3(4 OF THE PUBLIC PUBLICRECORDS2ooo 5Withrington tells me that inspectorthe ace CID sleuth has an account of someE3,000with Barclay's branch in the East End.He has told the branch thathenoteshe-haspaid in have been won on the dogs. This isof course the normal cover. There is a well-knomn-character-in-the-erook-orlowhomvarious officials at the Yard are in touch forone reason or another. This man does quita lot by getting dogs doped. He bacKs: ona certainty. en-he wants.the-police.te-turra blind eye he gives them a useful tip andthey. in turn begin to grow rich. Alternativelythey. reeeive moneyforservices rendered andhave an arrangement with a booky in the dogracing racket who for a consideration Nilla bogus transaction. i their books. eye, havealready had reasontosuspectIneidentally he was. deputed to interrogate Victorin connection with one of our bogus sabotageenterprises.ye916090Kim came to see me in the afternoon about aBelgian who nad been arrested and coamned todeath-by the cernang-for-assisting-at-itet:escape of some 300 allied airmen. He wantedto know if there was any possibility of anexchange... This is of course an old question.The only kind of exchange. that atwould-belikely to appeal to the Germans would be therelease of aGerman subject who was under sen-tence-of-death.He-have no-Gernansintt tenceofdeath. He-have.no-Germans. in thiscategory. Nearly all our prisoners are neutralsSecondly if we try and effect an exchange withanalhietGatalogue Referencecountry is occupiedelyeneourages-the-termans330to arrest others with the idea of using themas a quid propquo to get their spies herereleased or at least their names disclosed.Itseemed however just possible that the Germansmight be prepared to accept one of their owngenerals like Cruwell. -hey would not be ofmuch use to the enemy at this stage and mostof them are notly anti-Nazi and some OI them areven pro-British. Al of them are fairlydisillusioned. Kim will probably explore thiavenue. I saidthat I thought there was someadvantage in starting communications throughthe Protecting Power since once negotiationswere opened the carrying out of the sentenceof death Nould probably be suspended. Itmight in the end be possible to tide overthe negotiations till the reoccupation ofthe continent.Dick has written to the D.G. from algiers.He left for Italy last Tuesd y week. He say sthat Hill-Dillon evidently thinks that hismachinery for dealing with spies needs improve-ment in the nature of an LRC, although newants interrog tors. the fact is that he hasno mac inery at all. lay lor is thereforeout Of a job and Dick thinks that he mightwell do the C.C.I.B. job instead of waunsell.John Mair is going on to Italy with Dick.bick says that M.1.5 influence at AFHQ isdominating and the relations bet een ourpeople and C's are absolutely perfect. Jarvis,the SIS man in charge, told Dick that he ieconvinced of the neeessity of having MI5 menworking alongside their oNn in the NorthAfrican theatre.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/193331The J.I.C. have tried to estimate the potentialities of French Resistance. They say that uptill the end of March some 80,000 weapons hadbeen distributed to Fre ch resisters. Thisfigure does notinclude KnONn losses but adeduction of 20% must be allowed for unknownlosses and for deterioration, There give beenfurther deliveries of about 20,000 weaponsfrom M.Africa and there are also believedto be certai stocks of French arms lre dyin the hands of the resisters. It is con-sidered therefore that in France about 100, 000men are provided gith ars and amunition.The total numerical strength of the resistancemovement is much greater but cannot be con-sidered of milit ry value vithout arms. Thereis said to exist an organisation to co-ordinateactivity of all important groups. It has beenbuilt up from its beginning since about ayearago burt the standard of efliciency varieswidely from bad to excellent in individualgroups. There is a tendency especially inthe Armee Secrete to create a large centr 1direeting organis tion in Franee with Vriouscommittees and a staff on semi-military lines.This is an obvious dang er from the pointof view of penetr penetration. A good many.political differences exist particularly betseethe supports of Giraud nd de Gaulle. -neCommunists are hoping and working for po erafter liberation but re putting the elainia-tion of the Germ ns first. They appear to bethe most efficient organisation. Vicny aretaking strenuous counter measures which are-apported by Darnand. The effect of present-day activities against the German war effortCatalogue Reference:kV/4Pfg3ibl although it339cannot be stated that the German militarymachinery is thereby serieusly impaired.The general conelusions are tn t day to dayactivities are contributing to the weakeningof the German war effort but that the reulvalue of resistance lies in the building upof the means to strike on D.day. It is feltthat at the noret resistance cannot fail tobe of value o ing to the extent to which itdiverts German energy, and at the best itmay so derange e the German lines of comnuni-cation that it cannot fail to be a determiningfactor in the battle. The above niormationis I presume mainly based on SOE reportswhich have presumabiy to be taken at their facevalue.There is to be a security meeting betveer ourse.-ives OSS and Dan. The suggestion was originallmade Joe Walshe to the D.0: and the Ameri-cans. Cecil sees in this an attempt to shelveresponsibility. If ve refuse to meet themthey may say they had made an effort toco-operate which had been turned down, and ifwe met them and something goes wrong aboutOverlord security they would say that theydid everything they were asked to do. Theywould haever have difficulty in giving publicityto the negotiations at any rate until the warwas over, since such pblicity would compromisetheir neutrality. Cecil suggests that asa preamble to any discussions,w should say(a) it vas recognised by bath parties thatas long as the AXis Legations remain in Eirethere would be no possibility of 100; guaranteeof security (b) that the responsibility forCatalogue e Reference:KVI4/f93through the presence383of these legations must remain an lrishresponsibility.(c that the suggested conferencecould only examine in the ligt of (a) and (b)whether there was any further security measurewhich the Irish could take.From P/W reports it seeins that the Germans haveto some extent succeeded in making the Left.waffe believe that their raids on Londonare far greater than in fact tney are.The first incoming message to Treasure wasreceived on the 19th April. This message clearly indicated that the Germans had receivedTreasure's first message. He are continuingto send messages as frequently as possiblein order. to establish a satisfactory contact.Mutt has been extremely indiscreet about hisdoings in this country and has been severelyinterrogated by J.C. and Harmer. Tricyclehas now toid his story and as far as nis ownpersonal contacts with the Ab wehr and S.D. areconcerned he has again got away with it withextraordinary success. The greater part ofhis report is confirmed by ISOS. Tricyclehas brought back 1250 and a letter ofinstructions for Gelatine. Discussions havetaken place with the F.B.I. about obtaininginformation from the USA for Joseph and aboutthe possibility of ultimately sending Josephhimself to America. Peach has now returned frorhis second vist to the Japs in Lisbon. They-seem to be interested in his report and havepromised to send him 1200 through a cnannelwhich we had arranged. Tate has now receiveda message asking him to exert all his effortsCatalogue Reference:KVI4/193334efforts to find out about invasion preparations.Another Plan Dream is going through.April 23rdWe received notification today that 3,800Frenchmen of tae Armoured Division had arrivedfrom Afriea. We had been led to believe thathis division would not be arriving beforethe end of May. 400 out of the contingentcame out of occupied France after the totaloccupation. After a good deal of telepneningit was decided that they should Proceed to Hullwhere they are joining the 4th US Army Group.We would Look up the 400 and interrogate any whohad adverse traces. le ere also asking theFrench Security to let us see any reportswhich we can also pass over the LRC index.Meanwhile a paper had to be put up to theChiefs ofStaff, asking then whether our presentscheme should continue or thether tae 400should all be subjected to a thorougn securityexamination at the LRC Me have pointed out thatwe could not get them througn under 4-0 Weeksand that during this period their training youwouid be disiocated.I have gone over the round of TIS again withthe D.G. but quite clearly he is rather in theair as to hat it is all about. He are tohave a further discussion ith TAR and awaitthe rrival of Gen.Whiteley's letter.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/193335April 24thVictor tells me that he has had a meeting WithAir Marshal Peck, Gen.Brunshill and Pug Ismayto discuss the future of the BacteriologicalCommittee. Victor said uite bluntly that thecommittee should not be in the h ands of ErnieBrown but somebody like Sir Findlater Stewart.He hd always regarded the committee's delib-erations as Top Secret but now apparentlythey were being discussed by all kinds ofpeople and particularly by Americans. More-over at the P.M.-S suggestion we had goneinto xke production in the USA in order thatwe might be ready in case the Germans attemptedany funny business. Nobody seemed to havetaken any steps to see that these further moveswere properly saeguarded from the securityangle. Documents have been circulated to alland sundry. Vietor has also seen C. on thisquestion. He said that the bomb in which TubeAlloys were interested might be in productionby November. The problem had been solved butmight just have d number of teething troublesto go through. The effect of this bomb willbe devastating in the extreme.I saw Niall MeDermot and told him about GwyerHe thought that it was all most regrettable. decould not thinkof any particular job into whichGwyer would fit at the moment.Cecil and I had dinner With W.Bell and Marlinof O.S.S. Marlin was formerly it Trinity o1-lege Dublin and was sent over to tree ind by OSSsome months ago, ostensibly as one of Ambassa-Catalogue Reference.kv/4/193s to have gone336down very well with the Frish who always referhim in glowing terms, particularly Joe WalsheMartin however does not think very m ch of Joenor-doeshe-ver-nuch-like-the generalsetupin Ireland as compared with 1932 when he wasat Trinity. He regrets the passage of theAngloTrishandr rather distikesthehittlecounter-jumpers who have established themselven office, many of whom have only a thinveneer of culture. One 1S inc lined to#-nder-aether-Marlin-says-one-thinott as andanother to the Trish but on the whole I aminclined - to think that he. is straight. Heiscertainty a very pleasant individuals Heisgoing to act as the American representativein the Security baikse that we are to haveover here with Dan.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.Ll QoooKim told me that he had had a kong talk withViv. aboutthe Gwyer-inciden incident andhad eventualigot Viv. to ring up C. and ask the latter'spermission for Philby. to disclose to me the.SIS candidate for the appointment in TIS. Heished-to-tell-nle-thatrit-as-tilbertvleCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193331This I had in fact heard from TIS.. T thinkprobably-the-idea-in-telling me this is toreassure us and to prevent us sending part toTIS whom they are anxious to get for the warroom, at Ryder St I said that f would considerthis and that-if-theywere-going-to-supplysomeone I could not think of anyone better thanRyle although it would take anyone a fair timeto-pick-up-the-threads.Findlater Stewart-c called a meeting thismorning between ourselves,SIS, ISI.SOE SOE and OSS: Theprinarypurpese-vas-to-decide-mhether-enbers hethermembers membersof the Norwegian underground movement should bea Iloved. to go back to Stockholm SOE saidtheyto took no responsibility for these people howere run by the Norwegian Govt. from mStockholm.Tfehomeveretheyvhad control over them theywould not according: to present standards sentthen-back-untilafter the-Second-Front hadopened. We then went into other securitymeasures,be being taken to ensure that thereshouild.be no leak ge Of information throughagents-goingintothefieldv ser-said- that they had tightened things up SESadthat considerably.The agents were being more thoroughly searchandhadtosign a declaration. Documentstaken in suitcases swere.now going-tabe exami were to be examinedbags by Censorship are to be and discontinued. customs. - The They Polish contained sealedmicro-photograph-filns-aich-if opened-arexposed: The films contain cypher messages.raised the question of leave granted to agentsbeforet thyhwent into the field. SOE said thatthey had instructionsout-o acted March3lsttothe effect that no Xx agent on leave should got Catalogue the Reference:KV14/193 Senter said th t Mock-33&ler-Ferryman had given instructions that acomplete list of agents likely to go into thefield during the, next few months was to besubmitted to him. This would be vetted by SOESecurity Section and also by the Security Ser-.vice if necessary. indlater-Steart askedwhether SIS would be ready to adopt sinilarmeasures. AS the SIS representativ hadnotturned up we would get no answer to this ques-ion. I said ho ever that I doubted whetherthey would agree to anything d the kind.it was decided that the minutes of this meetingshould be sent to SIS and that they should beasked to conform.I had luneh with M. He spoke about the inqui-sition into his affairs by Roger and Horroekswith a certain amount of resentment. He askedme whether I knew anything about it. I saidthat I knew something of the kind was going onand that in fact I had had on one occasion beenconsulted and that I had given my views on whatthe organisatic should be. I repeated them toM. who expressed himsel in entire agreement.He complained however that F.Division did notreally keep him informed. His reports Nerenever eriticised and he never got any guid-ance. The only people those judgment he appear-ed to respect were Clarke ind Wendy gilvie.There may possibly be something in this.spoke to Horrocks Later in the day and ne toldme that there was a certain amount of justifica-tion for this complaint.I had a long talk with Herbert and Bird aboutsending 6 girls to SHAEF. Bird complains thatCatalogue Reference:KV/4/193330the beavers are wanted to bring the Frencn WhosWho up to date in order thet our records hereshould be in perfect shape when the SecondFrontopens Front opens. see the importance of this.At the same time it is equally important thatTIS should get on a proper footing. Moreoverve nave to some extent committed ourselves toproviding the neeessary staff. I think weshall nave to arrive at some sort of com-promise. Me would send 3 girls to SHAEF atthe outside and possibly fill up with newrecruits fr m the registry or LRC.I had a meeting at the F O. with indlaterStewart in the chair Cadogan and other F.O.representatives, Desmond Morton,C and Sporborgwere also present. It was decided that therepresentatives of the Norwegir undergroundmovement sheuld not not be be ITowed to go to Stock-holm, that Eady MCMillan should be asked topostpone her journey and that the P.M. of Luxem-bueg should come back to this country. ThePortuguese Amb assador no longer wishes to come asas he cannot communicate in cypher. The Polesgeare being very difficult. They are verymueh on their dignity and have written a longmemo which is historical and largely irrelevant.They are ready to conform to all the restrictionsexcept the one demanding that they deposit theircyphers. Mikolaicec has seen the P.M. who hasrather sold the pass. He saidythat he was re adyto waive the demand about depositing the cy pherson condition first that the number of messagessent in these cyphers was cut down to an absoluteminimum, sec ndly that the en clair text of themessage Catalogue Reference:KV14/193us, thirdly thatsoMikolicec gave the P.M. his personal word ofhonour that no messages were sent in secretcyphers except those of which the actual texthad been deposited with us, and fourthly thatthe existence of this understanding should bekept absolutely confidential otherwise HMGwouldbe exposed to rep resentatives from other foreigngovernments in a less favourable position.C. said that Brendan Bracken who had not beenoffici lly informed of this ar angement wasalready aware of it. It hud presumablreached him through press sources and would bynow be all over Fleet St. theCommittee decidedto make representations to the P.M. that thisconcession to the Poles placed us in a veryawkward position and that since the Polish F M.had already broken his word the arrangementshould be abrogated.April 26thAt the weekoy meeting today we discussed thecase of FUNDUS ind his possible identity withBENDIK part for a variety of reasons whicnseem plausible is of opinion that Bendia is notour man. He rather thinks that suspicionpoints to a man called DUDLEY who came overOn the same place and is employ ed by UKCC atLisbon. The case of FUNDUS in So far as weknow it from ISOS is based on Lisbon, and itwould be reasonable to suppose that there wasa more likely candidate Enan Benida who comesfrom Barcelona. le nave decided however tocontinue observation on BENDIA and to refuseboth him and DUDLEY leave to return to thepeninsula. This can be done easily under theeneral ban. Mean hile other enquiries areCatalogue Reference:KVI4/1933ulbeing made about DUDLEY.Garbo has received a message intimating thatsomeone will mike contact with him for thepurpose of using his wireless to send 17 singlegroup messages. This looks as if this nian wasintended to report on the date nd target ofOverlord. It is extremely important as it naygive us first-class pportunity of deceivingthe enemy on a big scale. It is possiblethat this man may be one Pedro who is accordingto ISOS to arrive nere about the 29tn.Sclater reported that the wireless sets of thetho Irish paracnutists O'REILLY and KENNY, whowere dropped in Irel nd some time ago, are of avery high grade. The voltages were not howeversuitable for either this country or Eire, butwere suitable for the USA. Equally thissappliedto the cry stals. I think this is theref re onemore example of S.D. inefficiency unless itwas intended that the agents were uitmtelyto proceed to the USA.Van HOVE is to be put up for trial. NUEKERMANNSwho is on trial is leading insanity. Theyare utting a witness 1 r the prosecution, adoctorCookie is getting hold of.T had a long talk with Gwyer and broke to him thathat the present difficulties about Tis were dueto the fact that he was persona non grata withSection V. I told nim that I nad done my bestto get tnings straightened out but that clearlythe decision must rest With SHAEF. L did notwish him to think that his work here was notCatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/193-3y2thoroughly appreciated or indeed that those inSHAEF who knew about it were not equally appre-ciative. On the other hand they mignt feelthat to avoid any sort of friction it vou.ld bebetter not apply for his services. I then askedhim about his beavers. He said tht in his viewthe French Thos To could be brought up to dateeven if or 4 of the beavers were sent over toSHAEF. The possibilities of getting onwith the French Mhos ho were to some extentlimited by the fact that only to of the beaversere allo ed to be in Ryder: St. at the sametime. He thought novever that work might bespeeded up if they had more direction. I thenasked him ho: it was that Bird wa in charge ofthis work. He said tnat he had made it quiteclear that he did not wish to become a kind ofB.1 Registry Potter. He had however neversaid that he wished to diseontinue his work inthe Information Section, but somehow or otherthis had all been handed over to Bird, and henimself had been left nigh and dry. i thinkthat the explanation is that Dick in anticipatioof Gwyer going into SHAEF thought Bird hadbetter get into the saddle ind take over thekeeping up to date of the Freneh wnos Who.When however the French Whos Who is up to dateit ill form the basis of personal files whicheill be added to as and when information comesin. I think that subject to anything that Dicknas to say it would be better for Gwyer to finisoff the French Whos Who, wnicn is undoubtediyimportant in connection with Overlord, andthen the document can form part of the B. ReG.on a personal file basis.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/1933u3I Lunched with Curry, who is evidentiy ratherworried about his future. He nas agreed to stayon with SIS until the armistice in Europe,and this has been accep tea by SIS and the D.G.Vivian however still had in mind that Curry'section will ultimately become part of SectionV and that Curry will not serve under Cowgill.Meanwhile Curry says tit it is extremelydifficult to do any effective NOrk sincethe records at SIS are in a hopeless state.He has constantly raised tnis matter but Vivianseems powerless to get it improved. He toldme of a case the other day where a file wasproduced about a communist in Mexico. Currymade a precis of this for Evans of SecurityCo-Ordination and sent a copy of it to MissBagot. The latter wrote to nim asking whetherne had made a full precis 01 the file since thereappeared to be a number of important documentsof SIS origin which were not included. It wasfound that the were some 20 such items whichwere scattered about in other files and hadnever been put into the man's P.F. Curry wasmerely told that if he wanted information of thatsort not only should he call for personal filout extra tr ces as well. This is by no meansthe only instance. In fact this is common form.Ap rt from this individuals are only earded oncea month. This throws on the sections an enormousamount f extra work. It is clearly impossiblefor SIS to hold themselves out as being res-ponsible for counter-espionage or communism abrodif they have no means of recording documents, andin fact very inadequate personnel fordealingwith them even if they were recorded. It wouldEatalogue Referefce:KVI4/193 start building up aTHISIS A COPYORIGINAL DOC DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENI UNDER SECTION(4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS34yACT 1958. Dec0co 2000huge registry system at thlis stse st. wilich ouldmerely be a duplic tion of ouroNn records.The read answer of Course is tat the toregistries sould be amalgimatec.I toldCurry that it yas very difficult to say howhe could fit into this office at any Futuredaie since we did not know whit our charter wasto be. I could not help feeling nonever thatsomethin vould be done in the way of amagima-Lion nd that there wouid be pienty of workfor everyone to do. Curry Nas very anxiousthat i should see Viviin who he Says is sufferingfrom frustration and persecution mania. I saidthat the onlyreason had not seen nim for SOlong was that I felt that his viens here SOfundamentally opposed to my OWD that a conversa-ticn was likely to be unprofitable. L wouldhowe er see what I could do.Harry,Lennox, Cussen, Robb, TR, Dick Butler andI vent through the agenda for 3 conference Whichis to take place tomorrow at SdAEF. It dealswith varicus security mesaures before Overlordand counterintelligence matters after verlord.Jcame to tal aboutwho is veryanxious that something should appear in thepress to indicate that he was caught by theBritish while attemtin to get a'vay from thepersecution cf the Gestapo to the iirgentine.I said th t first it would be necessary toascertain now he could have come into Britishhands on nis way from Spain to the Argentineand secondly th t it would be better if nisstory peared under an Hericar d ateline andwas copied over here.thinks thit ifseatafogueReference:KV/4/193 it wouid help himafter the armistice.basofAfter careful consideration/the Case of FRUINand DRIFBEEK, tro Dutcamen who came out through9 blown esca e route in the care of Louis deERAY, I have decided that they could berele ased. The Dutch Foreign Minister knows boththeir families and is prepared to vouca for themIt seems to me uite clear that if one is Spyboth are spies. It is ho never unlikely thatto pepple of the social status and integrity1of their amilles sho are personily knowntovsn Kleifens, should have been simultaneouslyrecruited by the Abwehr. Further it is true tosay that their early cont its Nere quite reput-able. It "aS on-y men they got to Faris thatthey were put on a blown escape route throughthe agency of Louis de BRAY. If they are Siesthey must have been trsined in Holland sincethere was no time to train them in Paris. Itseems hoivever unlikely that they were tr inedin Holland since their contacts were of areputable kind. On the other hand it is curiousthat they vere not arrested on the frontierlike certain other members O.0 the party.According to our present standard I shouid notrelease them Nere it not for the guarantees giverby vin Kleffens."e gave a dinner to Tricycle "Nich the DG, TAR,Marriott, Wilson,Foley,Lloya,Butle ilson, Foley Lloya, ,Butler and I atten-ded. The dinner was 1 think a great success.The D.G mide a short Speecn to which Tricyciereplied. Tricyele was full of praise for Hilsonfor whom he clearly has the greatest respect.I think he realises that ii Wilson heo not beenat his side coaching him ne could never haveachieved the position tit he nas now reached.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1933u6He told me also that Wilson had made a verygood impression on Artist and that further Ifhe could find time to go over to Lisbon it wouldundoubtedly give Artist very great encouragement.He spoke in a very moving way about his brother,whom he had met in Lisbon. His brother nas ofcourse been eading the Germ ns up the gardenin Belgrade for the last 4 years. It wasunknown to Tricyele that the cigars smoked ate e dinner were kindly provided by r.KleemanOI Ast.Paris. These cigars were given toTreasure for her notional boss in the M.0.I.Dick has been signalled from Algiers and shouldbe here in the course O1 a day or So.April 27thGwyer has had a talk with Dick Butler about hisposition which he feels ought to be elarified.He does not wish to make a fuss but he thinksthat SIS should say quite definitely what theyhave against him and give him an opportunityof answering the accusations.The Faris controls of Tate,Brutus, Treasureand Freak nave now moved back to Hamburg.This confirms other reports that ve have hadfrom Artist that the French stations of theAbwehr were moving back to Hamburg and Wies-baden.We have had a report that one Jack Vickers ison board the s.S. Mary B.Mitcnell ex Lisbonssailing to Dublin via Fishgaard. This anCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1933urhas confessed that he Nas recruited by theGermans some time in 1943 and trained in the useof secret ink which.he was to use on the backdropped of Red Cross by the letters. Abwenr as He they was found eventually that hehad British relatives fighting in the 8th Army.It is difficult to understand why they allowedhim to leave Holland or why,i he was a Britishsubject,he was at.large. We shall be takinghim off at Fishguard and having him interro-gated. He says that he reported the bvenr'sapproach to a Dutch girl working for the EngiishHer n me was van der BUM (repeat BUM).A telegram has come in from Michael Ayde sayinthat Coetzee nas staged some plot against himalleging that an agent of Lenton's whom he wasemploying had held up two individuals at thepoint of the revolver. The whole thing is ofsourse fa tastic nonsense. Ryde nas seenBaston but Baston is very much under the tnumbof Coetzee. We have wired back to Ryde te linghim to report all the facts to the High Comm-s-sioner with e view to the matter being takenup with en.Smuts. Ryde is of course actingunder Gen. Smuts' and Lenton's instructionswhen making use of the police although Basonwas informed up toa point. The police areclearly jealous and antagonistic to any Britishinterierence in their affairs. They also detestLenton.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1933us-April 28thI attended the F.O. Comittee on comaunications.We were ereresented ith the French complint that.as the seatof their government was in Algierswhile they had to conduct a great de 1 of theirbusinessin London it was impossible for them tocarry on. It seemed generally agreed thatsomething would have to be done in so far iscommunications between en.Koenig and Gen.deGaulle were concerned, but no s lution of thisproblem was reached. We also discussed thePolish case. It was agreed that we should infornthe I.M. that the unilateral arrangement whichhe had made ith Mikolajczyk very much cut theground from under our feet, since they laid usopen to serious criticism by other governmentswno nad deposited their eypners. While Miko-lajezyk's Mord of honour that he would notdisclose the arrangement might be all right, it Vwas obvious that many others would have to knowprecisely what thearrangement was. Itstherefore impossible that sooner or laterthe facts would not get out.There was a good deal of talk about Erenchtransmitters. C. said that ne wis Satisfiedtand a similar assurance was given by SOE.Although it was recognised that it as withinthe power of the French to tr ansmit, C. thoughtthat if they did he Nould be almost certain toknow. AnXiety was expressed both by Sporporgof SOE and C. about Polish communications Withtheir underground movement in France. FurtherCatalogue Reference:KVI4/1933ua-discussions are to take piece.Spitfires were over Germany last ednesd y forthe first time. They have evidently beenequipped ith auxiliary petrol tanke.Dick says that in N.Africa everyone is tremen-dously impressed oy the restrictions oncommunication. They really do think thatsomething is going to happe en. They are howeverdoubtful about the outcome and about the projectas a whole. They feel that the threatofinvasion will be better than the invasion it-self and that our best line would be to attackin the Balkans in support of Tito.I attended a meeting at Norfolk House from 3 to 5at which some 50 people vere present. Anendeavour was made to find some solution to theproblem of the 30,000 refugees who are expectedfrom the bridgehead, at the rate oi ,000 a dayfrom D plus 2 onwards. Nobody was particularlyhelpful. The only really suitabie piaee wouid bethe I.O.M. since conditions there would betolerable and therefore not-likely to giverise to such a storm from allied governmentsand parliament, It ould however only held15,000 and the camps vere noA largely t ken ug byNavy and Army training units who shewed noindication of moving. Otheralternatives vere toput the refugees in military camps, but theseould not be available till D plus 4+ at theearliest and would consist of huts with thepeople sleeping on the floor. The third sugges-tion was to requisition houses but it wasCatalogue Reference:KVI4/193ssodifficult to see how these could be isolated.It was agreed that in any case camp ould haveto be established in the vicinity of Shorehamto hold some 4-6,000 refugees since all of themwould.have to be ex umined medically before theytravel further. They would also have to bedeloused. We made it clear that there was veryittle basis for examination, but on the wholewe would prefer to see the whole party keptin internment and shipped back to the conti-nent en bloc as soon as possible.General Gurney,DPS War Office, eventually askedfo some tatement from us on the security risksinvolved This we undertook to give. Meanwhitevarious reliminary steps are being taken by theMinistry of health and other depts. concerned.Ceeilhas been summoned to a security meetingwith the Irisn and Americans. The Americans rekeen to discuss the possibility of stoppin theGerman ind neutr i cabies hich pass through thiscountry. Would the rish give a guarantee thatthey Nould not give the Germans facilities byireless. Cecil said that he could not discussthis matter since it had been dealt lth bythe Cabinet. If it mas thought aavisab.le tore-open this question it would have to be donefrom the top and could not form partoi the agendaof a rather low-level seeurity meeting.Several canisters containing about 27,000 indohrars, and about a million Beigian Franes, havebeen broken open on the aerodrome. These Nereto hve been dropped on the continent. Burt andCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1933S*Spooner have been investigating and have arrestetwo RAF men found in possession 01 some of thenotes. They have now confessed. The Belgianfrancs were apparently burned, out a largeproportion of the dollars nave been recovered.-It is now quite clear that Canaris ho has beehead I the Abwear since 1956 at Least, has beenvirtully dismissed from his post. This isthought to be due partly to the inefficiencyof the Abwehr and partly to the political unreinbility of some of its members who had recentlydeserted. Himmler took advantage ef the situationto discredit Canaris by implicating him in ascandal concerning the irregular use of Abwehrfunds. The situation was aggravated by Abwehractivities on neutral territory which ad Causedprotests and got the German F.O. into trouble.There followed a genera review oi Abwenr per-sonnel in neutral eountries. The presentposition is not altogether clear but it seemsthat some time during the middle of ren thefoho ing agreement was reached between theAbwehr and the S.D. Hansen wvinl remain head ofAbt.L and has taken over the direction of allSections. The S.D. are to receive copies ofall Abwehr reports. The names of all AbNeNragents re to be communicated to the S.D. No oneis to be sent abroa ad without the S.D.'s perinissiorKaltenbrunner is te admiristrative head butHansen is said to nave the right of appei toHimmler.Ihear that n envelope containing importantextracts from ISOS which goes to the tontroilerof Deception from RSS was inadvertently fandedotoCatalogae Reference:RV4i93I'ne Polesalso receive35'2communications from RSS. The Poles opened theenvelope and returned it saying they thought itmust be intended for someone else. This inci-dent has caused a considerable flutter in theIS S dovecots.April 29thFurther message have been received this weekindicating that the Germans are receivingTreasure's messages. Both sets are still send-ing blind, but we are try ing to get the otherside to acknowledge Treasure's transmissions bygiving o.K. at the end. This wit save repet=ition and should speed things up.The Muilet and Puppet case is still going on.Hamlet has received a pay ment from Werner inMadrid. There has been a slight hitch in thelatest Plan Dream. Although the enemy said thatthe fruit merchant's brother as not stayin inthe hotel in Madrid, a telegri was received bythe fruit merch nt in London say ing that he was.A further request Nas made to the enemy to payover the pesetas. Although they say that thishas been done, the fruit merchant in Londonhas not yet receiveda confirmatory telegramfrom his brother which we are waiting beforewe can take possession of the sterling depositedwith Dick Butler's firm. A further deal is tobe carried out for 200,00 pesetas pius apromissary note forthe balance which vill bepaid over on the deal after this one.ISOS indicates that the Germans remain entirelyCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1939253satisfied with Tricyele. Artists's positioncontinues to be somewhat invoived as his so-callefriend Brandes continues to report on him tothe Abwehr and the Gestapo who are investigatinghis fin nces.Joseph's courier returned from Lisbon. Lle hasbeen intervie ed and a ritten report is onthe way. His meeting ith the Japs vassatisfactory. They paid him 140, confirmedthe accuracy of an earlier report, and g ve anew address in Lisbon to nich traiiic could besent.There has been considerable trouble in Ecypt dueto the King ishing to get rid of Nanas. ashaby unconstitutional means. He thinks thatNahas is too much under British influence. Thishas caused crisis and the possibility of theKing's abdication hs been considered. Thismight lead to a revolt in the army. Gen.-agetnas become some hat concerned, and has beenasking for more troops to deal vitn the situationThe P.M. nus been handling the Situation. Onthe 24th April ne told Paget: "You must not getdisturbed by all this Egyptian cnatter. Ifriots should occur you must not count inbattalions and V.P.S but in vigorous andsuccessful use of tanks and armoured cars nnichill very soon change the face of affairs. Donot all the Palaee elique the forees of law andorder. Here is a case of a King threatening tooverthrow a lawfully constituted Government wniehhas proved itself faithful to us in the monthsof erisis. If fhe ne abdicatesor nasto be deposed,ve have Monamed alie, the heir apparent, andCatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/193