The National Archives(c) crown copyrightCatalogue Reference:k :KV/4/195Image Reference:68f 64 6 tabout Orange who wants to go to Switzerlandand cannot get a passage. We are trying toget his ambassador to support his application.Secondly they wished to discuss the question--naire or-Orange. We have put up a number ofpoints concerning Germans endeavouring toestablish themselves in Switzerland, the trans-fer of funds and the passing of German patentsand-companies-to Swiss nominees.After lunch I met a friend of Guy Durgess call-ed Lucas who had worked his way up irom thebottom-of the Air Force bothhere-and-irCanada nd has just been hipped out and putinto the BBC. Burgess asked him what thegeneraltalk was in Air Force messesin thejunior ranks. He said that their main interestwere centrered round their homes and theirtechnical equipment, general conditions 1n dif-ferent branches- of the service, clothes, andfood are also discussed. Outside this themain topic is Ding Crosby or Betty Grable.Nobody: seemed to be the least interest inBeveridge beyond a vague hope that they mightreturn to somewhat better conditions afterhe war. This only shows how wide of themark paperslik the New. Statesman are.October 14thAnthony came to see me about a igood piece of forby Duck who has got all the latest instructionsfrom the new Spanish Foreign Minister as tohow-Spanish affairs are to be conducted here.Anatalgiterefererfee:kvi4(195ial examiners fortranslation and found that the document hadA copyORIGINAL DOCUMENNT RETAINED170.IN 3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONACT 1958. LOV 9000Seeing that we have producedWith the greatest regularity copies-ofallAlba's despatches which nave been circulatedon an SIS ticket, it seems a bit thickthat a document of this-s is-sort should not havebeen_passed to us as a matter of routine.Clearly it is of interest as general back-ground. David Doyle generally takes the Tinrthat matters of this sort are of the highespolitical importance and are wholly for theeyes of the FO. >his of course is a ridicu-lously narrow point Of view. tnthony isgoing-to-register-a-strong-cor complaintAnthony tells me too that there has been anothe:incident in regard-to-CERVELbW has gotinto touch with the managingidi director of theArmstrong Siddleley group who has applied forpermission to Show CERVELL round the works.We--kewfromthatthislittle intrigue had been going on. The AirMinistry are apparently keen that the visitshould take place as theythink they- it would be goadfor postwar trade. The danger does not necess-arily lie in CERVELL seeing these particu-lar works but in his establishing a closeliaison liaison--with-the-managing--di director whichwillin the long run lead to trouble. What theAir Ministry cannot get into their heads isthat any information which goes to the Swedesis more than likely to reach our enemies. Ifthey are prepapred to say that this does notmatter, we had better give up looking afterGatalogue Reference:KV/4/195171Joe Archer is doing his best to keep LACHMANNout of the aircraft industry. LACHMANN isat present interned but Handley-Page would ob-viously like to have him back as soon as thewar is over We have rather taken the bull bythe horns and have strongly recommended thathe should be deported back to Germany. theAir Ministry are inclined to take the viewthat if we do not get him for our industryhe will go to America where he will do justas much harm. Personally I think that thisdoes not matter nearly So much as having himonce morebedded down in our industry. We asa Service would like to keep our vital indus-tries clean and if LACHMANN is readmittedhis case will always be cited as a precedent.There is a certain amount of loose thinkingon the lines that if Germany is not to have anAir Force for 20 years there is nothing thatLACHMANN will be able to tell them which coudbe of the slightest use. The probability isthat the Germans will be making commercialplans before many years are passed. LACHMANNwas of course responsible for the slotted wing.But I cannot believe that we are incapable ofproducing people just as good and a greatdeal better.A Jap JMA indicates that the Japs anticipatethat they may perhaps be thrown out of neutralcountries at Stage A. They have thereforeissued instructions that some sort of secretorganisation is to be left behi'nd. In anti-cipation of relations being severed only withGermany attaches are at once to begin prepara-tions for taking over German secret intelli-eatalogue gence networks. ReferencetKV/47195 Reference: subjects aor enquiryare Germany' ability to continue the war,peace moves in Europe, relations between U.K.Russia and america both up to and after theconclusion of the Luropean war, strength ofBritish, American and "ussian forces inLurope after the conclusion of the -uropeanwar and the arrival of forces from Lurope inthe F E., British, American and Russian poten-tial strength for war ag ins Japan and inter-nal conditions after the conclusion of thewar in Lurope and hussias attitude towardsthe F.E. after the conclusion of the Europeawar.I1 Jap B.J. of the l8th Sept. indicates thatthe Jap Ambassador in Moscow has been able toget the Russians to maintain their neutratity,thus giving the Japs the opportunity of devotingall their efforts to the southern front. Heis convinced after talks with Molotov andafter Hoshima's talks with Hitler, that bothRussia and Germany have rejected any effortsby Japan to bring about a German-hussian peace.The Americans appear to have been proceeding witthe cancellation of citizenship of americancitizens of enemy alien origin, through aquasi-civil action in the Federal Courts. Thecharge is that the ctizienship of the individualwas procured through fraud and that his oathrenouncing loyalty to his former country anddeclaring allegiance to the USA, was taken withmental reservations. Action has only beentaken in aggravated cases where the dangerwas real and the fraud grievous. No actioncould be taken against a derivatiive citizenwho Catalogue had acquired Reference.k4/19ss not on his oath173but through the naturalisation of a fatheror husband. In spite of these restrictionsthere havebeen filed as by Aug. lst 1944548 petitions. In these cases which havebeen brought to trial the courts have appliedstringent rules of evidence andhave beenlimited by Supreme court dicision that theeviden e in such cases must be clear, unequi-vocal and convincing. Nevertheless 181 certi-ficates have been cancelled, 49 cases havebeen withdra n by the uovt. and 110 havebeen dismissed by the courts. 6 decisionsfavourable to the Govt. have been reversed byappellate courts. 4 cases have been terminat-ed by the death of the defendants and theremaining 198 are still in litigation.October l6thAnthony came to see me about SULZAwho wishes to visit the USA. We Came to theeonelusion that we should have to inform theAmericans owing to sources of a tatementwhich have to be somewhat guarded.Four SD agents have landed in Palestine.TR cam in. He thinks that the moment hasalmost come for disbanding his section butproposes to leave behind. ind-Stewart Hampshire., theSD expert, whose services may be necessaryin guiding RSS in their interception work.Kellar had a long talk with me about theMiddle East. There is a proposal to discussthe future of CICI at the JIC.This arisesfrom the paper which was forwarded byCouthorne sometime ago urging that if thereCatalogue Reference:KV/4/195was any reorganisation of Intelligence in theMiddle Easti, India should be consulted.Courthorne has eomplained that no satisfactoryarrangements existed fore the war in theMiddle East and that there was no stay-behindnetwork which could have come into operation hadthe Germans been successful in c trying out apincer movement from Egypt and the Caucusus.1th OctoberHad a further discussion on the Middle Eastwith Kellar and Harry. We were a1l agreedtaat it wes impossible to eontempla terunning intelligence in the Middle East exceptin some sort of combined organisation whichwould cover TURKEY, PERSIA, IRAQ, SYRIA,PALESTINE and EGYPT. We also thought thatM.I.5 and M.I.6 and DIB should eombine to earlyou't this task. If we do not look out CICI willjust pa pa ck ck up and hand over whatever it has totct. Since, howevee, CICI is primarily adefensive organisation it ought still to bebased on SIME or its post-wrar equivalent.I had a talk with Roger about Section IX.Heis waiting a note giving his peasons as to whythis Section should really be ama 1gama ted withF Division ra ther than tha F Divisiongo to Section IX. The real point is thatsuch information as is obtained abroadrelating to revolutionary movements is in manyways of less interest to the Forei mn Office thanthe extent to which, for example , the Russiansmight be bringing pressure to bear on theGovernment here through the medium of theCoumunist Party and its outer constella ions.There is a be tter opportunity here with allthe forces of State behind us for getting tothe bottom of Soviet intentions than the r everwill abroad. be through the stuast of Communist PartiesIt therefore follows that the foreignCatalogue ReferenceLKV/4/n95 be assessed in the175light of the whole produ.ct before being issuedto responsible Government Departments.1 8th OctoberBurt came to see me about STYLES. He isworried about the charge preferred on thebasis of a statement by STYLES that he hadinstructions to get into touch with a Germanagent named HEINZ at the MidlandHotel,Birmingham, or the Adelphi Hotel, Liverpool.ff Spooner ere.challenged in the box he wouldbe bound to say that he could not acceptSTYLES' tatement that although STYLES mayhave be en interviewed by Major HE IMPEL, andalso have seen HEINZ in Germany, and thatso.me espionage mission might have beendiscussed, the plan never took concrete shapeand Birmingham STYLES in or Liverpool; fact ne ver visited the story either had beenput up me re ly because STYLES thought that ifhe appeared to be assisting the authorities tounearth an important agent this might to someextent mi tigate the offenees whichhe hadcommitted in German camps. Sinclair is takingthis point up with Hinchley Cooke.Colone Bartik, who is in charge of CzechG.E. has asked to be aequainted with ourCensorship methods and also with our PortControl ma chinery. T have arranged withGrogan that he sha]l be given information onCensorship tters similar to that alreadygiven to other Allied Governments.ASretards Port Control, I gather he only wishesto have a rou gh idea of our machinery here foratehing spies, so thatmhe can'blow: ourtrumpet when he ge ts back to Czecho-Slovakia.Baxter talked to me about the two Russianswhom S.I.S. want sent back to the French.SIS think that ANTERRE can claim FrenchCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1951bnationality, but a gree that KHRYZANONSKI willhavet to be handed over to the Russians.Baxter will try to square the ImmigrationOfficer on this matter which is reallyentirely a matter for them.Renegades were discussed at the Weanesdaymeeting. There is still no final decisionas to how they are to be disposed ofpending enquiries into their cases.SHAEF have, I gather, refused to hold the iin a. special camp and the H.O. have refusedto have them over here.Pitt called on me about turalisatior cases.He said that his firm had a large number ofsuch cases through their hands and he thoughtpossibly in the future he might be ofassistanee to us.I talked to Buster and Brooman White aboutpassing French cases to the Belgians andBelgian cases to the French, etc.We hadgiven an unertaking to ret the French have allcases with an espionag bearing which we hadback from the Field.B.W. thought that itmight eause bpouble unless we confinedourselves to passing the cases of Alliedna tionals to their own Governments only.He undertook, however, to see if he couldnot get the Belgians and Freneh to agree ona joint distribution direct From here.The Home Office had had a meeting aboutsending back alien fugees and: internees.They agree that any who have been guilty ofcriminal offences or are pro-Nzi OP have beenengaged in espionage, should be deported.Thereturn of others is apparently to depend tosome extent on circums tances and probably meansthat any of them will remain here. It is feltthat they camnot be sent back until theirCatalogue ReferenCe:KV14/195177countries reach a more or less settledstate.Rex Janson has brought in a naval questionnairwhich was received by NID from Prince BERTIL.It asks a large number of extremelyimpertinent questions about our defences inthis country, the ove ments of the Fleet,ete., etc., and can only be of German orJapanese origin. Probably BERTIL, in theabsence of some compe tent officer, has madea Gargantuan blob.Almost simultaneously with this incident JoeLyneh has come in with information about anEn Clair telegram said to have been sent fromTokio to Stockholm, asking for informa tionabout the movements of our Fleet. We havealso peeeived doeuente obtained from theItalian Air Minis try in Rome giving accountsof meetings be tween the Japanese Attaches andthe Italians. The Japs contributed anumber of items which we have already seenon JMAS stating that they were obtainedthrough the Swedish General S taff. Wepropose to have a full-dress protest aboutall this to the JIC., In my view the Swedesshould be told that until they put their ow nhouse in order their attaches will be givenno further information and their movementswill be severely restricted. This seems tome to be the mimimm. They can be shown thedocuments obtained from the Air Ministry inRome and they can be told that in our viewBERTIL'S uestionnaire can only come from theGermans and Japanese, and that it must havebeen forwarded he re by someone in the SwedishNaval Department who is either assisting orat le ast conniving wi ith our enemies. Intothis pudding we shall undoubtedly introducea little CERVELL seasoning.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/195I7Adam told me that he was in trouble for havingordered the SCO to send three French M.O.I.officers with diploma-tic visas to the LRCI refrained from comment but I have sincetold Harry Allan and the DG that T think suchincidents are positively disastrous. Itseemed to me that an yone who took the t oubleto read the papers would have realtised thatwhatever the regulations such action was onlycalculated to le ad to tr ouble and to give theoffice a bad name. The peal trouble isthat tSCOs are not allowed to use theirdisere tion and that when they refer to D.4 thewhole thing is reganded as a sort of game inwhich the objeet is to catch out some GovernmentDepartment which transgresses the rules.Cadogan has, I gather, egistered a strongprotest, and since these are the only sort ofineidents which give himany any knowledge aboutwhat the Department is doing; he na turallyreache S the onclusion that M.1.5 is apotten show.Victor has come back.T gather that Dickhas more Or less won his battel with R.Jabout the transition ofm C.I. from SHAEF toCOMS by a gradual means.19th October 1944.Col.Forsyth came to see me. He is employ ed inCCMS and 1S charged with the liquidation ofNazi priests and school teachers in Germany.He had some idea that he might get assistancefrom the LRC. I explained to him that the LRCdealt primarily with German-oeeupied territoryand that the chances of their having any infor-mation about either priests or school teachersin Germany was extremely remote. The onlyCatalogue Reference:KV/4/19524possible source of information might be CSDICwho probably would have had some school teacherthrough their hands. Apart from this I tnougnthe would have to rely on information that hewould obtain locally. Doth the padre and theschool teacher were public figures and therewould be many people in towns ind villagesfrom whom he could get a pretty good ideaabout their political sy mpathies.Forsy th was formerly one of R.J.S DSOs inTunis and is an ex-school master from Felstead.Not very impressive.Reports by civil affairs from the field indi-cate that the population remaining behind inGermany are obeying orders and giving notrouble. They have no apparent sympathy withthe Nazis. Isolated instances of surlinessand an attitude of fear have been noticed butthe only incident reported is the pouring ofhot water out of a window on a soldier's headby a German woman.Joe Archer brought Plant to see me. Plant ishinking of taking a job in CCMS. I toldhimas much as I could about the set-up.Horrocks came to talk to me about the reorgan-isation of the department. He has telescopedB.E and Divisions and and D Divisions. Hehad put Kellar's section under subversive move-ments. I said that I thought it should beconsidered on a territorial basis and shouldcover all saspeets of the ork in the area.Catalogue ReferenCe:KV/4/195icvHe had also wa'shed out the Irish section.ThisI think is wrong at any rate for the timebeing. Ireland must also be considered on aterritorial basis, and there is an importantliaison to be maintained with north and south.Horrocks had put espionage and preliminaryenquiries re espionage into different sections.I said that this wught to be together since itneeded the experience of those who had knoW-ledge of the cases to pick out somethingin its early stages. This was in fact themost difficult job. clear case was fairlyeasy to run. 0.C. had been put into A.Divis-ion.. I said I thought this nasal all right butthat if it was to be so placed it must concernitself solely with administrative matters.This means that there would have to be asection in .Division which received the report!of all DSOs who did not have a correspondingterritori section in B. Lastly, thoughtthat the work of Dl,D2 and D3-in D3 in so far asfactory security was concerned, should beoff-loaded on to the regions. The regions areto remain but to be reduced to 4, 3 in Engiandand one in Scotland. There is a certainamount of argument as to whether they should ouran office in the provinces. The generalopinion seems to be that they should not.They should however have their residence inthe area, spend 3 weeks touring round to CCsand one week in London. I am very doubtfulabout this. I am inclined to think that theyshould have an office, otherwi'se CCs will notfeel that their interests are being properlylooked after, nor will .0.sbe able to makeproper reports.Catalogue ReferenCe:KV/4/195H Jap B.J. indicates that the Germans aregoing very slow on the question of Poland andon the question of using Vlasov's Army againstthe Russians. They want to be able to cashin on the differences between the Poles andthe Russians and are consequently treatingthe Poles who surrendered in Warsaw withconsiderable leniency. As regards Vlasovthey do not wish to do anything that wouldcreate a further barrier to any possiblepeace negotiations with the Russians.The LRC returns for September show that 863people passed through the institution.October 20thR.J. has returned from Faris, and althoughI understand Dick's view about C.I and itstransition to CCMS has been accepted by Ken-neth Strong, R.J. is endeavouring to make methink that what had been accepted was his plan,worded somewhat differently. He is obviouslyworried about his own position. Either he hasgot to be accepted as head of C.I.at SLEF, whicis almost impossible since then the Britishside would be over-loaded, or he has tobe ome the chief c.I.planner under CCMS underen.West, or he should resign. At presenthe really has nota position but merely a vaguecharter for C.i. planning for phases 2 and 3.He put forward the suggestion that perha aps inthe mean time he might be made head of the warroom. I treated this suggestion with consider-able reserve.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/195192Toby Mathews has been made DPP, a somewhatnovel appointment since he is a) a solicitorand (b) a Catholic. I should think howeverthe he would do the job extremely well.Anthony tells me that he has had from Joe Lynehthe gist of an en clair telegram from Tokioto Stockholm which was sent in English. Itstated that units of the British leet werereported to be concentrating in the IndianOcean and asked for information from a neutr lmilitary observer as to the truth of thisstatement. We are trying to find out moreabout this telegram, which has an importantbearing on our case agaanst the Swedes. B6RTIL)Air John Anderson has announeed that so farthe war has cost us 24,000,000,00October 2lstVictor has been over with a letter fromDick stating that it is desirable that some-thing in the nature of a central counter-sabotage organisation and school should beset up in Paris. All information regardingsabotage will be centralised there and thenecessary instruction will be given to counter-sabotage squads which may be required in thefield. There is a feeling that since so muchinformation has come to light about theburying of dumps etc. .something, more activeshould be done as a precaution against troublein Germany. The D.G. has given his consentto Victor doing this work.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/195183A CX. reports states that the Nazis are makingout lists of non-Nazis which they would seereached us as lists of Nazis. They hopethat this will lead to the arrest of a largenumber of innocent people and that those whopropose to make trouble in the future willbe left at large. to facilitate this arrange-ment the papers of foreign workers who havebeen liquidated have been taken over, andfalse papers are being given to Naziswho are to go to Switzerla nd to carry on thedirection of the underground movement.John Marriott returned today from Brussels.He has a high opinion of the work being donethere by the SCI units who are, in SO far asD.A.S are eoneerned, under the control ofChristopher Harmer. The most promisingcharacters are sent to Brussels where theyare housed in a large block of fiats calledWuthering Heights. After interrogationthey are either used, handed over to theBelgi ns or sent back here for interrogation.barge numbers of agents are still beingsent back from the field and many others arebeing handed over to the local authorities.Both the Abwehr and the SD have been takingadvantag of the stabilised tactical situationto introduce German agents through our lines.Most of them are hastily recruited and ithetrained. The return of a small percentagewith limited local tactical information isapparently considered to be satisfactory bythe Germans. In addition to a group opera-ting out by Densborn, most of whom areCatalogue Reference:KV/4/195iSufromrecruited ex ex-agents released from Frenchprisons, another group operating from Mulheimhas been encountered in Belgium These agentsare young Frenchmen, most of whom claim to befrom the Dept. du Nord and who pose as escapedTodt werkers. Preliminary investigation revealthat the organisation is similar to that ofChateau Moulny and there is evidence thatsome of the Moulny instructors and agentsform part of the present group. Theirmissions are to report on the identity andlocation of units, S,particularly armoured,convoy movement, presence of Belgian, Luxemburgor Dutch units with U.S.forces, the degreeof co-operation offered by civilians and ongeneral relations between troops and civilians.an agent captured by the 5th US Corps hadthe mission of placing magnetic incendiarymines on our armoured vehicles. He S ays thatothers have been trained for similar or.No unusual security problems have arisen inGermany. In the occupied areas numerous. Germancivilians have been ceoperative to the extentof informing on Nazi officials and Gestapomembers once their fear of a German counter-attack has been dispelled. In some areasof occupied Germany front line units havefound it desirable to evacuate all civiliansto the rear. T'his is apparently necessarybut has used some confusion in the backareas. Hundreds of German soldiers incivilian clothes have been apprehended in thismanner. These soldiers are beieved to bedeserters rather th n ay-behind agents. Notonly are German civilians reported to be submis:-sive to our orders but there are numerousreports of individual friendly acts such asCatalogue Reference:KVI4/195185aiding our wounded and sheltering patrols fromenemy observation or capture. On the otherhand the 19 J.S. Corps has reported that toAmerican soldiers who were lost were offeredassistance by a civilid who led them straightinto a German control post. the 9th J.S.A S.Army Armyhas reported an incident involving the captureof 3 German solders wearing U. U.S S. uniform anddriving behind our lines in a U.S. jeep. Onewore an American Army Captain's uniform witha first .Army patch and the other twowere in war-enlisted men's uniforms. Theystopped another Americanjeep carrying twoLt. Cols. the latter did not notice anyirregularitie until after getting out of theirjeep and surrounding the Americans the Germansbegan talking in German. In the ensuing fightone American officer and to Germans, one ofthem the pseudo-Captain, were killed. The lattewas wearing a German C.O.'s uniform underhis American one, but carried no identificationpapers.Independent but corroborative reports from theRuhr, Cologne, Dresden and hanover, point tothe existence of an organisation calledthe Eidelweiss Piraten. This organisationis primarily anti-Hitler Jugend and it isalleged that it has not be penetrated bythe Gestapo. Many of the members of thisorgnisation are former le ders of the HitlerJugend. There appear to be quite a number ofother anti-Nazi youth movements.Experience in the field shows that d.f.ing forwireless sets has not been really elective.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1956Attempts generally lead to giving the showaway. Intelligence clues have been found tobe much more profitable.saw Denniston today about getting Lewis andStalbo, who are working an Ispal, and 2, toread back some Hebrew records for us relatingto the activities of Shertok and others.Denniston was quite prepared that they shoulddo this work and regarded them as 100% relide.He thought however that as they both workedSO closely together it would be a mistake toemploy one and not the other. I said Lwould consider the position and let him havea final answer.I had a long talk with Keltar about 0.C. Hefeels very hotly that it should be purely admin.istrative and should not in any way interferein intelligence matters. He told me thatClay-tor was visiting Gib. and later on goingto Mid East. In writing to Douglas hobertsEde had suggested that he should discuss vithClayton future pians for intelligence orgisation in the Mid East. This is clearly amatter well outside Clayton's scope. theonly person to discuss matters of this sort areKellar or-myself.The RSIC state that if Ne could get oversufficient XX traffic on the Madrid-Berlin routeand on the Meisbaden network they may be ableto break new groups which have recently comeinto use. Our DA material is relayed on ttheseservices and therefore provides a crib. it isnecessary however to get considerable depthCatalBgue Reference:/4ta95s.18 7Keith, Kenneth Strong's P.A. looked in. Hetalked about R.J.S recent visit to Raris.Apparently R.J. succeeded in boring Strong, whodoes not really know what to do with him.->There has been apparently a hint from Tedderthat he does not think R.J. a very suitable can-didate to run C.I. in CCMS. I believe this isbased on some acquaintance with R.J. in theMid East but what it all amounts to don'tknknow. Dick's stock meanthile is extremelyhigh at SHAEF. R.J. had apparently been tosee Brig. Way, ADMI(O), about his position.Keith has alsdseen May and the preseat propo-sal is that RJ sho ld go into CCMS under Gen.West. Tt is a matter of some speculationhowever whether Gen.West vill weleome thissuggestion. He does not apparently take verykindly to RJ.I dined with reter Loxley, when he discussedat gre t length the possible amalgamation ofourselves with SIS. I told him about ourconversationswith Arnold-Forster and I showedhim a copy of my minute defining wat I mearby taking over Section V and Section IX.He seemed to think on the whole that thereasoning was sound but he was coming roundvery much to the view that total amalgamationwas the thing if it could possibly be achieved.I said that T personlly #as in agreement, pro-vided the politic 1 difficulties could be gotover and a suitable chief could be found.Ithought however that in any case there wouldhave to be a sub-division between offensiveand defensive, somewhat on the lines of myCatalogue Reference:KVI4/19519note. If there could be no total malgamationthat division seemed to me more logical thanthe present onee.We then discussed ministerial representatioLoxley seemed to think that the Fo. was moresuitable than the Minister of Defence buttook the point that such an arrangement wouldnot find favour with the H.0. who argued thatsince we derived our poers from them weshould come under the Home Secretary. +heHome Secretary would certainly not wish tosee subversive movements under the ForeignSecretary. Peter said he thought thatSection IX were perhaps going a bit wide.He had had a talk with Kim about this. any --thing in the nature of pursuing prominentcommunists all over the world was, he thought,a waste of time. That sort of thing shouldbe done on a much more selective basis.In other words in areas where the SovietGovt. had vital interests.October 22ndPeter Loxley rang me up about the SpanishConsul Vidal who has been pulled in underblack market diamond smuggling. He is to besent back to pain tomorrow. Ne do not propose to search him unless we have positiveinformation that he is carrying something ofsecurity interest or that he is in fact inpossession of large quantities of diamonds.We have no such evidence at the moment.Catalogue eferenCe:KV/4/195Moffatt and Woleey of the RUC came to have atalk with me. They are seeing Haltand whois to take over from Himmler in Germany.I told them all I knew about the possible set-up in Germany whicn in the present state ofaffairs is somewhat vague.The Germans have given the Japs that they esti-mate to be British and -American aid to -ussia.They say it amounts to 9 million tons at theprice of more than 5 million dollars.Slight danger to the case of Brutus has arisenin so far as Violette, his late mistress andsub-agent in France has been arrested by theFFI on a charge of collaborating with theGermans. Unfortunately the Germans allowedViolette to learn that Brutus was was workingfor them in England and Violette is thereforein a position to compromise the ease. A fullreport on the circumstances of Violette'sarrest is awaited and meanwhile a sdheme forproviding Brutus with the necessary safeguardis being devised.Kliemann who was bragonfly's later spy-masterand who is at present in this country has nowgiven after considerable delay an account ofhis rel tions with Dragonfly, and has in factrevealed the latter's identity to us. Inorder to safeguard Dragonfly should he ever de-cide to return to the continent, Kliemann isbeing given the impression that Dragonfly wasin fact arrested in Deeember 1943 but thatinsufficient evidence of espionage was foundCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1951aoto secure a prosecution and that he wasaccordingly interned. Kiiemann has nowsuggested that we should run Dragonfy andTreasure as DAs. ie has no idea that theyhave been run as such over a considerableperiod and that he himself is the sucker.A party from this office accompanied by theRSLO Notts and the CC Boston visited theplace selected for the parachuting of the ttwo transmitters to Sniper. The party wasthere on the nights of 10/11 Oct. between thehours of 9.30 and 1.30 and on the night of the12th between 9 and 9.30. The German planedid not arrive and Sniper had since been told tlthat this was due to weather and bombardment,but he has in the Same message been asked toname another date and time on which he couldbe present at the meplace. We havesuggested the nights of l1th and 12th November,bet een 9 and 9.30 each evening.October 23rdCurry came to see me. He is L think alittle worried by the rapid development of SSection IX which he thought Nould precludeany chance of amalgamation. I showed him thenote that Roger Hollis and I had prepared onwhat we felt should be the functions of adefensive organisation. urry seemed to thinkit was reasonable. L told himythat I had readhis personal note to me about his position andthat while I thought kao he had been hardlytreated I did not see how t could put it allinto reverse. If however we obtained widerCatalogue Reference:KVI4/195191charter there mignt possibly be some positionfor him within his present rank.Gort.cam to see me about the security ofhis safes in Falestine. Both of them havebeen in use since about 1937. I said thatif thiswas so he must take it, that the keysmay possibly have been compromised. The onlything therefore was to have WO new safes. Isaid that some people kept their safe keysalways in their left hand trouser pockets.He said "Yes, ,that it just what I always do".replied that other people might not have beenso careful and that in any case there came amoment when he would have to have a bath. I ssaid that we could say from practical exper-ience that we had taken advantage of a situa-tion of this kind to obtain high precisionmeasurements and to manufacture a facsimilekey down to half thous ndth of an inch.Gort seemed very impressed by this isane and hasquite made up hismind that he is going to havetwo new safes. Itold him too that we wouldget our experts on to devising some means ofknowing whether the safe has beenopened with-out this coming to the notice of the culprit.I thought that if we were successful in thishe should test his safe at least one a week.Kellar seems to have established a completebond of confidence with Gort who is popping inand out of the office every day. He evenrehearses with Kellar what he i's going to sayto Shertok. Gort is quite determined to getabout the place and see everybody. amafraid th it those who are responsible for hissecurity Catalogue Reterence.K8i4rigsty anxious time.92The Germans have made an unofficial sugges-tion through Switzerland on l8th Oct. for anexchange of 5 or 6 British subjects underpenaI sentence. We have replied to the F.O.that at the moment we. have no Germans who couldsuitably be exchanged, but that if they Liketo keep the ball in play they should getaway from the phrase "under penal sentence" whinarrows the issue and makes exchange extremelvdifficult.October 24thThe following conversation took place betweenNashat tasha and his British bride Miss Priestthis morning. They are due to be married atnoon today:Pasha (in hoarse but faint voice) Hello,mydarling.Priest (in gay clear voice). Good morning,Hassan darling. Have you got your whitecarnation?Pasha I don't know. Oh, my God. My head!Priest What do you mean? Give just had my facedone.Pasha I can't get out of bed.Priest Darling! What is it, lumbago?Pasha No, an unbalanced head. We shall have toput it off till tomorrow.Priest Oh, no, darling,please!Tasha All right cherie, ma petite, H tryto get up.Priest Darling, I've got a boil on my chin. Iwarned you.Pasha Oh, my God! My legs won't work.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1951923PriestPlease,Hassan, get better; have a nicebath.PashaAll right,. will. I'll be ready.Whdo you want Mrs.Ali?PriestNot till 10.30. It's just for packing.I can manage to dress ny self.PashaI can't. Goodbye,darling.As Kellar says, not a very auspiciouswedding morning.I attended the investiture at Buckingham alacewhere I met Tiltman of G.C &c C.S. Tiltmanreminded me of the time when he and I had gonedown to some firm in >outhampton Row to inspecta holorith machine. This was a good many yearsbefore the war. He said he had no idea atthat time that the holorith was going to besu h a big factor in the work that he would bedoing. He did not know what future therewould be for G.C &c C.S. but he could not helpthinking that the difficulties of the workmight become insuperable when foreign govts.realised the mistakes that they had made duringthe war. Intelligence might well be drivenback on the old cloak and dagger lines.Tiltman is now Chief Officer on eryptographyand a Brigadier. He said that this does notprevent him from a certain amount of dailyexereise in his special line, without which hethinks his usefulness to the organis tionwould disappear in a very short time. He saysthat methods change so quickly that it isabsolutely essential to de a certain amountof hack work, otherwise pne's usefulness willentirely disappearCatalogue Reference.KV/4/195I spoke to "C" on the telephone. He said thathe was open-minded about turning the saos outof neutral countries. I said that the casefrom the security point of view was not a verystrong one because in fct we doubted whetherthe Japs would do anything effective even iftheir Embassies abroad did continue to function."e" does not place a very high value on GC &e CSproducts after Stage A but points out that itis only through neutrals that Ne can hopeto get much out of Tokio and that from timeto time something quit e useful comes along.There is in fact a Portuguese B.J. in todayindicatingt that morale is very low and thatthe recent exaggerated claims by the Japs tohave sunk many Americar ships in the vicinityof the Phillipines had been put out merelyto boost up public morale."C" said.he was hotly opposed to the abolitionof the American visa but th t he thought thecase perhaps more one for us to present thanfor his organisation. T said that t thoughtthe main point was that the whole structureof the visa system would disintegrate if aprecedent were created in the USA.I spoke to "C" about the cases of LEDEBOUR andOtto JOHN, the to Abwehr or SD officers whomSIS wanted to get out of Bpain and Portugal.I said that certainly we were not very keenabout people of this sort coming over here sincwe had to look after them from the securitypoint of view and they eventually became acharge on our organisations. From theinformation point of view there was nothingCatalogue Reference:KV/4/195195to be gained since that had all been suckeddry before they started. We could not verywell detain them after their past services indif we did we had to put them in differenthouses. They could not obviously be put into.the Nazi camp in the I.0.M. "e" said thathewould speak to Felix.The D.G. has written a long memo on our rela-tions with SIS for tindlater-Stewart.Personally do not much like it but Ido not know how we can stop him sending it.I pointed out various inconsistencies. Heseems to be against total amalgamation andequaly ag inst taking over Sections V and IX.I havenow obtained our file in the case ofSERRA. It shows that he was recruited bySOE in India, after having come across tous in Abyssinia. He was finally brought backhere and xamined at the LRC. who viewed niscase with considerable mistrust and said so.In spite of this SOE took him on. As previouslyrelated he betrayed his colleague RMSTRONGas soon as he landed in Sardinia.SOEeventually had a suspicion that the transmitt-er was under control and suggested to us thatwe should use it for urposes of deception.Nothing nowever materialised.There wasalso a suggestion from SOE that another manshould go out and make contact with ARMSTRONGand SERRA and see hether they, ere in factunder control. This man as not to be toldabout r suspicions that the transmitter wasunder control. this seems to be pretty tough.ataloguehReference:kv/t95 about, the case of Mrs.RitaabBEDFORD who had an account paid from thatwould appear to be an SOE account, ith aregular monthly instalment of fl6. She alsohad another account which was receiving ilmoney orders amounting to very considerablesums from an Army Post Office in NAfriea.There seemed to be some suggestion of irregu-larity which he might like to look into.The Norwegians have been asked by theRusslans to send a mission to join theRussian forces in Northern Norway. They arealso to send 12 police battalions. TrygveLie has gone to Moscow or Stockholm todiscuss details.October 25thAt the Tednesday meeting Mrs. pring said thatthe Germans are no rying to find a means ofcommunication between the Iberian Peninsulaand Switzerl nd, in order that they may sendmessages by Duff on airmail letters. Grogansaid there is a sy stem of lorries going fromthe Spanish to the Swiss frontier, and theseare believed to be carrying ing German mail,sometimes in allied vans. 71 scheme is beingdevised for a control to be set up t Lyons.I asked him to find out more about thisconvoy and to ensure that we see all mailsfound by censorship.Shelford said, with reference to German broad-casting stations, that it was essential thatrecords of renegade broadcasts should be seizedas evidence when these people are brought totrial. Records of the JOYCES were found atCatalogue Reference:KVI4/195:197Luxembourg as well as many other documents,including receipts for payment for the broad-casts. No documents were received from thestations at mris or notue. I asked whether adirective had been sent to SHAEF pointingout ho" important these documents ere. ulfordsaid a memo hd been drawn up but for S-mereason had not reached the right people. Hetas looking into tais.Butler said he had been asked whether MIS hadan objection to the ban on weekly and otherpapers being exported. the ban was imposedbefore .day for the Overlord period. it wasagreed that we had no interest, but later inthe meeting Masterm n said that informationabout flying bombs had been part of B.:Adeception and therefore back numbers of thesepapers should not be sent.Bird said that there was considerable evidenceto show that the enemy organised theirstay-behind netork in Belgium far earlier than inFrance.pan said t'rit e sorship wished to knowIf the Security List and etails of how itworks could be pass.d to the Norweyians indGreeks. F.Division has no interest andany references to ISOS addresses nill bedeleted.I lunched with Montgomery, veddes and hellar.Montgomery is a younger brother of Monty andat present a G. 2 in the MAI. section dealingith Mid Easte Geddes ports P.A.Iatalogue amount about aaunified intelligence organisation in the MidEast and the necessity of dealing with the vhwhole area. He seemed to be in agreement.Nagel and Gledit.ch called at our request todiscuss the possibility of getting backimportant agents from the Nornegin front forinterrogation in this country. Brook-booth,Corin, Vilmo and TAR yere also present. TheNorvegians did not seem to think tit thispresented any insuperable difficulty providedthe Russianr handed the bodies over to them.The agreed ho'vever that Ne were not likely tobe interested in characters found in thenorth. Anybocy who had been operating fromTronajae: south might hoever be important tous. The Norwegians doubted whether theRussians ould do more than clear the Germansout of the Kirkeness area. This would leavethe Germins one extremely bad road over themountains for a distance of 250 miles. theNorwegians thought that very fe of them wouldget away and that in any case they ould haveto leave their equipment behind. It wa'showever possible that the Russi ns would moveun the small tongue of Finland in thedirection of Tromboe which vould cut off talarge area. They thought it most unlikelythat they ould attempt to go further souththrough the winter months, since the narrowstrip would be easy to nold oving to themountainous character THISSOPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONTHE PUBLIC RECORDSCatalogue ReferencPAd!Too199THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.NOV oldI asked the D.G. S permission to employ weis.and Stalbo on Kellar's Special Nork. tie hasagreed.Capel-Dunn called here yesterday to startenauil into the work of this dept. He saidthat he had been charged by the JIC to investigite all the soucceS of intellicence ae theirdistribution. The D.G. asked him for hiscredentials which he had not not. The D.u.very politely told nim that ne ould like tonave 2. letter from somebody as before llowingsucn an enquiry to be made he might have tconsult his Minister. This is i think quitecorrect though periaps 3 little unfortunateas it rather gives the impression that wehave something to hide hich is very far fromthe case.Field-hobinson caine to see me about a Mainclled ENGEFELD who had formerly beenrving in the Adolf Hitler .S.Division.Tris man is aprarently prepared to bump offHimmler though personally I think he isa bit sanguine. The question rises of courseas to whether this is not merely an attemptto get back to his ow lines. I told rield-Achnson that I did not think that 020 or LROcould express a very .old opinion. The bestplan Nould be to et Melland or somebody inM.I.14d. who vere the experts on tie S.S.tr Catalogue ex ress teterenceiRv4nfosit might also beworth while asking Columbine thether hekne nything about ENGENFELD.I undertookto get in touch with Melland.October 26thHarker talked to me about the RSTOS. Iexpressed doubts to him about the suggestionthat they sh.uld have no offices in theprovinces.Lennox tells me that a Brigadier and 138"NOunded officers aind men have fought theirway out of the hospitil at Arnhem after makingcontact with Dutch resistance movements wholaid a wire across the Naal and were in com-munication with the Britisa forces. Theseteoops held a kind of brideehead on the bankof the river until assistnce arrived. Theywere got back to the British. lines without asingle casualty..Dykes has arrived witna letter from Dick.nllan Day is being transferred to the SCIunit in Brussels and Lick vants someone toreplace him. Patrick Day and >ourtney Younghave been suggested. Countney we cannotspire and Day is a servant of CCMS althoughworking in EDS. Dykes told me that theTravaux Ruraux who are running XX in Francein conjution with Ramsbothai are settingup a wireless network. L warned Dykes thatthis might be extremely dangerous if theirsignals were not Secure. They were in factcreating an ISOD for the Germans. He promisedto et Trevor-Wilson to look into this as sooncatalogugReferece:kyte9sally Ramsbothamis an unqualified success with the Fre chand doing extremely valuable work.October 27th-laldane-Borter. eame to see me about nisfuture. I said that at the moment I was veryanxious to get someone to assist in Kellar'ssection for about 2 months and that afterthat there was no doubt that his servicescould be usefully employed in CCMS. Meanwhilehe has had a definite offer from Felix ofthe post of PCO Belgrade. ne said he wouldhave a tlk with Felix nd let me know.Ltold him what the position was regarding apossible amalgamttion and that after he hadcompleted his work in Germany there wouldprobably be a place for him in the organisationKellar and I saw Stalbo and Lewis in Dennis-ton's office. They have agreed to work forus.Kellar tells me that Gort san the PM yester-day. He only spoke to him gor about 2 minutesafter a lunch party. His parting words were"Look after our friends and see that theyare treated well. The Jews have rendered usgreat service in this war". Lort has nofirm indication of British policy in Palestineand clearly feels that he is in for adifficult time. He also resents not beingtaken into the full confidence of the govt.Mrs.Spring came to me in a great state aboutthe case of ABADO, a Spaniard who has turnedCatalogue ReferEnCe:KV/4/195up in Gibraltar. He was pulled in on a shipgoing from Barcelona to teneriffe. On interrogation he admitted that he had originallycome from Stuttgart where he had lived formany years He had been bombed out and hadhad his business destroyed. te had thereforeobtained permission to leave the country. Hehad however left his documents in Barcelona.There seemed to be some doubt as to whetherhe was in fact a Spaniard. The ndmiraltyhad asked us whether we had any trace ofABADO but had given no indication that theywere making arrangements with Sis and the FOto have the man brought back here. Meanhilean indignant telegram has come in from kirby-Green who says that while he was interrog tingBADO the Admiral ordered him to be arrested.I spoke to Ricketts and explained to him thatthe Security Officer and ourselves must bethe judges of whether a man is to be broughtback here. We had to satisfy the H.0.that there was a security case, otherwisewe cannot dispose of the body. This did notseem to have oceurred to the ndmiraltyRicketts undertook to stop the telegram ifpossible and to give instructions to theAdmir 1 that the man should be sent on orsent back at the diseretion of the DSO actingin conjunction with the governor. MeanwhileI am calling a conference of all partiesconcerned in order to get the position clearlyunderstood. We have told Kirby-Green to sendback all Germans whether civilians or inuniform and in cases of doubt to communicatethe facts to us.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1953The RSIC report states that DA traffic mustbe increased to-effect a break. "/T of theMilitarisches amt within-uermany-nowconsists of the folloing stations: Belzig(foBerlin), Kuugsdorf (for Stettin) Wohldorf(for Hamburg, Cologne, "eisbaden,)Bigmarigenfor Stuttgart and Vienna) tS the-militaryposition returns to the 1940 position- SO thestations will probably return to their formerattern. Belzig is the terminus for alltraffic lines, each of the other stationsbeing linked by direct lines. Wiesbaden asthae seat of the runkleiter est, co-ordinatethe networks orks.of..Cologne,and-Sigmarigen-i of Cologne, Sigmarigen inthe western areas and is responsible for alarge network - For this purpose it has "/Tlinks with ologne and Sigmarigen.- At thesame time it is joined to iamburg and Viennathe first being the location of the Fuleiubersee and the second of the Fulei SudostThese intheir turn control particular-areas.Hamburg is the reply station for agentsoverseas and in the Scandinavian area.ientcontrols directly and indirectlycommunications in Italy,Balkans and turkey.. Stettin lasecently taken over some of Hamburg' S commitulents in Denmark for hich purpose theyrarelinked by teleprint line and-possibly by W/T.though RSS no longer hear its "/T link, if itexists, but it is probable that Stettin'smain task willbe in the east when the funklei-ter ost withdraws into Germany from Poland.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSCatalogue Reference.ORIGINAL NDEPARTMENT THIS THE DOCUMENT IS PUBLIC A UNDER COPY RECORDS RETAINED SECTION 20003(4)OFACT 1958.October 28thI sent a wire to Kirby Green giving-him-hinstructions in the event of any furtherarrivils of the ty pe of ABADOGrogan came to see me about the censorshipof mails between pain and Switzerland. Thereis apparently a lorry route and also the Luft-hansa air route te-mich-comes-intoBarcelonevia northern italy. There is nothing to bedone about the air mail unless it is shotdown, but arrangements are on foot for censor-ship to co-operate with the French at uyonsin censoring the mail carried by lorry.There are reports tha t duff is being usedby the-Germanson this route.I had a talk with Melland today about "ENGEN -FELD. He has seen Capt. Capt.Gache Gache of M..l4d whotook over his work. Gache thinks- the. storymore or less plausible and 1 am arranging to pput him into direct touch vith i ield-obinson.Melland seems to think that he has perhaps"calalogueirelerenbe:ksvi4la95nte CCMS SO early.2asHe would have done better to have stuck tohis job in M..14d and gone over at a laterdate. the actual planning he feels ismuch more a matter for uonnie hay lor.E have had a talk with TAR about the futurepostings of officers. He is giving MarkJohnston to Milmo, Olsen of the LRE toBird and wachell to Albert.-October 3uthCourtney has returned from France. Theevidence with regird to Stella LONSDALE isas complicated as ever. A eert in amount ofpr gress has been made however since we havediscovered an ISOS message regarding Simoneaaddressed to Marseilles. Stella was atMarseilles at that time and was using thealias of Simone Lavalliere.TAR,Breok-Booth and E had luneh with bepage.He was very cordial and has keen as ever tomaintain liaison with us. He was rathercritical of his government. He did not thinkthey were taking aa sufficiently strong line,particularly as regards the communist resis-tance movement. He thought that they allought to be enlisted m the Belgian forces.There was apparently a reluctance to do thisowing to opposition from the right wingresistance movements. In fact Lisenhower'sinstructions are not really being carriedoutHe suggested that Lisenhower should gingerthem up about once a week. His second pointwas that there was not nearly enough BritisnCatalogue Reference:KVI4/195nepropaganda in Belgium. Now was the moment.He thought it extremely importan for hiscountry that this should be done. Lepage saidthat he was having very great difficultyin dealing with collaborators. He had some30,000 in jail but could get no firmdirectives as to how they were to be handled.Nobody seemed to know precisely what con nsti-tuted collaboration. People h d become SOmoulded into the life under German rulethat they were hardly conscious of whetherthey had bee betraying their country or not.A fairly strong tine is apparently beingtaken against all those who have assistedin the anufacture of war material for theGermans and the excuse that they wanted tokeep their workmen employed as not accepted.The embargo on all banking accounts isapparently working very successfully. Tillall accounts have been examined and sumaccumulated by war industries confiscatedthere is to be no relaxation.I held a meeting today with NID,0.0. ind SISto discuss the case of ABADO. Hart citedthe case of Bertus HAM, a Dutchman which waon all fours with the case of ABADO. Thesame mistakes had occurred, there had been ameeting at which every one had been representedand it had been agreed that the disposal ofthe body was atthe discretion of the Governoron the advise of the DSO. Meanwhile ABADOhas apparently been released'an their Lord-ships had viewed a telegr m which they hadreceived from the Admiral with grave concern.They evidently thought that the DSO hadCafal6guerReference:KV/41195 nded way. I under-1o7stand that we had not given instructions forBADO'S release but had told the DSO to actaccording to his diseretion after he hadsatisfied himself that the man was not a-German. If he was in doubt he was to referback.Caulfeild will convey this explanation totheir Lordships and wil I hope prevent thefrom expressing their severe displeasure.It was agreed by all that a blob had beenmade by the Admiralty and that in future theyshould conform to the normal drill. Suitableinstructions have been sent to FOGMA.Tim Airy came to see me. He had just returnedfrom Ceylon after visiting Australia. He toldme that Fergie had arrived and sold himselfto SEAC. He had had a meeting with -amploughand Airy at which he had told them that theSCI units would be coming out and #ould lookafter C.I. in the field. Lamps was thereforesitting back and feeling that he had nofurther worries. I have thoroughly dis-illusioned Tim. I said I did not know. whatmen were i Fergie's party but unless he wasrecnutintalent locally it seemed to methat the SCI unit had really nothing tocontribute. They would kno* nothing aboutJap espionage organisations except what theycould collect in India and they would haveno practical experience of CI work in thefield. Tim told me that according to Fergie4 of their people speak Japanese. I SaidI did not see this was going to be much use.If they were going to run agents they wouldCatalogue have to Reference:kV/4/195 and Indianwudialects. Jap prisoners were not often takenand they would be the concern of the regularI.B.staff. Further it seemed to me thaSIFS were really doing what the SCI unit wassupposed to do.Cussen h S come back with the suggestionthat Ne should set up an office in Paris.Strong is going to write us a letter.the main purpose is to deal with renegadesIt is suggested that Joe Stephenson shouldgo and be accompanied by an officer. of B.5and two secretaries.October3lstI attended a meeting of the JIC, then Caw-thorne's paper was once more discussed. Them eting seemed to be more c ncerned aboutJICS to receive intelligence than about thepro ueing age even, nieh are a1 at sixesand sevens. It is no use having a JIC unlessit has got some sort of decent intelligenceto consider. I said that in so far as CI wasconcerned we felt very strongly that the MidEast must be considered as in area. Itwould be radicudous for us to be responsiblefor ralestine and Egypt and for somebody elseto be dealing with the other adjacent countresIt seemed highly desirable to combine allforces. C.was present at this meeting butonly murmured something about his responsibil-ities in Persia. Cavendish Bentinck saidthat he thought the co-ordination of producingagencies would be dealt with in due courseand I imagine that he had in mind Capel-Lunne'sCatalogte Reference:KVI4/195NoThe D.G. has written a long letter to Caven-dish-Bentinck about Capel-Lunne in which heelcomes the visit but points out that thematters dealt ith by this office have onlyon rare occasions come before the JIC. Ethink this is a pity since it rather givesthe impression that we have something to hide.It would be far better to send a short noteagreeing to the visitand saying that Ne villoffer every assistance. Butler is going tosee what he can do.Ede came to see me about SIS wishing to handover the remnnnts of the P. Section in Gib. toy -Green. This was very tentatively dis-cussed by the P.Section representative withKirby-Green who expressed no definite opinion.The next thing he eard was that the P.Sectionofficer had written to London. at that stagehe wrote home explaining the position andstating that he had certain very definitereserva tions, particularly as regards takingover administratively as had been suggested.If he is to take over these bodies ae mustknow what they are doing. Meanwhile aletter had been ad dressed to Hart signed byRumbold for akenham of Section V statingthat we might be interested to know thatKirby -Greer had agreed to take over the bodiesin Go. This was follo ed t O or three days late-er by a letter from Felix to Ede, not refer-ring to Pakenham's letter stating th t C. hadtelegraphed out telling his man to hand overto Kirby-Green. Meanwhile wire has comefrom K.G. asking what this all means. I haveCatalogue eReference:kv/4n1gsmust make 8.G. clear-ly understand that the whole of this arrange-ment has been conducted withoutany consulta-tion with head office here by SIS. MeanihileEde is taking over a statement of the sequenceof events which he Nill leave with Felixand register a complaint. te will also saythat we do not propose to take over thesebodies unless we know something about whatthey are doing.I had a meeting with Tin-Eye,TAR and Butlerabout a proposal to set up an dvanced U20cum ESDIC in Belgium. tin-ye thought thatas we had agreed to set up an in tegrated showin Germany after the cease fire, e shouldperh ps send out a token force to Begium.This would consist of major, 2 I.0.s and10 wardens. Tin-ye said he could do thiswithout any detriment to his erganisationhere. It was agreed that I should goith him to the meeting t Beacsonfieldtomorro.Cussen has returned from Paris. We are toreceive 9. request from Paris to establishan office there to deal with renegades. Itis suggested that Joe Stephenson should bethe head of it and h ive a B.5 officer.Haldane-Porter came to see me. he has hadan offer of the most of PCO Belgrade. L toldhim what I thought might possibly be thefuture of ourselves and SIS, that had workfor him to do in Kellar's section whileKellar was away in Mid East, and that doubtlesshe could work with the Control CommissionCatalogue in Germany Referenee:kVi4argsiou to take this on.2uapart from these two jobs I had nothing elseto offer him at the moment. I could give himno guarantee that after he had completed hiswork in Germany he would be taken on herebut i thought it was quite likely that wemight ultimately be in a position to makehim some firm offer. He said that he wouldhave a talk with Cowgill ind let me know theresult.The SIS representative in Stockholm, a MajorCross, has been blown, according to a JapJMA. the Japs seem to have got to know pre-cisely what his instructions ere and theextent to which he was to deal with Russianaffairs. I gather that the faets as reportedby the Japs are quite correct and that theincident has caused considerable concern.It has recently been learned that ZIGZAG nas titold a number of his doubtful acquaintancesofh his war time visits to the continentand the purpose of his coming to this country,including the fact that he has daily beentransmitting messages to the Germans. In viewof this bpeachcof faith it has been decidedin B.le that we should take advantage of thisopportunity of closing the case with ZIGZAGin the wrong. Michael nyde thinks it isjustpossible that he had a pact ith Graumann,his spy-master in Germany. Graumann isaccording to ZIGZG corrupt and when askingthe Abwehr for for funds for his agentsal ys puts a certain amount in his ownpocket. It is just possible therefore thatCatalogue in RefererRCe:KV/4/195G may have tolda1?Graumann of his connection with ourselvesand that the to were running a financialracket between them. this of course has nobearing on the case since Graumann ould n tappear to report the information to nissuperiors. He know moreover that what ZIGZAGtells him is passed on to Berlin.Michael Ryde has gone to Gib. to interviewERZ and his compatriots who have a safeconduct from Lorenzo Marques back to Germany.If possible Ryde will get one of YERZ'S sub-ordinates to sign a document waiving hisdiplomatic pravilege.Lipstick has received an incoming duff in whichhe 1S told that his family hasysard 1,000pesetas on his Behalf even during his Silence.They ask him to reopen communications and givehim a new cover address in case the otherone has gone wrong. It is not proposed atpresent to re-open the case. Lipstick ispreparing to return to Lisbon to take upresidence there with his nife. The fact thatthe Germans are attemp ting to revive thiscase is an indication that Lipstick was notblo#n through his alleged indiseretionswhile last in the Peninsula. This renewedinterest also indicates that when Lipstickreturns to the Peninsula he may be approachedby the Germans there to co-operate ith themin their postwar plans.November lstI attended the meeting at Beaconsfield. Crock-Catalogue att was RefehenchRif4/1asnli R.J.,in-ye,213Tingling of SHAEF, Kendrick and Scotland Nerealso present.I nas made clear that thepresent arrangement did ot in any way affectthe interrogation of civilians and that theexisting machinery would continue as atpresent. Me agreed to send a token forcealso to provide instruction for a limitednumber of would be interrogators from CCMS.Tineye and Rawli are to go out and reconnoitrethe site in Belgium. There is the usualdifficulty about establishment. CSDIC sugges-ted that our people, like theirs, shouldremain on the establishment of 020. I saidthat subject to the D.G.S donfirmationthis arrangement would be satisfactory.Jenkins, our DSO in Hgypt, same in to see methis afternon. He is rather worried about thefuture of intelligence in Mid East. He wantsa reliable under-study and suggests a mancalled Tomlinson who I believe is not partic-ularly high-grade. I told him our views onthe Mid East intelligence question. He saidthat he Nould be quite prepared to join in thecombined show as deputy head but not apparentlyunder Roberts of whom he evidently has notgot a very high opinion. He likes him butdoes not thik himsufficiently forceful. Onthe other h and from what I hear he wasinclined to thinkR.J. rather too forceful.There has I am afraid been a certain amountof adverse criticism of Jenkins's reporrts bythe various depts.which have received them.They are thought to be not too reliable,rather of the gossipy kind.Catalogue asked him ieterhocet about 9h4 i/1e5ganisation Orby which11is run on a voluntary basis. There is nodoubt that in Urby Jenkins has some valuableconnections particularly in the banking world.On the other hand we have been worried aboutone of the members of the organisation whoit is said is de Gaulle's commercial repre-sentative. I think probably that rby oughtto be broken up but that touch should bemaintained with certain individuals who arlikely to provide us with information.I had a. long talk with Tim niry, TAR, Ede andMarriott when provisional propos ls were maderegarding our setup in the Far East. +t wassuggested that Airy should in accordance withbamplough&s wish be attached in an Advisorycapacity to SEAC instead of to GOC Cey lon.It was also tentatively suggested that AiRYmight ultimately become responsible for CIplanning in SEAC. On this point T had certainreservations. Although iry,reinforcedpossibly by yourtney Young would probablybe able to put up a better plan than mostof the staff at present in Ceylon he is notvery qualified for the task. He has notbeein on CI planning here nor has he hadany practical experience in the field. Thishowever he may acquire to some extent duringhis stay here. What SEAC really require issomeone like Niall MacDermott. Airy urgentlyrequires a B.LA LA case officer to handle thecase of Carbuncle in Colombo. It is suggestedthat Lee should go out to do this job. thismatter is somewhat urgent owing to the illnessof Patterson who will clearly have to comeatafoguetReferencenevi4igsntil he has woundTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENL BETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION13 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS2ACT 1958. MAs 2o0up the case of Treasure and Brutus which areat present producing useful resuts. Lee isactually--the operator- these cases:. Itis however suggested that russell should comefrom V.Africa to take Airy' place at Kandy.- Ede would like to get hold of Lt. ommanderRicketts of NID to take ratterson's place-as SCO in K indy. Ricketts would be preparedto take a job on rovided he can be spared.DSO Trincomalee is also leaving and there-appe. r to be no Security Service officers whocould fill this post. At the moment we arealso in idfficulties regarding the supplyof-DSOs-and-ADSOs for-ialayaI dined withwhen we discussedhe-future'-relations bet teenthisde dept. andSI. is quite prepared to see totalamalgamation and equally agrees with oursuggested division between defensive and off-ensive: He does not think hink-that-Section-V.i thattheir present form areperforming.. any usefulfunction, and. is quite convinced that counterespionage ought to be under one head:November 2ndCussen and richard Butler came to teli-methat Burt was in a white heat because HinchleyCook had never taken Spooner with him tothe JAG when consultations were going on aboutthe STYLES case. Aeart from the improprietyof this, it is highly dangerous since clearlyCookie cannot master a case of several hundredpages in the same way as Spooner who has doneCatalogue Reference:KV/4/19521bthe statements of all the various witnesses.The result has been of course that a chargewas preferredabout attempting-to-communicatwith n-imaginary spy in this country whichnever ought to have been preferred at all.Hilland who is actually conducting the Casefor-the-JAG-has been SO confused by Cookie'spresentation.t that he has been forced to getinto touch surreptitiously with SpoonerSteps are being taken to ad just matters;but-the incident only. shows how ill-fittCookie is for his job.We are issuing new instructions to portsabout the -categories of. people who are to. besent up to: the LRC, which I hope will preventany more incicents which in the past haveled-to-important-people-.with diplomaticvisasbeing sent up to London for examination.The subordination of various aspects: of theconduct( of the.war. the war to the-American-electionsis:..becoming-more.-and-mor irritating.Follow-ing the joint declaration of the P.M. and:Roosevelt at Quebec about the reinstatementof--the-Italians and the-granting ofdiplomaticrepresentation with cypher facilities, p.21has been brought to bear upon the forcesin the Mediterranean to permit the establish-mentof consuls. This was quite blatantkystated in the telegrams to have a politicalbackground in the United States.The Irish are attending the Civil AviationConference in the USA while the Argentineshave not been asked. The Irish have a GermarCatalogue RefetencerKy14/ses the Argentines, suc-217combing to American pressure, have expelledtheirs.Lasoly Morganthau's suggestion that Germanyshould have her machinery removed and beturned into an agricultural country ispresumably a manoeuvre to obtain the Jewishvote. Declarations on the subject of thefuture of Palestine also operate in this senseNovember 3rdI lunched with Kim,B-W and TAR. They bothseem quite prepared for Dick's recommendationfor a change in the whole set up of the War.Room. Kim seems to have the idea that we aredefinitely opposed to total amalgamation.I told him that this was not so. We hadonly been worried by the tremendous difficul-ties to be overcome and by the possibilitythat if alternative proposals were madethe whole thing would be put into the waste-paper basket, leaving us in the present muddlefor another 20 years. Apart from this wethought that even if total amalgamation couldbe achieved there would have to be a sub-division rather on the lines that ve veresuggesting. Our greatest di ficulty inadvocating total nalgamation was that theDG was by no means persuaded that it vouIdbe a good thing and would not advocate sucha measure at the conference t able. Otherdifficulties were the political ones which wwere very strong and the finding of a suitablehead.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/19521%Buster has returned from Brussels He con-firms our view here that the SCT units arenot receiving the support they require fromthe War Room. noland Dird is making lengthyappreciation as a result of links-up in theregistry but these are either filed in SectionV or recline in people's trays. The SCI unitsare doing extremely good work but in the viewof Rodney Dennis are performing functions whicthey were never intended to carry out.Williams of 2lst Army Group seems to take theview that C.I. in Germany and the smokingout of the Nazies will be done entirely bythe Army through the C. I. staffs. There doesnot seem to be any place for COMS and stillless for R.J. unless they are to constitutesolely a liaison unit in Berlin with theAmerican and the Russians.Cussen and Butler came to talk about rene-gades. It is now proposed-that a renegadesection should be set up with Cussen as itsdirecting head and Shelford and Seymer doingthe civil and military side. This shouldwork well. I impressed on them both thatthere was a certain B.Division interestin cases which had connections with theG.I.S. We were rather anxious to ascertainprecisely whatthe G. I.S. plan was and whetherit has any long term intentions.November 4thBurt came to twll me about his difficultiesin the STYLES case which i gather ave nowbeen liquidated. Spooner is taking part inCatalogue Reference:KV/4/195219any further consultations.A Jap JMA shows that the Embassy staff inSwitzerland is to be increased for intelli-gen e purposes. This is mainly due to a fearthat the Embassies may be turned out of thePeninsularbefore long. In fact nothing willhappen to the Japs in Portugal until theattack on Timor which may not be for some time'Arcy Hughes rang me up about an americancalled Eric KERR ho has gone to the policewith a story that he vas captured in italyand taken on by the Germans as an agent, andthen dropped by parachute in Herne Bay. bub-sequently he was picked up by a fishing boat.I said I thought that thiswas a most unlikelystory and that KERR was prob bly a deserter.November 5thThere have been interesting developments inthe case of one Chris LINDEMANS @ KING KONG.An agent sent back from the from named DAMANdenounced a Dutchman called VERLOOP.The latter when questioned gave informationto the effect that LINDEMANS in order toget his brother releesed from prison h doffered his serv ces to the S D. and had in aldenounced some 267 Dutch Belgian and Frenchagents working in the resistance movement.LINDEMANS was one of the leading lights ofDutch resistanceand has bem appointed byrince Bernhard much against the advice Ofour old friend Pinto who is Dow on the Prineestaff, as liaison officer between DutchCatalogue Reference:KV/4/195220resistance and the Canadian Army. Orderswere sent to the field for LINDEMANS'arrest nd he is now at 020 where he has madea confession. An ISOS trace shows almostundoubtedly that he attended a meeting whereagents from this country disclosed to theDutch resistance movements thhe possibilityof parac ute landings in the Maas area. Thiswas fairly late in August and was prooablypartof the plan to seize the Arnhem bridge-head. the SCI units could apparentlyget nothing out of LINDEMANS who had severalepileptic fits. He has had another sincehe arrived at 020. rinEye's report abouthis confession opens with the words "Thisobstreperous ant".Under date l6th Oct. the JIC issued a paperon German strategy and capacity to resist.the only exception to the general declinein the flow of productio has been the pro-duction of single-engine fighters which hasbeen ste idily increasing and has reached ahigher figure than ever before. The limitingfactor however is petrol for the purposes oftraining, and pilots. There can be only tomajor reasons for Germany continuing thestrueglem the possiblity that dissensionand war-eariness may lead to compromise, andthe belief in the minds of the Nazi leadersthat Germany's future depends on her goingdown fighting to the last rather than admittinthe fact of military defeat. She will there-fore continue her secret veapon offensiveagainst England and targets on the continent,and at sea she il press on with her improveddevices for U-boats. At the end of this yearCatalogue Reference:KV4/19 to be operating in221considerable numbers from Norway and Germanyagainst ocean shipping in attempts to preventthe sending over of lliedsupplies andreinforcements to the continent and Russia.ome ayoperate in eastern waters. On thestrategical side it is felt that once theallies have built up their forces in the nestsufficiently to break through or outflank theSiegfried line or the Thine in strength,the immobility of the German forces andtheir vast inferiority of armament and airforces will make it impossible for them everto reform a cohesive front in the vest thoughresistance may continue in some sectors. Itis estimated that the Germans h ve no morethan 35 full strength divisions including67 panzer available for the defence ofGermany, and under the most favourablecircumstances, most of which are highly im-probable, they could not possibly increasethis strength to more than 46 divisions.After December it is thought improbable thatthere ill be any substanti 1 increase in thestrength of the German forces in the west.The conclusion is that except in .Europethe Germans have for themoment stabilised theposition. On no front are Germany's forcesstrong enough for her to feel ucheonfideneein her ability to hold off a major alliedoffensive. On no front except to a limitedextent of the northern sedtor of the easternfront, in Norway and in Italy, can theGermans afford to give ground without sacrificing strategical positions or economicresourees essentil for the continuation ofthe war. Moreover the increasing jimmobilitytyCatalogue ReferEnCe:KVI4/1952?of the German Army due to lack of transportand of oil and their great inferiority inarmour and air forces make it impossible forthem to engage in a war of movemnent withoutrisk of irreparable disaster. At the same-time by concentriting the maximum.possibleeffort on the production of fignter and jet-propelled aircraft theGermans may hope toregain some degree of ascendency in theair over central ind eastern Germany in anout attempt to blunt the striking poerof the allied strategical bomber forces,and thus to protect German production of warmateri i from the full effect of the exclusiveconcentration of the allied strateg ic bombingoffensive on Germany during the cominwinter. The Germ ns are thus compelled to st nand fight nere they are ind they must atall costs avoid a major allied break-throughsince if this Nere once achieved it would bealmost impossible for Germany to re-establisha cohesive front. tt seems improbable thatthere ill be any formal German surrenderat l1. At some stage the German comma andwill lack the troops, armaments and controlof communications vith hich to hold anysort of line and in the end the German aryon one front or nother will disintegrate.The JIC believe that in the period before thecomplete coll pse of Germany's military resis-tance, there may be a cert in amount of gueril-la activity behind our lines.y they thinkhowever that once resistance has ompletelycollapsed Nazi plans for underground warfareill in the nain collapse with it.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/195223November 6thV.2 is still coming on at the rate ofabout 5 or 6 per 24 hours.. there is also anoccasional V.1, though very few now reach theLondon area. On the 5 th a V.2 fell at Isling-on,killing 22 people, injuring 8o seriouslyand 134 slightly. 12 small houses were destroy-ed. Today one fell on the comma car factoryt Luton, causing a large number of casualties.Apart from one or two incidents of this kindcasualties from V. 2 have on the whole beenslight.There appears to be a considerable decline inthe stand rd of our signal security in north-est Lurope. A German intercepting opertorrecently captured said that the British gaveaway a lot of valuable information in clearconversations over the air. On the italianfront prisoners seemed to think that signalssecurity has improved but that there stillexists several major loopholes. The main pointsin recognising a given network were speech,accent identification etc. routine calling,umber of outstations on the group, frequency.ne P/W states that the opinion expressed inhigher quarters is th t 75% of the intelligenceavailable to German staffs is derived frominterceptionlA report from Italy dated 14thyOctober statesthat 7 agents have been arrested during theweek, two in Rome and 5 in forward areas. theto in Rome were an *taliar at.Col. and hisW/T operator who had been despatched by theCatalogue RefeRENCE:KVI4/195Air Intelligence Section of the Abwehr. Thefive in the forward area were German agents ofthe usual type of whom one was sent by the SDand 2 by the Abwehr. No information is yetavailable about the controlling agency of theremaining two who were traced as a result ofchecking the visitors book at in hotel atIesi, known to have been frequented by enemyintelligence personnel. An unusual confessionhas been made by the son of an Italiangeneral who states that he was to allow him-self to be overrun and then to get recruitedinto the allied air forces. If possible hewas to return to the Germans in a Lightning.There are indications that the Lerman Ambassa-dor to the Hatican is attempting to start upan intelligence network in Home. The reportconcludes with the rather significant state-ment that despite the large number of agentswhich continue to fall into our hands,interro-gations indicate thata number are still beingsent into allied territory who remain undetec-ted. Only a small proportion appear to com-plete their missions but steps have been takento improve control of travel both across thelines and in the forward areas generally.This is in fact not particularly surprisingsince there have never been adequate controlsin Italy since the invasion.Dick's latest counter-intelli enee summaryfor the week ending 3rd November which iscirculated telegraphically indicates a markedincrease in enemy espionage. In Spain linesare being planned i to rance and Belgium,and the G.I.S. in N.Italy is preparing linescataloguerReferenee:Ki4195e being established228for post-occupational purposes on the lineof the German western frontier. Line-crossingattempts are continuous along the whole front.Parachute landings ofvat least 8 agents are inpreparation. Our counter-measures are meetingwith success. Six /T agents have beenarrested on the south coast of France, twoparachute agents have been captured nea Metz.at Dourg and Dijon an Abwehr network numbering24, two on W/T sets, has been uneovered andat Nancy an S.D. ring numbering 60 has beenunearthed. On the sabotage front to saboteursemployed by S.D.were arrested while attemptingto cross 7th army lines. Their mission w sto locate and damage fuel pipe lines usingpreviously placed sabotage dumps. It has beenestablished that such dumps exist in wupenMalmedy andupper Moselle. The position onthe Franco-panish frontier is slightly better,but is still by no means satisfactory. InBelgium resistance groups are now under uni-fied control and the police and gendarmerie arebeing rearmed. >ome 200 Surete officers aredistributed throughout tBelgium. Against thisthe economic situation is serious and thegovernment is in disrepute. In Holland therers a serious situation due to the cessationof public utilities and exhaustion of foodsupplies. Vast areas are inundated andreception areas are over-crowded. The enemyhas destroyed a good deal of industry andtransport has been paralysed. Police forceshave been reorganised.Aeeording toa JIC report the enemy is eoneen-trating ind intensifying his nav l effort oneataloguerteierence:kyf4ligsise typesof small26escort draft and to types of u-boats incor-porating new technical equipment, improved antidetection devices and higher submerged speeds.The small battle units include explosive motor-boats, larger u-boats, one-mar torpedoesand swimming saboteurs. The enemy is energetic:aly training and producing these types ofoffensive weapons in increasing numbers tooperate against our communicatios in the lowCountries. The present maximum effort to beexpected from air-launched flying-bombsdoes not exceed 40 in 24 hours and this ratecould not e sustained. when further groupsbecome operational this maximum for one daymight rise to 60 or 100. The maximum recentlyof attack by V.2 for any one day againsttargets in England and on the continentcombined has so far been 22, and the sustainedaverage much lower than that. H maximum of30 rocket launches in one day might beachieved with a sustained effort of 15 to 20a day.A C.I report from the American 6th Army Groupdated l8th Oct.states that on 27th Sept.a Lieutenant of the 45th Division wasapproached by a French civilian hao told himthat Tendon was unoccupied. the civilianstated that he was a French captain working forthe Strategic Services Section (presumablyOSS). The company commander, acting on thisinformation, sent a 12-man patrol into thetown. The town was found to be occupied bythe Germans and only one man got back. AnAmerican colonel was rerorted by the 7th Armytatalogie Reference.Kv/4/195 chauffeur who was227later found to be a milicien acting as aGerman spy through the interception of a letterwhich he wrote to his wife. The rimerican 7thArmy reportt that a usually reliable informanthad given it as his opinion that the Nazishave definitely organised underground resis-tance to the invading allied forces but thait will cease as soon as Germany is completelyoccupied. The Naiis reaise that when thefighting ceases the only desire of ghheGerman people will be to be left in peace.Consequently any underground activity will bevery unpopular. Fanatical Nazis have been toidto lie low for 6 months when it is hoped thatthere will be considerable discontent and ill-feeling against the occupying forces.Two German generals discussing guerilla warfarein Germany agree that they do not believe inthe possibility of the successful or widespreadpartisan warfare for which the German peopleare quite unsuited. The peasants in particu-lar would not join in Ramcke, the defenderof Brest, seems to think differently but thisis not of course surprising knowing the typehe is. The other day he asked his servantwhy he was alway's doubled up. +he servantreplied that he had had two ribs removed.Ramcke answered "That is no reason. why A ladof 18 should be unable to stand upright, evenwithout any ribs at all ".Corcoran of the High Commissiorer's officein S.Africa was brought down by Ede. He talkedin a very interesting Nay about the future.He thought that everything was in the hands ofcafalbgueeferenee:KK4/fg KKA4/19 they played their28cards cleverly. The key of the situation wason the Rand where both the United Party and theNationalists were angling for the votes ofthe Rand miners. Conditions brought about bythe war had in many ways reacted in our favoursince it had brought Afrikaans into touch withthe towns and factories. Everywhere thishappened they almost invariably became pro-British. The Dutch hurch was perhaps the mosthighly nationalist institution. It endea-vours to keep the peasants in ignorance,encourages the speaking of Afrikaans, to theexclusion of the English tongue, and producesanti-British propaganda. As soon however asthe peasants get awayfron away rom the village life andtaste the pleasues of the town they areinclined to drop their religion. At the momentthe church is having an uphill fight. It isa curious anomoly that the less religiousthe S. Africans become the more they are likelyto be pro-British. At the moment there is onlyone successor to muts,namely Hofmeyer. He isa clever man and a good speaker, but hasabeolutely no personality An attempt wasrecently made to build him up by sending himto visit the .African troops in Italy.His shorts and shirt however were so ill-fittingand he looked so ridiculous in his topee thatit ill take him some time to live this inci-dent down. Photographs of him were publishedin all the .African newspapers. Corcoranthinks it likely that Smuts will remain inoffice util his death. He is still the greatfigure in S. Africa and nobody eIse comes near hhim in influence and popularity. His wifeis slightly failing in health and if she diedCatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/195229this might have a great effect on Smuts.The memainder of his family are not much ofa support to him. He apparently gets acertain amount of intellectual stimulus fromthe Crown Princess of Greece with whom he hasa very strong platonic friendship. Thisaccounts for the agitation by Smuts in favourof British intervention in Ereece and supportof the Roy al f amily. Smuts apparently does aconsiderable amount of work on his farm ndhis existence there is somewhat lonely.Corcoran thinks that if the United Partybehaves st pidly and the Labour Party weredriven into the arms of the nationalists theGovt. might no longer have a majority and thedirection of ffairs might pass to the nation-alists. There is a possibility th t in suchan eventuality there would be civil war. TheBritish element would in that case almostcertainly ask for British intervention. Nobodyseems to know what in that case the policyof H.M.Govt. would be.I discussed with Corcoran our position. Hesaid that as Coetzee was dead and Baston wasretiring, de Villiers would aain take overthe police. He would.not hoever be able to dovery much until he got back tne divisioncaptured at Tobruk which consisted largelyof recruits from the police. These menwere thoroughly loyal and no real reorganisatioof the police or elimin tion of nationalistelements could take place until their return.Except for the fct that ne is one of about 10people who have direct access to Smuts, Lenton'Catalogue Reference:KVI4/19530position is rather weak. He gets on moderatelywell with de Villiers. enton is nowweverconsidered to be very indistreet. His wifeleaks, his daughter leaks, and his mistressleaks.orcoran thinks that Michael Ryde was unluckyin having a man like Pozner offered him byLenton as an informant. this man was anathemato the police and as soon as they knewwhatwas happening they got on to Michael rydeand were determined to run him out of business.Corcoran did not think that we could usefullysend out anybody else for the time being. usethought however that at some future date whende Villiers was well in the saddle and had gotthe police organised we might taetfully makesome suggestion to him if we thought it wasreally worth while. Far the most rellableperson in .Africa is Forsyth who deals withforeign affairs. He is thoroughly discreetand is judgment is good. Another man vorcoranthinks useful is a certain Major Ashton whois a very wealthy influential and knowledge-able man. Heis of Jewish origin. AShtonhas fin anced the censorship laboratory frombhis own pocket since the beginning of the were.There is little that he does not know aboutAfrica and all its leading personalities.He would be quite ready to assist if approachedat any time.Christopher Harmer has arrived back for a fewdays. He seens to be absolutely in line withall of us about the Nar hoom.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/195THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION233 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958. Ma 2000The D.G. has amost agreed to cussen runningrenegade section with Shelford and Seymer:D.G is I think worried about putting Cookienose out of joint.count CARADINI is to be the new ltalian Miniter here. The r.0. propose to give him diploatic cypher facilities but to force him todeposit his diplomatic bags atthe F.0.(ehave said that from the strictly securitypoint of view we weuld like to see his cypherdeposited and vetted for security but that wecould-not-say. that we thought in present-cir-cumstances there was much danger of valuableinformation going out through this channel. Iwas much more likely that suchinformationwould o.through the Swedes or bpaniaras.Epointed out that we are in rather a difficultposition. Either we allow theItalians to usepoor cyphers-and in-that-manner we becomeaware of what they are doing, but also run therksk of our enemies and allies knowingwhat passes between theAmbassador-and the Fto,If on the other hand we insist.o a securecypher we are in the dark,ourselves Can deal with the Situationat one end of the other.the ltalianswho are to come back to their old house, althoI believetheAmbassador" believe the Ambassador willybe at ClaridgesHarker called a conference of Ede, Ede,arry,myself arry myselfand Tim tiry. nfter much talk it was agreedthat Hiry should begin by- transferring his HQcalatogueyr tfalogngrefthee&r9pigs r9185 that it was desirablefor him to be in touch with SEAC HO in ordertoco-ordinate the Rangoon and Singapore DSOparties with C.I. planning. It might be thatamps would feel that the DSOs were SO muchpart and parcel of the whole CI set-up thatthey- would have-to be military until such timeas the .civil power took over. Lamps mightalsofeel that Airy should take on C.I. planningin general. I made it clear however thatI. did not think -that-or C. I. planning himshould hold himself uo in any way as being anexpert. India really had the knowledge but ifthey were not going to supply anyone Tim wasprobably-a-better starter than most.. Harrywas anxious about Tim being attached to the SEAC staff and thought he ought either to be inde-pendant-or-an-actual member; with properrank and position. I think he is right inthis. If finally Lamps wants to take Tim onhe will have to sever his connection with theGOC-Ceylon.D.G. has been to see Bridges who told himthat-he-had-seen-Cavendish-bentinck s-letterabout Capel-Dunn and wanted to explain thatCapel-Dunn was not interested in organisational matters but solely in the distributionof-intelligence. He mentioned that he hadheard that there was certain friction betweenourselves and S.IS and said that it had beendecided that ahigh-level committee should-investigate the affairs of othdepartments.The .suggested that possibly one singleindividual of sufficiently high standing mightbe-better-than--committee: Bridges'-seemed tothink that this wes a good ideaand also thatCalegterefererce.k94/i9s a suitable personto undertake the job.233November 7thA spy named LANGBEIN has apparently given himseup in Canad. le was landed by subm rine sometime in 1942 with a vireless set. He had$7,000 which had now become exhausted. Hesays that he never used his wireless set norcommunicated with the Germans by other means.There is some vague trace of him on ISOS.Courtney thinks he has caught a Hungarianspying for the Japanese. A man n amed BERCO-VITZ. The woman in the flat next door thinkshis behaviour peculiar and hears him tinkeringwith the wireless set. Hughes is setting thenecessary machinery up, although he says itwould be almost impossible for anybo y totransmit from BERCOVITZ'S flat. A certainamount of significance:has been attached tothis on account of a JMA wich indicate thatat onetime at any rate there had been a setin the possession of the Japs capable of trans-mitting information to Lisbon. Probably thisrefers to some emergency set which the apsmight well have had in the Embassy before thedeclaration of war.It appears that the Germa ns ve finallydecided to let VLASOV come out in the open andset up a committee of liberation, in Germany.the ommittee will conduct propaganda andrecruit for the eastern front. It was apparent-ly thought desirable to take this step inorder to reassure the Russiins in Germanythat they will not be het down by nything inthe nature of a compromise peace. The finalCatalogue Reference:ky/4/1igse] on the 2nd Nov.134Himmler and Vlasov had previously agreedon the course of action but evidently dconsiderable difficulty in persuading Hitlerwho was not anxious to take any step whichwould jeopardise the flimsy chance of coming-to terms with the hussians.A report from Italy dated 21.10 states that ttwo SD agents have confessed that they wereto organise a band of partis ns in the Bariarea. They had both been trained in an SDschool at Verona as saboteurs. tour additionalagents have been captured in the forward areas,one of whom had a political mission in someand another in Florence. In home itself 4 agenhave been arrested who were operating for theSD. Enquiries are in progress, to trace aP.38 aircraft which was taken from Pomiglianoairport on 13th October by a man claiming tobe an American Ist Lieut. and which has notbeen seen sinee. It is eonsidered possiblethat this is the enemy's handiwork as areport had already been received about a missionwhich involved the theft of an aircraft ofthis type, which was to be flown back overthe German lines.November 8thThe suggestion has been made to send over10,000 Dutch soldiers for training in thiscountry. What has really happened is tnatthe competent military authorities havedecided to evacuate all the areas between theMaas and the Waal and the consequence is thatthere is a considerable congestion in theCatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/195235immediate rear of the armies. We have saidthat while we mightbe abie to pass the amesof these people over the records ind examinedoubtful cases we cannot possibly do more.e also said thit in view of the LINDEMANN caseand others it is likely that we fey get asmall percentage O1 spies. We cannot hope atpresent to get much assistance out of the DutchSecurity Service. They have not really gotgoing.I told Thomas that he would probably in futurebe orking under Cussen, and that in some Nayshe might find it easier, since it ought to bepossible for him in future to go down to theDPP himself in sbead of being accompaniedalway s by Cookie. He seems quite agreeableto the suggestion.Brook-Booth is to go to Brussels at SHAEF'Srequest. The DG wants him to see wick beforehe starts. SurEF evidently wish to have astrong representation with Lepage and alsoith the Belgi n Govt."he D.G. held a meeting about renegades anddecided finally to set up a section underCussen which will be known as SLB3.At the Wednesday meeting Buster gave us abrief impression of his visit to Brussels. TheB. side of work is being done at present by theSCI unit although the intention had been thatthe I.B.staff would do it but they have notenough staff at present. The local LRE is atantwerp, run by Torry as chief intelligenceCatafgure ReYerence9avi419ss go on to the I.B.226staff at 21st Army Group who decide whatfurther action should be taken. Prisonconditions are. tremendous congestion, noprivacy for interrogations, no security, andnot enough clerical staff. Harmer's outfit isdoing excellent work. The great drawback isthe lack of any guidance or intelligence fromLondon. owing to the incompetence of the WarRoom, who do not send on the informationsupplied for use in the field-by this officand others. The same situation applies tothe American Army group, who have less experien-ce of their own todraw on and have a furtherbottleneck in the shape of Comm. Zee in Paris(known as "Comm zee Comme Za').Shelford said that documents found at buxem-bourg has thrown light on the identity ofcertain hitherto anony mous broadcasters forthe German radio. "Lancer" Nas apparentlyBaillie Stewart.Cecil mentioned that the the Adiralty had hada proposal from the F.O. that Spanish merchantships should be allowed to call at Britishports, a thing which has not been allowedsince the beginning of the war. Herbert saidthat this would mean that the cres would haveto be examined at LRC and that B.1L activitieswith Spanish seamen would start up again.Noakes said that NAUJOCKE, the chief thug inthe Venpo incident, was now at U20. He had comeas a member of the Austrian resistance mov ementbut so far his story appears phoney.Catalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/195237November 9thI attended a meeting at Kinnaird House, enthe subject of Swedish visitors. 1 said thatboth the Germans and Japs had links with the-Swedish General Staff, the visitors who camehere worked to their embassy, and that theAttaches included their remarks in their des-patches. These were sent out quite innocentlybut ultimately reached our enemies. If theretfore the services felt that there wasinformation to be picked upnin this country ofimportance it would be better tht thesevisitors were not allowed to come. The vieseemed to be that the visits should be post-poned, except perhaps those of certain timbermerchants who had already been sanctioned.I took Jenkins and Kellar to lunch. We dis-cussed Jenkins' political reports. Jenkinswas very insistent tha if politica. reportswere all bottle-neckee through Killern theyNOuld just be blue-pencilled if they did nothappen to agree with Killern's vie Kellarsaid that he thought it was important that inso far as it was possible Jenkins shouldget his reports discussed by BTE and PICME etc.If they vere agreed by all the principal partiethey would carry more weight. If on the otherhand certair portions of them vere not agreed,he should notify us. He apparently receivesreports prepared by the Egyptian police for theMinistry of the Interior. It does not alwaysfollow that these reports are ccurate. Theyare nevertheless the basis for action taken bythe Ministry of the Interior and in this senseCatalogufeereference:kV/4/19s criticism of thesereports35reports hs arisen in the past, I thinkprobably through a lack of appreciation as toprecisely what they are. There is no doubtthat Killern's reputation in Egypt is prettybad. It is more or less common gossip that hemade E1300 last year from his duckshoot. Every-one is asked to buy his cartridges through someofficial who acts for Killern. These are paidfor at a prohibitive price. Each person thenasked to the shoot is allowed to take awaytwo ducks. The remainder is sold at a con-siderable profit. Killern also has the reputa-tion of being a heavy gambler. Officials inEgypt are apt to criticise him for his attitudetowards the King. they think that he shouldsupport the King even though at times the lattemay attempt to aet in an unconstitutionalmanner.I saw Cavendish-bentinck after lunch andtook him Anthony's case against the Swedes. Hetook the view that the best course would be todropthe document obtained in the Ftalianpir Ministry on the Swedes at Stockholm withthe remark that it would found in Rome andmight perha ps interest them. This would h hav ivhave the effect of keeping them guessing. ASregards the naval questionnair he thought weshould ask Bertil for an explanation aboutthe question rel ting to maps. ne did notthink it would be possible at this stage ge to getthe authorities to turn out the Germans and JapsThis may be due to the fact that at the momentthere is some suggestion that Sweden sho ld beasked to join the allies and declare war onGermany and Japan.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/195239I talked to Cavendish-Bentinck about the mebtinof the JIC when Cawthorn's paper was discussed.I said that what Ihad meant to imply wasthat while a good deal of diseussion was goingon as to where there were to be JICs, whatseemed to me to matter much more was thatthere should be an efficient organisation toproduce the intelligencewhich the JICs wouldhave. to consider. I thought that the wholeMid East area ought to be considered s oneand that there ought to be a joint organisationof 5/6 and DIB. Cavendish-Bentinck seemedto think that something of the kind mightfollow if our relations ith 6 could be satis-factorily established, in this country.I saw Arnold Foster this evening. he tol ldme that the Bland committee had recommendedthat some adjustment should be made in therelations between 5 ind 6.. A copy of the wholereport had been sent to U. but he had beentold that it was-not for eireulation withinhis own dept. I gather however that the ques-tion of our relations with 6 had been discussedin a limited circle and that C and repliedagreeing to an enquiry. He had stated thathe did not wish in any way to prejudge the issuHethought that there were various alternatives,total amalgamation, the rump theory or the ACEproject. There were certain points howeverwhich he would like to make (a) he thought thatsome adjustment of the present'system wasnecessary,(b) he could not possibly agree tohaving two clandestine organisations operatingon foreign territory, (c) he thought the recordshould be amalgamated,.( (d) he could not agreeCatalogue Reference:KV14/195that the collation of C.I. should be doneby the Security Service along since it affectedtoo many other depts and indeed was a vitalpart of his own machinery. I pointed out toArnold-Foster that (c) was really the answerto (d). He would have the eomplete run ofall the C.I. records and ll the protection hewanted. As for the other depts. who wereinterested in C.I. we were already looking aftethem as far as it was necessary. it seemedto me rather amusing that at this later hourSIS should wake uptothe fact that the defensiveorganisation could be of some value to theoffensive. As adept. the Sections willhave nothing to do with Section V.,neither dothe majority of them regard us and in particu-lar the LRC as anything but an organisationwhose sole interest is to pry into their affairHad they accepted the protection thi we couldhave given them they might nave been pared fromaking many costly blunders. I told A-F thatI understood there was to be a high-powercommittee which was to look into the wholequestion of our relation I said that Ethought it would be far better for the enquiryto be made by one man who was more or lesssympathetic and had some general knowledgeof the running of our depts. he asked me whoI thought could possibly do this job. Weagreed that it was undesirable to have anyonefrom the E.0. We thought Creedy was too old.I then me tioned Findlater Steyart whothought was the outstanding chairman of thewar, a man of great experience, extremely soundand ready to take endless trouble to go intothe smallest detail. He had already nadCatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/195auexperience of the work of all govtdepts. and ttheirrelations withIntelligence Services, anhad impressed with hisinfinitepatiencehis powers of finding a solution and of extracting from all witnesses precise what theyhad+in-their-minds: A-Fsaid,he thoughtthatStewart was certainly an outstanding man andprobably as good as anybody who could be foundhinktherefore that if his name comes upit-will-atyleast-be-favourably-consideredSIS.A-r asked.me once more for a copy of my,roposalsfor the absorption-of Sections andIX by our organisation. f I said that Iwas! ina difficult position in giving him this becausin nfaetmyown-Gh own-hief-did-not agree-ith-manyOf the proposals which I had made. It wastherefore rather difficult for me to commit myself to paper. There Was no objection to mydiseussing-the-whole-question with him AE Asaid that if he could see this minute againhe would give it most ernest considerationandtrytoget tasneartoit,astherpossibt as near neartoit..as it. as he possiblyould. L doubt myself whether he Nill ever>stomach the para.. about our putting in acirculatin section, although as. T pointedout-to-him-itwas-doing--nothing more-thaninserting in his office a few chaps with MI5experience, who would have the right to makedemands upon the outstations and giveus fullparticulars-as-to-how_they_obtaintheirinformation. I told A-t quite bluntly thatwe were sick and tired of talking through a;bottleneck, which was-not straight one:but. uatafhaPeRetirkace-sarfssrew. Catafogue If anythinggot.THIS IS A COPYUNOER4ROF OF tHE PUBLICACT 1958Mou 2eodthrough atalr it came: out distorted at theother end. We had suffered from this for 5years-and-all-ne-+ere-reallyasking-as-for-theright to talk direct to those who wer'e to becalled upon. to do the job. Had we for examplebeen able to makecontact With the ST representative. in Lisbon-the-endless-stream-ofblunders from which we had suffered might havebeen avoided. They arose from the fact thaourrequestswere either-nottransmitted-atall, transmitted wrongly or without sufficientbackground. The result had been lamentable.aGerman-capturedir Frange,sent back here some time ago from the fieldby: SIS. We - ereasked ere asked to interrogate him 1attheL LRC as ST wishedto empfoyhim, andheapparently was willing to or for theme! Ashe had a French background we stretched a pointand alowed nim to be sent to the LRC.Ihaveleft- him there-for- efor-5iweeksand andonlyafterrepeatedrequest's have at last removed him.Novembermle l0thThe D.G. held a meeting with endal,D D.P.P.MiSs Nunn, Cussen, Dick Butler and myself: Thepurpose wasto get -Kendal-to-let-one-of-hisofficers work under Joe Stepehenson in in FarisKendal began S one might expect by digging hrstoesin He seemed to think that the whole-business-oughtitochave-been-aonducted-fron-theYard. It was pointed out to him however thatthey would have to work under SHAEF and thatthey theymight haveto go might go forward with cheTForce. che T Forceteisacatheerefehreakerenqlggno-eventually_agreedthat whoever went should SO to speak be struck243off the strength of the police. de seemed tothink that Burt's people were not uite of theright status, tat they were seconded aind thatthev ougnt rely for the purposes of thisjob to be cart of the Army: in the field. e-sid that Ne had lready made arrangementsabout suspense commissions, that we could easilyput them into uniform. "urthermore that at themoment we only required the services of one man.1 said that I thought that one cf Bulrt'speople ould be very ready to go. Kendalthoght he had better Cisciss the matter ithBurt, to hich I hesrtily igreed. Burt E knowis quite satisfied about the arrangement andsees no diificulty whatever. ile thinks it-extremely imortant, that the cises should berun from this office under Lilssen's direction.Miss Nunn was very insistant ab uit final pre-senttion of the case being done by the police.Newsam had tiken this view nas he thoilgnt thatrenegades should be dealt with as common crimin-als and net have the glamour of spies. Icannot see very mch difference myself. If aman is a traitor he is atraitor, "hether niscase is presented by the police or the military.sure has been giving 3 certain amount oftrouble. She has written a book of her experi-ences with us and also with the Germins. "heis proposing to get it. "iblished. Mugceridyehas han 2 nord with her but his not succeeded ingetting the LSS. I celiev: she nas been talkedt.o by BSM. I suggested to TAR that they mightrut some tame iblisher and in that. wayobtin the MSS. This Old not however reventhecatalogueRefereneekv/o1g5thin heCataloguel acin nor ifshe had stayed here Wr uld it have been possiblequu22to prevent her giving. the MSS for publicationin eric3.Patton is apparent.ly doine very well and ithas been decided to develop the offensive allalone the front instead of waiting until theport of Antverp is in full swing. A detiniteattem. t is to be made to finish the war in theNest y the zlst Jan. it 1S thought thatthere IS a reasonsore chance of doing this.ittle progress has been made with thesweeping of the Scheldt but i$ is thought thatthe port. of Antierp may be getting going bythe end of November.ORIGINALTHisACOPYIN3(4THEUNDERRETAINEDOFACT1958PUBLICRECORDSCatalogue ReferenCe:KV/4/1952482COPY3CT1958.Nevember IZtAI had a meeting ith TAR, Herbert, Buster andKellar. I told them ill tait as far as L couldsee there a.S likely ti be an enuiry into therelations beteen ourselves ind SIS, either bya high-powvered committee or possibly by a singleindividual, like Findlater. In any event itseemed to me desirable tht we should get ourminds clear on a. hole number of questions thatwould undoubtedly crop up., that, for examul<l we say to the H.O. sustestion that, ivewould be sp.lit into home ana foreign, thatour foreign activities should go to SIS andour home activities to the i.O.from .i.0. we in factderive most of our norers. Our first anserwold be that the division between home andforeign was the:cief evil from Which we hdbeen suffering during the whole yar.. e hadall of us come to the conclusion, including bis,tcatatogue Reiferercek/4/95 ridiculous barrier.Secondly e thought that espicnage, suoversivemovements and security vere one ind indivisible.Thirdly ae thought it was generally inadvisablefor an office like the Security Service to beattached definitely to any one department sinceit had to tender advice to all depts. If it veretied uo ith any particular one its advicewould be rezarded 28 prejudiced. Fourthly Aeh-d very definite commitments for the fightingservices and ve nad in fact planned the tholC. I. for the second front in addtion to supplying some 30 people. A very good example toquote in connection "ith advice to govt.depts.would be the visitors ban. He had on thatoccasiontaken the view wnici ultimately pre-vailed and which wa.s diametrically opposed tothe H.O. view. At the outbreak of var it masK'S leaning torards the H.u. that, got him wrongwith the Services and to a large extent resul-ted in his downfall. Herbert undertook to ro-duce a paper on this matter ind also to raiseother points on which we should have furtherdiscussion. There is for example the questionof RSS, the question of Mid East, of ecialmaterial, of whether Ne should nave a pice onthe Y.Board, and lstly our DSO points. allthese are matters on rahich ve should tryand steak with one voice.I had n. talk with Gros n about the SilLestionto re-open the mails from this country andfrom Arerica to Ilberated territory. Grog.intells me that there "ill be 100% censorship andtesting for secret ink igiingt a. watch listand also in the cases of any suscicious lockingtexts. Grogl thinks the idea a good one sincetheatalbgueireterenoe:kvt4195lici materialthat the sitution is quite out of hand. Once247postal communication is re-established, it willincadditiontocbeing contrary by army regulations, be contrary to D.R.S. to carry letters.I mentioned to Gragan that I thought the mailsof allied armies here should be looked atfairly carefully sinee we ere expeeting 10,000Dutchmen and probably as many Belgians backin this country before long. It was notunlikely that there would be a small sprinklingof spies amongst them.TAR, Herbert,Buster and I had a meeting aboutthe future of the War Room. It seemed to usdesirable that we should Let Dick have our viewsfairly positively when he returns. T- who nadbeen over to see me earlier today, said thathe was not altogether in agreement with Diek.He thought that we should be making a mistakeif we do not give nominal control of the Warroom To C.. He argued that ultimately ISOS wasthe only sure source, that ISK had an operation-al value and that its security was in the handsof .backed by the PM. Any attempt thereforeto lessen G's eontrol over Most Seeret Soureesis probably doomed to failure. T-R thought that"ile making the gesture to C. somebody from ourdept. should be placed in charge of the WarRoom. He told me privatelythat he thoughtBuster would be the erson. Personally I donot agree with T-Rs views that the only suresource of information was ISOS. In fact we hadthrough interrogation of large numbers ofpeople established bey ond doubt almost all thefacts relating to the organisation and personal-ities in the Abwehr and SD. Our records there-fore were basically as sound as the ISOS index,ardatatogue Relerence:k\/4/195r more comprehensive.ueSecondly I was opposed to conceding the principal that the War Room should be an SH concern.We had fought strongly against this. We haddemonstrated beyond all question or doubt thatCI in the field had to be carried largely bypeople of MI5 experie ee and what was beingdone in the field therefore should have itscounterpart at home. To get over the difficul-ty I thought that the War Room should be underSHAEF control. The work would be done inboth depts.but SHAEF would be responsible.Buster thought there might be a small committeeconsisting of a re resentativ of SHAEF,MI5,MI6and OSS. SHAEF would be in the chair andultimately responsible to the head of the CIstaff in the field. Various other alternativesuggestions Nere put up. These will be notedin a memo by Buster hich we shall have todiscuss with Dick.Thomas came to see me about the ease of a /Wwho has confessed that he was givena mission bythe Germans. The man is a gunner. There isreason to think that he is mentally deficient.Peter Loxley has replied in the case of HARPIsaying that Codrington and Inspector Smith ofS.Y. have expressed themselves as being satis-fied that there is no security interest in thecase. If we have any information to the contrarythey would be glad to have it. It is of coursequite ridiculous that vodringtonyshouid behandling a matter of this kind. He has no know-ledge of investigation and no real facilitiesneither had he any background. Had we beeninterrogating HARPLEY we should probably haveCatalogue Reference:KVI4/195249put him and his lady friend on check in orderto test their reactions. Had a case such asHARPLEY'S arisen in any other Govt.Dept. weshould undoubtedly have been called in.I understand that odrington has sent HARPLEYback to wadrid. He had no right to do thisuntil we were satisfied about the case and asa matter of courtesy we should at least havebeen consulted.The D.G. hax seen Bridges. He gave him somenotes about the organisation explaining care-fully that they were only a few thoughts passingthrough his mind and that if he nere asked toput up a memo on the future of the office hemight have dohe something very different. Itseems that Findlater Stewart was due to onBridges today but for what purpose is not knownBridges has I think already written to Cadogansuggesting that Findlater should conduct theenquiry.The murderers of Lord Moyne are Eliahou Hakimand Eliahou Tsoury. There has been discoveredin a Cairo hide-out two British uniforms, twoA.B. 64s, one Navy pay-book, 6 blank leavepasses, and 14 cubes of cordite, 6 cases of TNTand 612 rounds of Luger ammunition. the two menwere seen in uniform on Oct. 27th. Other membersof the Stern Gang are said to be still at largein Egypt. F believe that the PM has beenconsiderably moved by the assassination of LordMpyne and that in consequence he is not quiteso favourable towards the claims of the Zionistsas he was.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/195soThe Tirpitz. has been sunk and is Lying onthe bottom with her keel out of the war some 4miles north of Tronsoe. >he has been hit by3 12,000 lb bombs dropped by -ancasters.-Complications have arisen in theBrutus caseowing to the arrest of Violette in France andthe fact that Victoire may have to be deportedto France. "e may nave to vind the case up.When Burt and Cussen went to interview ZIGZAGand to inform him that we proposed to dispensewith his services they found in his house thenbtorious MeCartney, nogot got L0 years forSoviet espionage. Z44ZAG implied that he haea guest and suggested that they should meet inthe bedroem. Burt however pushed his ray intothe sitting room and found his old friend Mc-Cartney. ZIGZAG undoubtedly got the impressionthat we were aware of his assocition with M.and that it was on these grounds that we erereally getting rid of him. He admitted to usthat he had discussed with M. the writing ofhis book. ZIBZAG accepted his dismissal anddid not substantially dispute that the groundsfor it were well-founded. We shall probablylet him have a further E1,000 and two ameraswhich he brought over with him on his last trip.The Germans did not keep their appointment withSniper last Saturday,probabl owing to badweather. Father returned to this country lastAugust. It is now proposed that etransmitterin India shall be taken over by'a subagent andthat Father should be supposed to have returnedto this country prior to repatriation to Belgium.In this way his real and notional situation willCatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/195251again coincide. Father may have to resume letterwriting from this country. Meanwhile we haveheard that the Germans have a transmit ter waitinfor him in Belgium.Notwithstanding the position in the Treasurecase, the Germans seem to imporporate hermessages in their high command coinmuniques.The Germans state inter alia that reports on V2received by them show that extreme Lyserious damage as occurred in the Cambervell,Mitcham, Sidcup and Edmonton areas. This istaken almost verbatim from a Treasure re ortdated 25.10. which names these four districtsin the same order as they appear in the Germancommunique.V2 burst at about 8.30 pm on the 12th about20 miles up over Westminster. Pieces fell inCamberwell,Paddingtor and Victoria.SHAEE CI report for week ending lOth Nov. givesthe following information: The HQ of the GISis according to a captured agent gravely dis-satisfied with the work of its outstations.Tightening up has been ordered and periodicinstructions promised. there are two parachuteope rations in preparation in Belgium and France.The GIS in N.Italy has despatched agents towork on the French Mediterranea coast. thecapture of two S agents indicates that on theMoselle front a eontro+ group Girects theactivities of 4 groups ach of about 40 of ficersand men including 15 Frenchmen, each grouphaving its own sphere of operation. Two new typeof line-erossers have a eared, assassinationCatalogue Reference:KVI4/195952agents and convict agents. Two have beencaught who had an assignment to assassinatetwo Belgians described as enemies of the Reich.The latter class are mainly ex-Vichy prisonersestimated at 150 S trong based at Strasbourg.The Direction General des Services peciaux andthe HQ of the FFI have now reached an agreementaccording to which the FFI will nave a SecurityService which will be called Service Nationaleand will accept direction from the Bureauxdes Securities Militaires. I BSM will have theresponsibility of presenting all security casesto the military tribunals.November 14thAnthony and I went to the JIC this morningwhen the question of Jap Embassies in neutralcountries was discussed. C. was anxious to seethe Japs kicked out of Stockholm. He saidtheir relations with the Finns were causing himserious embarrassment. Bevan on the other handsaid that he had a very good line runningat Stockholm whieh was putting his stuff direetthrough to *okio. It was pointed out that inso far as security in this country was concerthe Swedish attaches here would always be adanger as long as both the Germans and the Japshad access to information in possession ofthe Swedish General Staff. The menacewould notbe halved by simply kicking out the aps. Itwas felt therefore that on balance the best thinto do was to leave matters as they are untilStage A. and then press for the removal of theJaps.Catalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/195253I talked to Bevan afterwards. He said thatSEAC did attach a certain importance to decep-tion channels in regard to Japan. He agreedhowever that it was open to some doubtas to whether any channels west of Suez were ofvery great use.Burt tells me that Cookie is going to Brusselsto see the local JAG. on the COURLANDER case.This is of course another insut to the CIDofficers. Skardon should be the one to go andin any case Cookie should not go without him.have spoken to Cussen who thinks that vookiewill have to go but it may be possible to getSkardon there as well.I saw Arnold-Foster. I handed him a copyof my note and read him out a letter which Lhad prepared in which I stated that 11 was givinghim this information quite unofficially andoff the record since it was nmerely a cockshyof my own, in an attempt to find some betterline of demarcation between ourselves and Sec-tion V. L quite realised that if you had adividing line at all there was band to be adertain amount of over-lapping and frictionuut thought the one i was suggesting was atleast a better enehthan at present. L wasconsidering the matter firstly in the event ofa united organisation being thrown out by theoliticians and secondly as a dividing linewhich would have to exist even within a unitedorganisation. foster still seemed worriedabout the suggestion that a Section should beseconded to SIS which would virtually givedirectionsto outstations.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/195Foster still seemed worried about the suggestiothat a section should be seconded to SIS whichwould virtually give directions to outstations.I said that I could see no real difficultyin this since both C and his presentativeabroad would have the right of veto. Such anarrangement owever would ensure that theman on the spot knew precisely what we wanted,and that we were informed of the circumstancesunder which we obtained the answers toour questions. I think Foster agreed aboutour definition of CE and I think that he wasperhaps more inclined than before to agree thatanything outside this definition was a matterfor the offensive services. He seemed verykeen that if possible we should both advocateat any rate in the first instance a unitedshow, but was afraid that we might run outon this idea. I said that we had only beenappalled by its difficulties, but that I, andI thought also Dick ind TAR, were quite re adyto support the idea. I could not however sayas much for the DG since I knew quite weIlthat he would not.November 15thWibroe came to see me and I showed him a notethat I had had from the FO. they are definite-ly interested in the Danish approach butcannot give a final answer just at thismoment. Probably in the course of a month orso they will have a better idea how Denma rkis going to come into the picture. They willthen reopen the matter. Haigh of the FO wasvery pleased to meet Wibroe who has been ableCtatatogue ReferenceekV/4/195about Danes and Danishasspolitics. it is important when the matter isre-opened that the head of the Danish ResistancMovement sees somebody of fairly high standing.November l6thI had a meeting with TAR,Ede and niry thismorning. It has been agreed that Airy shouldbe attached to SEAC as our Security LiaisonOfficer. CASS Formerly of this depth beenappointed GSOL,IB riry is wanted asadviser on Civil Security matters and Nill beresponsible for co-ordinating his DSO staffswith the C.I.staffs. Mean while Ede hashad a meeting ith Felix. It seems th that he hasgiven up the idea of SCI units for Burma,buthat he is proposing to send them to Malaya.It looks to me as if Fergie had failed to getthe services of anyone locally for the Burmese.campaign and that in any case perhaps it wasa bit late in the day. The SCI units are togo forward with the armies and to remain aspart of the CI staff until the area is handedover to the civil government It is by nomeans clear what these units are going to con-tribute or what qualifications they have.c attended the RSLOS conference. They hadalready had a meeting in the morning and haddecided that in the ne r future there shouldbe only 4 R.0.S,3 for England and one forScotland. they ould have a residence inthe centre of their area but no office. Theywould travel about seeing C.C.s for 3 weeksand then return to head office for a week.A record of all letters sent out to COsaffecting their areas would be kept at headCatafogue ReiekenteEeKV4/19S study. they would als254aquaint themselves in London with any newdevelopments in order that this might beimparted to C.C.s. It was anticipated thatthey would not be able to visita C.C.more thanonce every three months. I said that Irather ondered whether C.C.S would t ke thesame view of an RSLO if he had not got anoffice. I thought that they rather liked tofeel that the RSLO belonged to them ratherthan to head office and that they could whewhen necessary use him as a stick to beathead office. RSLOS seemed to think thatprovided the visiting officer performed hisjob properly the right atmosphere could becreated. I then said that I thought C.C.Swould probably want to discuss cases butthat on these the visiting officer might beanything up to 3 weeks out of a ate and in anycase would not have the same knowledge asthe section officer. It seemed to me thatthere was a risk that in consequenee he mightbecome rather a bore, just one of those ose:peoplewho come around to talk but having reallynothing to say. Phipps seemed to agree withthis and that special care woudd have to betaken to see that RSLOs were well informedI then raised the question of factory securityI suggested that this might becarried by R.0.swith a small section representing the 5services in London. Col.Barry thought that thiwas well vorth considering.I am told that a meeting was held toda todiscuss Dick's suggestion about the reorganistion of the War Room. It has apparently beenturned down flat, and there is to be anCatalogue RefereNCe:KVI4/195Albert Hall meeting at Ryder St. tomorrow.Dick has just arrived.The technical dviser on material productionat MAP, a certin Major TEED, aas expressedthe view officially that there were! four gravedefects in the air clauses of the Treaty ofVersailles, namely Va) Germany was allowedto maintain, operate and build commercialand civilian aircraft. (b) there were noeffective provisions to prevent German air-craft firms from starting or joining aircraftbusinesses in such neutr 1 countries asSwitzerl nd, ,Denmark and seden. (c) Germanaeronautical experts were allowed to exercisetheir calling in neutr l countries and evenin those of the allied and associated powers.(d) German firms were not revented fromstarting commercial air lines either withinor more particularly outsidet the Reich. thisall seems very sound and I hope some competentperson will take note It is equally desirablto keep our own industry clear of theLACHMANNS.November I7thDick arrived yesterday evening and dined ithme. I told him that there was likely to bea certain amount of opposition to his plan.He feels however that there is an over-whelmincase and that SLAEF are quite determined thatsomething should be done. It'will not do forhim to go back and say that no very drasticchange is contemplated. I told him aboutour meeting and showed him a copy of buster'scatafogueReterencetkvr4rigsu: suggestion of a562small co-ordinating committee might or. Igather that Kenneth Strong has turned downthe suggestion that Dick should be placed incharge of the War loom. strong has woken upto the fact th t U.I. is going to be a majorproblem, tht he does not know much about thejob himself, that Sheen knows still less andthat his reputation will depend a good dealon Dick. He nevertheless is aware ofthe bargain he has made with the D.G. He wantsto get it modified. It is I think importantthat Dick should come back for any discussionsas regards the future relations between 5 and6Apart from this he could I think be spared forthe time being. The latest interpretation ofSHAEF is "Should have had army experiencefirst". SEAC is "Supreme example alliedconfusion".We had a full dress meeting this morning withick,Buster,TAR,Herbert and Joe Stephenson.We went over all the ground in order toprepare Dick for his meeting today with SIS.The meeting took place and was chaired by C.Viv,Cowgill, iv,Cowgill,Arnold-Foster and the commissarwere also present. the wind was slightlytaken out of Dick's sails at the beginningby a st atement that had he not come over SISwere going to ask him to do so in order thathe might consider the pian that they had for-mulated for the German War room. Dick saidhe would be very pleased to consider thisplan, but that he must make it clear thatSHAEF were not satisfied with the presentarr eements and that they wished to exerciseCatalogue Reference:KVI4/195289some easure of control over any future organ9isation that was set up, since they regardedit as an integral part of SHAEF machinery..appeared to dissent. He doubted whetherhe could submit to SHAEF'S jurisdiction.suppose what he means is that if SHAEF werein control he would have to abrogat hisresponsibility for Most Secret Sources.Thishe could not do as he has a mandate from thePM. The truth is of course that/section V.had performed their task properly such asituation would never have arisen. Thearmies in the field would have had confidencethat the work was being done properly and wouldnot wish to interfere in any way. PersonallyI think it is essential that there should besome sort of SHAEF control if only to settlethe differences between 5 and 6. I gatherthat the meeting was not hostile but it W Spacked with people who of course were quiteunaware of what had been going on withintheir own organisation. the only person whomight have known would have been Felix whowould have been incapable of appreciatinghow bad it was.Kellar brought wuy -hompson to see me. hehas been SIME'S DSO in Istanbul since Act. 41.There is no doubt that he worked up anextremely close liaison with the Turks, that hhe has through his efforts obtained photographsand articulars of il1 aliens passingenhroughTurkey, quite apart from other informationrelating to German activities and to therunning of agents. this outpost of SIME hadserved an extremely useful purpose. We askedCatalogte"Reference:KA4/19 Roberts in conversatiooowith Marhsall-yornwall and Felix had decidedto give it up. Thompson said that this wasonly subject to our approval. Roberts hadarranged with Cowgill to hand over to SIMEofficers who would continue the work. theonly difference was that it would come underISLD snstead of SIME. SIME would have theright to communicate direct with these officerssending a copy to ISLD. In other wordsonce more ISLD should get the kudosfor what some other organisation had done.I said that it was quite impossible for usto objeet in this ma tter exeept unofficially.The only people who could veto this schemeould be the organisation to which SIME wasresponsible,namely the Defence committee andultimately the Resident Minister. SIMEshould say that for the time being at anyrate their organisation should continue.It had worked efficiently and given the armedforces the products they required. As longas there was a military responsibilitytherefore they could not carry out any change.Ultimately any such change would be dependenton the re-organisation of intelligence in theMid East as a whole. t was agreed that Wrshould communicate in this sense with Roberesand urge him to seek the support of aget.Thompson said that he had seen the Chief ofthe Turkssh Secret Service before he left.The latter had made a suggestion to him thatthey should have some exdh ang'e of informationon Hussia. Turkey regarded Russia as hergreatest danger and was anxious that weshould keep each other informed. Thompson saidCataloghe Refekence:KV/4/195ec attitude but said261he would inform his superiors when he got toLondon. Obviously I think this is a matteron which it would be difficult for us to collaborate without gruve risk of incurring the dis-pleasure of the r.0. I explained to thompson ththat whatever safeguards we e instituted weshould have to take it tha ultimateiy thefact that we vere collaborating with the turkswould readh the Russians Who were extremelytouchy about our relations with urkey. "partfrom this there was probably very little thatthe Turks could tell us. we on the other h ndmight be in a position to tell them a greatdeal, but we should be unable to for obviousreasons. In other words the li ison as far aswe were concerned.oul be to some extent one-sided.Brook-Booth came to tell me that he had beenoffered a job by UNRRA at 013,00 a year atLuxembourg, with expenses. He had turned thatdown. He had now been offered a similar jobin Brussels at ,500 plus expenses amountingto something like 12 a day. He said he did notwish to take the job on even though it Nasmore lucrative than the SHAEF job. He didhowever wish to know whether the SHAEF job wasa firm one and whether he would be given therank of Lt. Col. without which he did not thinkhe could operate. The matter was urgent asLehmann was having a meeting this afternoonand wanted Brook-ooth's answer by 5.3u. Easked B-B to stall things and told nim tospeak to Dick.ICatatlogue ReferenceikVt4/19s sources that Dick'sproposal about the WarRoom is being approachedfrom the angle of being one more attempt by.MI5 to penetrate the continent. This iscertainly V.Vs view.November l8thV.V. rang me up this morning to say that hewould very much like to see Dick. He was notsuite sure whether he would attend thisafternoon's meeting or'not. He could do soif Dick wished him to. The troubl le was thathe was never kept very au fait with what wasgoing on. He thought obviously that he Nouldhave to take a greater hand in future eventsand it would be desirable for him to visitSHAEF and Brussels. He thought Dick wasrobably not aware that plans had been m adewith regard to the German War toom, and thatthe present War Room was really only improvisedto deal with the transitory period. I toldV.V. that I had not actually inspected theorkingS of the war room my self but that ashe knew we had representatives there from whomI heard a certain amount. It seemed to methat an immense amount of time was wastedby all the officers who were forced to dotheir own registry work and that in fact somnename,e.g.that of a Belgian who had turned upin France and had subsequently gone to Germany,had to be carded in 3 places. also told V.V.that as I understood the position his officersno longer consulted their own main registryfor German n ames and indeed for a good manyother names, the reason being that they nevergot any results. On the other hand it seemedto Catalogue me that Reference:kV/4/195 Colinsection which dealt963with the ISOS Index was working well. I alsotold him that we were doing an immense amountof work but that in fact the results of ourlabours were not re aching the front becausethere was nobody in the war room sufficientlycompetent to realise the significance of thingsV.V. was obviously in total ignorance ofevery thing that had been going on. He didhowever mention one incident which had beenbrought to his notice by that he descrubedas a rather undesirable channel, namely T-RI am sure that he does not realise that it isquite impossible to patch up the war room andthat the undamental troubles are lack of aregistry and lack of experienced personnel.Brook-Booth tells me that Lepage has beenpushed out. We do not know the circumstancesTAR Ede Herbert and Teresa came to talk aboutGib. and irby-reen, who is obviously in arather nervy state, probably due to the factthat he has been on the nock for nearly 3 yearsIt seems clear that he must either get along spe 11 of le ve or else be sent to anotherst tion. We c ame to the conclusion in theend that probably David Schegr could holdthe fort during his absence but that ifthis were not possible Michael -yde should go.Paillole or his suceessor,sine I believe hetoo has been given the sack, is being informedabout Brutus and is being asked to sidetrickany enquiries about the latter's escape fromprison. Meanwhile Victoire is to remain here.Treasure is now employed near Verdun and as farsatalogueeReferencekv/4p195:r obscure telegifrom the field, has aroused some suspicion inthe minds of 12th AG. The latter have beenreferred to bykes for full particulars.Gelatine has been given a fresh questionnaireand some words of encouragement.Capt.Gache of M. M.I. I. 14d, Brian Melland andField-obinson are continuing with the caseof WENGENFELD, whose story has recently beenstudied by Columbine. columnbine has pointedout several discrepancies and thinks that thewhole plan is impractical. It would be quiteimpossible for WENGENFELDT to gain access toHimmler's office. columbine thinks it possiblethat WENGENFELDI may have invented the planto win sympathy and pose as a hero. Litherway he stood to profit. If we turned the schemdown he would have the credit of proposing itwithout the onus of carrying it through. Ifwe accepted it and g the him the requiredfacilities it would be simple to return tohis country men and relate how he had hoodinkedthe British Secret Service into giving him areturn trip to Germany complete with car.Arrangements are being made for Columbine tointerview WEGENFELDT.Mail serv ce between Switzerland,us and UK hasbeen reopened since the lth Nov. This serviceincludes letter mail only and not parcels.Two of the beavers have put up quite aninteresting p per on the re-formation of theGerman I.S. after the last war. During theCatalogue Reference:KVI4/195last war the big industrialists had directedan industrial intelligence service which wasrun from neutral territory and it was theywho in 1920 formed the Deutsehe Uberseedienst.this was an official organisation which wasostensibly to acquire commercial informationto enable Germany to start up her export trade.It very soon became a cover for illicitactivities, which were organised by members ofthe German staff. Certain officers from thelast-wa: Intelli ence Depth, known as Abt.3were given sinecure positions in variouscommercial houses enabling them to continuetheir intelligence activities. Foremost amongthe industrialists were Hugenberg,ThysserStinnes and Voegler, who undertook to supplytwo-thirds of the necessary fees while theGovt.found Govt. found the remainder. The ultimate controlin Germany was in the hands of 3 industrialistsand 3 staff officers representing the services.It is interesting to note that the air officerwas Capt.Goering. there is evidenee thatthere were many similar organisations operatingat this time, for instance the Ost dienst andthe Wirtschaftsdienst. Associated with thesewere the numerous simil r concerns such asche Wirtschafts Politische Geselischaft andmany groups of journalists who had amplemembers and cover to run secret reportingservices.Thor these organis nisations werepreviously thought to have worked index endentlythere are indications that they, were in someway linked. It is possible that the collatiorof their separate information took place in theNuntia Bureau, an office affiliated to theUberseedienst. At some date rior to 1920,Eatalogue REfereREPKv/angontro of theUberseedienst. Officials of the USD appearto have been on good terms with the nationalsocialists, probably because the latter wereat one time financed by the directors of heavyin ustry. Freiherr Freytag von Loeringhovenwas at one time nead of Abt. 2 of the Abwehrin this war and was reported as having beenliquidated in the July 44 Putsch. Goering wasone of the committee of 6 controlling theUSD. Before that date, and more activelysince, the position of the Abwehr vis a visthe SD has rapidly deteriorated and the wholeorganisation now comes direetly under Hammler.A Hill-Dillon report for November 4th statesproudly that since Day CL.investigationsin the Athens-Piraeus area have resulted inthe arrest of some 40 enemy agents,sub-agentsand contacts, and some 13 W/T sets, also asmall quantity of sabotage material.The Portuguese Govt. have quite spontaneouslydecided to hold WERTZ and his associatee fromLourenzo Marques against the release of alliednationals. this action seems peculiarin the light of Portugal having given theseGermans a safe conduct. I have suggested toSIS th t Stevens might be a good exchange forERTZ. Calude Dansey, witn whom I spoke saidhe would be glad to get back 2 Frenchman forone of the others.Jap B.J. indicates th the Japs are intendinto set up an office under led Cross cover inGeneva for the purposes oi espionage. both theycatalogue eReference.kVI4/9s to the conclusion217that Switzerland is a useful base from Nichto take action against British and Americanforces in France. I am trying to find outwhether this information ever reaches C.I.at SHAEF or whether anybody gets any reportsabout Germ n and Jap activities in Switzerland.Joe Stephenson has written an interesting reporton the War Ro.om in So far as it is possible foranyone to discover what goes on. Herberthas described it as a kind of jelly which oozesout between your fingers when you try to gripon to it and Joe concludes his report by sayingthat until the "ar hoom acquire or arepartly or wholly replaced by the quality andexperience of MI5 officers without whose workthey would be lost and the field be almostcompletely uninformed, their function is likelyto remain not merely unproductive but contra-eeptive.November 19thC.I. reports of the lst U.S. A.G. stated thatthe observance by German civilians of securityrestrictions imposed by the military govern-ment has been completely satisfactory.Local officials are reported to have strictlyenforced our proelamations and have co-operatedto the extent of arresting and turning over toC.I. persons discovered without papers or whoseresence in the area was considered suspicious.H test of reliability bf local informants was mamade in one area by checking their views onazis known to them against lists found atNSDAP HQ. In all eases the information agreedCatalogue Reference:KV/4/195substanti lly with that found on the party fileIt is further stated that early detection ofprominent Nazis by the military authoritiestends to loosen up potential informants whoare given a feeling of confidence. tt isrecommended that this should be done in allareas so that CIC enn gain information aboutprospective officials prior to their appoint-ment.In reading a CI report of the American 12th AGI found two entries for a man called de CORTEwho was wanted. It was clear firstly that thetwo individuals mentioned were identic l witheach other (though the americ ns had not linkedthem up) and secondly with Arm nde deCORTEwho has been under interrogatior at 020 forsome considerable time. there is clearly alack of co-ordination here. What is obviousfrom the two entires in the American report isthat the U.S. C.I.units have clearly gotinformation from some quarter or other aboutde CORTE which might be extremely valuableto us in dealing with his case hre.November 20thE had a long meeting this morning with Dick,Horrocks, Buster and TAR. Dick produced acockshy plar drafted by Tim Milne. AS a face-saving clause it was suggested, that a registryshould be set up on the lines of MI5. MiIneI think is quite convinced that this registrywill in fact have to be the RB registry. Thereis to be a special section for dealing withCatalogue Reference:KVI4/195969documents and another for preparing generaldirections. There is no doubt that all thejunior ranks are longing for us to take over.the chief trouble arises with the personalityof Felix.Dick is working towards certain agreed princi-ples which he wishes to have endorsed by C.nd the D.G. I have mrely stipulated th tn so far as it is possible it vould be undesirable to uproot Milmo,bird and Hart and placethem in another office. firstly I need them asa kind of advisory council, secondly they aredoing at least 25% of their work for D.Divisionand thirdly if some of them have to be movedit could only result in our giving less serviceto the front than we are giving at the presentmoment and also less service to thisdept. Edo not think that Dickquite realises the extentto which D.Division is a unit and that if youtake away all the principal heads of sectionsand put themsomewhere else the loss of efficiency is going to be considerable. The otherthing he does not realise is that unless Iam intending to write all the memos and decide11 the uestions of policy singlehanded orith TAR, many extremely dreary problemshich are nevertheless important to the office rnow and in the future are likely to go to thewall. This is not to say that we do notintend to do everything for the front thatwe possibly can, but when ve are asked todama e the efficiency of our own orgaisationand cut our contribution to the armies in thefield in order to cover up the deficienciesof Section V.I cannot help feeling a littleueReference:KV/4/195170Joe Lynch came to see me hisafternoon. Hesaid that George Burton hd resigned from theFBI in order to join the Army. This I amafraid will be a serious blow to Cyril and tous. Burton has always been extremely co-opera-tive. Joe thinks that Gannon will probablytake his place. [ne latter is hear not apatch on burton. He is a pleasant little manbut not one who will likely accept responsib-ility.The Jap in Berlin has spent an evening withGoebbels. The Jap seems to have been underno illusions that he was getting a set pieceintended to set his mind t rest through anexpression of German confidence in their plansfor stabilising the situation on the variouswar fronts and through a frank revelationthat Germany was anxious for a politicalsettlement vith Aussia. Loebbels pparentlyinteimated that Vlasov's army had to be usedentirely for interni purposes and would notin any way hamper Germany's fitire foreignpolicy.I dined with Holiis, who is very worriedabout Lurcy. Curry wants to continue dealingwith ISCOT. Hollis feels that this must comewithin his section and that if anybody isto attend the meetings at SIS which Curry hasbeen attending it must be someone from Fiv.In this I think he is right but it is of coursea blow to the old man and he feels that hisnew born baby is being snatched from his arms.I met radgham fterwards, and had a short talkcatarogue Refererice:kv/pr95it working for PNE7thought I believe is not very happy. He wasobviously glad to talk about his work in 1939-40He wants to go back to Germany as soon as thispossible but there may be difficulties sincehis property will probably be in the nussian-zone. I thanked him for what he nad donein the past nd he seemed ple sed.November 21st+ne French have arrested FG.WODEHOUSE andhis wife,and Cussen is to go over to Paristo sort things out. this will precipitate somedecision in the HO as to how these chiractersare to be de lt with in future. I imaginethat this has come about quite naturally, TheFrench who were arresting all collaboratorswould naturally find it embarrassing to haveWODEHOUSE, so notorious a character, hanging.about in the Hotel Bristol and have doubtlessbeen criticised in conse uence. The matter mayin part be due to the resignation of Pailoolewho knew about WODEHOUSE and agreed to his beingleft at large. His successor may have differenviews.L was able to see Dick for a few minutes thisevening. His departure has been postponed tillFriday.He has to await the arriv 1 of Keith.This probably relates to Maunsell's future.Dick, in talking to RJ,told him that he didnot think he was going to get xi very good deal,apoint which RJ had I think already appreciated.Dick L think was rather inclined to urge himto pack ,but Ra not unnaturally replied"I have burned mny boats in the Mid East andCatalogue Reference:KVI4/19517?what do MI5 propose to do for me". ActuallyI do not think that we are under any particularobligation to RJ unless and until the uirmysay they no longer have any use for his serviceRJ I gather would like to have a permanent jobin this office and fancies himself as DA ifand hen Charles give S up. I told bick Lcould not see RJ in this office in any capacity.Were he prepared to take on something in thenature of DSO Singapore one might considerit.If he were y.here nearer he would undoubt-edly be intriguing against whoever was in char-ge. He has got much too big for his boots tosit still in an office like ours in peace time.Dick himself is I think determined not to takeon CI in Germany which Kenneth Strong Noulddoubtless like him to do. I told him that Ishould be delighted to see him back at anytime but if he thought he had pore of careerby taking a big job in Germany he was free tomake his own deeision. Personally thoughtHe would in the long run be making a mistake.He entirely agreed nd expressed the desireto return as soon as he could be released.Dick is putting up certain positive proposasto C and the Du about the Nar room. the DG istaking the attitude that it is for SHAEF todecide and that he will not be left to wranglethe thing out with C. C.I told Dick that wewere giving as much service as we possiblycould to the front but that if we vere to beuprooted and stuck in Bryanstone Sg. we shouldnot be able to do so much and that the efficiency of B.Liv.as BL whole would be seriouslycaalogfeReference:kvg4ls95ontemplate letting223B.IB,bird and Hart pass over in toto to theNar Room if we all moved into one building.This to my mind would be the rightstep bothfor now and in the future. D.Div.and SectionVcould move in first, to be followed immediatelyby the rest of SJ andBroadway and finally bythe registry.November. 22ndAt the Wednesday meeting Herbert said that anew series of Ostro reports were now coming infrom West Africa, which seemed to have morefoundation than his previous efforts. Hissources are probably air-liner crews andpassengers.Herbert also spoke of the case of GOLENKO. Heis a White lussian, rabidly anti-bolshevik,who will work for anyone so long as it isagainst the Soviets. He had worked for theGermans for 4 years intercepting Russianradio-telephone traffic and is an expert onthe subject. He was left as a sta-behind agentin Paris, and was taken over by the Americanshey have brought him to the U.K. and installedhim at Claridges. He is 65. ve propose tohave him examined at LRC, but unless there isa strong case for his retention he will be sentback to ParislIan Wilson entioned the case of MIERSEMANN,who has been used by the Germans to runcaputed SIS and SOE agents as D.As for theother side.Catalogue Reference:KVI4/195auTeresa Clay mentioned a captured SD agent,a Swiss called NAGEL, who is in our hands inParis. This mas an extensive knowledge ofthe SD organisation, and of sabotage dumps inthe Black Forest,Alsace etc. He had a missionto blow up pipe lines. It is not certain yetwhether we can bring him over, as the Americanswant to keep him on the spot as a referenceand guide to the dumps.Hughes said th t there seemed to be anincrease of V.2's over the last week, 24 outof 30 reaching the greater London area, and12 of these landing round the docks. In somecases propaganda leaflets had come down afterthe arrival of a rocket.Burt and Skardon are going off to Paris withJoe Stephenson on Friday. Burt as a Majorand Skardona a Captain.T Learn from B-W that the general tendency inSection V is to plump for an SIS representa-tive as he rd of the War hoom. I thinkC. has been prompted in this matter by T-Rand Felix, for different motives. T-Rwants to exclude Felix and takes the viewthat SIS must control the secret sources andthat the ISOS index isreally the most impor-tant contribution. In this think he is wrong.The index is of course important but it isquite erroneous to say that any informationnot checked by ISOS has no real value, fromthe point of view of action. There are so manythings in fact w ich have been checked andcross-checked from interrogation reports thattafalogueReference:KV/4/195j it of no doubt whatever275There was a certain amount of argument as towhether the War room should deal not onlywith the Abwehr and SD but also with otherpossible underground mov ements. In so far asit may be possible Lithinkfbhaththeyoshoul ithinkfthat theyoshould dealwith everything affecting the liquidation ofthe Nazis in Germany, Section V. have handedover underground movements other than SD andAbwehr to Section IX who are putting theirqueries about Germans to Miss Dagot.Curry came to see me yesterday about the his-tory of the office whicn he is to write up.He was in some doubt as to the form it shouldtaketand felt that it would be difficult tomake up his mind until he got all the contri-butions. I said I thought he ought to mekeup his mind and guide the sections in thepreparation of the material. I was inclinedto think that he should rite up the intelli-gence of the organisation altogether i.e.he should state the position at the outbreakof war and show how each piece of machineryhad been created to meet the various contingen-sies as they arose.nOllis talked to me about the Ossewa Brandweg.He thought this ought perhaps to be an F. 3commitment. This is in a way a rather diffi-cult question. The main interest in the O.B.was that the Germans were controlling it andthat it was really an instrument of Abt. 2. Ithas however considerable local importance withinthe framework of S.AfriC n polities,since itadvoc tes cessation from the Empire.this isI think one more instance of now difficult itatalogtferelerencelkvp4rigs movements from counter76espionage. In point of fact we are not verywell placed for obtaining much informationabout the OB except from what we may learnfrom MSS. We shall ertrinty not be toldanything by the African police, until theyhave been properly reconstituted and the worstAfrikaans elements thrown out.Harry cons lted me about the situation in Gib.The W.O. wanted to ithdraw the guards. theydescribed them as personnel employed on antisabotage duties. We wered out to Kirby-Greenahd received the reply that ll these peoplewere employed on normal guard duties and wouldhave to perform these duties whether or notthere was any danger of sabotage. This is athing of course that the W.O. might have foundout for themselves. We have said that thesabotage risk must remain until Stage A,although the present political situation in Spanshould cause the bpanish Govt. to be lessinclined to eondone aets of sabotage than hadformerly been the case.Niall MacDermott is anxious to get hold ofNoakes who would act in a B.1B capacityvis a vis the forward CSDIC cum 020 camp.This camp is I gather to come into being aboutthe middle of next month.Herbert came to eensult me about the case ofGOLENKO. This man is in our view not a menaceto security. He is quite frank about hisassociation with the German I.S. which wasbased entirely on his hatred of the Russians.He has considerable teehnieal knowledge ofwireless Catalogue Reterencero4ri9sHe has I gather277devised some de-ecrambling instrument and alsoa speeial instrument for intercepting telephoneconversations. We are allowing the mericansto give him a certain amount of libertyuntil Monday when they return him to France.He has not give an undertaking not make anyvisits or establish contact with anyone herewithout our approval;to ensure that he keeps tohis undertaking we are asking B.6 to keep himunder observation.Noakes tells me that WENGENFELD has been brokeby calumbine. Columbine says that the man isnot an officer at all and that his wholeproject was merely a blind in order to getback to Germany. Columbine was evidentlythroughly worked up about the whole case andseizing the man by the collar accused him ofbeing a liar and made him confess in front ofGache of M.I.14. It seems that Columbineannoyance was based more than anything on thefact that a private had had the impertineneebo pose as an officer.November 23rdTAR, TAR,Milmo,Kell Milmo, Kellar and Bird came to discussAbwehr and SD cases in Italy and the Balkans.It was agreed that there were characters comingfrom both these areas who had knowledge ofAbwenr and Su activities in Germany and hosecases should therefore really be examined herein the light of our information. There wasperhaps a tendency to regard the western frontas more important than the italian and Balkanfronts. the situation was really governed byCatalogue ReferenCe:KVI4/19511%the actions of the characters captured. Inthe case of Italy distance was a factor and itwas not easy to give that fron the same serviceas we were giving to the western front. It wasfelt however that the liaison should be con-siderably improved. Bird is to draft a letterto John Mair in order to ascertai in from himwhether a visit by Bird to the Italian theatrewould be well received.Hart talked about the case of GOLENKO. Ithas now been discovered beyound doubt that heis a stay-behind agent. Mrs. Spring happenedto see a reference on an ISOS card for a mancalled GUSTAV. The facts fitted GOLENKOand checked up with certain information foundin his diary. This led to other traces ofGustav showing that he had been working forthe Germans as late as August 1944 and that hiswhole story about his having refused to go backto Germany was a lie. GOLENKO is now at 020which he will find somewhat of a ehunge fromClaridges.Barry came to see me about the screening 6fpersonnel enlisted into allied armies,particularly P/WS who are to be sent backhere for training. We are saying to SHAEF thatwe are prep red to accept these people providedadequate screening is done on the continent.Me cannot do more than examine such eases asthe allied authorities think are unsatisfactory.We ean also put doubtful cases over our records.suggestion has recently been put forward thatGerman L/WS should be accommodated in Nreland.atalogueReference.kv/4/igs any of these prison-279ers who escape to Eire would according tointernatonal law have to remain at large indthat it would be difficult to hold the EireGovt. repponsible for their activities. Wehave also pointed out that the presence ofthese German P/W in N.Ireland may well providean incentive to the Germans already internedin Eire to evade parole and to extremistIRA elements in Eire and N. Ireland to attemptO rescue. An incident of this sort whichmight result in casualties on both sides wouldbe most unfortunate and owing to the peculiarcircumstances would have eonse ruences out ofall proportion to its n importance"e had a meeting with the D.G. at which Dick,Milmo,Butle and myself were present. Dickput forward his main principles about the MarRoom. I made it quite clear that as far as Iwas concerned the situation boiled down to amatter of location. If my division was going tobe uprooted in part e eould give less assistto the Mar Room and should.lose considerablyin our own efficiency. If on the other h ndwe could all be in the s ame building theroblem could be easily solved. The DG seemedto be against a move, ag inst the uprootingof .Division and in favour of having theMar soom. I said quite frankly thatI could not see how this ould work. Busterseemed to agree with me. It was agreed that weshould have a further meeting tomorrow.November 24thBriscoe came to see me about the circulationeatalBgaerReferencekv4irg new inks involvinga new process. He said that data had alreadygone out to the armies in the field about inksalready known to us. I felt therefore thatit was desirable that the field shouid be toldof what to look for in their searches for thesenew inks. They are of a kind that I havealready described and appear to be in fairlyfre frequent use. They are not susceptible tobulk testing but can be tested against a MatchList or a Suspect List. The process israther eomplicated.E had a talk ith Baxter, AR,Bitd and tartabout the behaviour of SIS in the case of OttoJohn. They first agreed vith us that he shoudbe brought back and that they would be res-ponsible for looking after him. They havenow suggested to the H.O. that if PID do notwant him he should be interned. This iseontrary to the undertaking which they gaveand runs counter to our recommendation to theH.0. that the man is not a security danger.TAK tells me th t he has heard off the recordthat Lennox had recently been to Grige aboutthe future of this office, and has more orsssuggested himselfas its future head.Grigg said that this matter had nothing to doith him but recommended that bennox shouldgo and talk to indlater Stewart. It viil beinteresting to see whether he does this.Leonard Ingrams rang up about LORENZ. SertonDelmer is anxious to take him on but is apparen-tly a little worried from the security pointof view. I said we could give no absolutesatalogtfeerefereheeikv/4/195 aa strong feeling thatLORENZ was trying to evade capture in France.He probably wished to desert but did notwish to give himself up to the allies. Hemight easily have got away with it as he spokefluent French and had lived in the countryfor a long time. He was picked up by theResistance Movement and handed over to theAmericans. Delmer will I think run him withas much caution as possible. There is acertain risk that he inay give his colle aguesaway if he gets back to Germany but he isof course himsel in the same boat.Kellar has had a t lk with Stanley and is tosee him gain after he returns from Mid East.Stanley is apparently giving us full backingin the work that we ire doing in Palestine.Apparently he is making good use of thematerial which we have given him and hasbinged up the PM to make the st atement he didthe other day about terrorism, and its effecton any Jewish settlement. He is working toget the President to make some similar state-ment.urt and Skardon are off to Paris tomorrow tostart the renegade office.Bill Williams came in for a moment. L spokebo him about Noakes, He will make a directapplication de novo to the DG for Noakes!services, stating tha he met him in Brusselswhen he was out there for discussions With theIB staff. Williams was very complimentaryboth about Dick andNiall. He said they hadboth done first class work. I told him thatCataloguerReference:kv/4/195 round about the War89-Room but that we hoped to get things traight-ened out. Whatever happened I hoped that hewould complain loudly if he was not satisfied,since this would strengthen our hand ingetting the necessary adjustments made..I had a talk ith Michael Ryde regarding theOssewa Brandweg. He saya that he regards themovement at any rate at the moment as ofpurely local significance, since van Rensbehas more or less severed his conneetion withSITTIG and PAASCHE. I told him that Rogerwas very anxiout that F3 should keep an eyeon the movement. He said that he did notquite see how this was going to be done at themoment, since there was not the slightestchance of getting any facts out of the S. Afri-can police. the only other source were Lentonand some of Michael Ryde's personal friends.He could not however hope-to get a eompre-hensive picture. The High Commissioner's officeshould be far better informed.November 25thRy mer-Jones of the Palestine CID came intoday. He seems very pleased that hisforce has at last got the order to go aheadand elean upthe the terrorists. His only troubleis shortage of men. I gather too that he hassucceeded in getting an increase of pay. Hesays this will make an enormous difference tothe efficiency of his force. He expectstrouble but appears fairly snaguine about beingable to deal with it.Catalogue ReferenCe:KV/4/195ar3Burt came to see me about a leakage case.Some employee of Vickers who was concerned withthe anufacture of the Mohne Dam bomb nad beentalking to a naval of fieer in a train nd stat-ing that this bomb was going to be used againstthe Jap Fleet. The officer reported thematter and the employee of Vickers has beenidentified. Burt says that this employee wasan enthusiastic worker talking to a serviceofficer and that although the Admiraltyare.very keen about a prosecution he thinksthis would be apity. Something in the natureof a reprimand from Major Cussen would be moresuitable. I said I agreed and that I thoughtthat if the full facts were looked into we mighfind that the Germans alre dy had a specimenof one of these bombs, details of which theywould doubtless have passed on to the Japs.The fact that the bombs were likely to be usedagainst the Japs would be more or less axiom-atic. A prosecuting counsel might thereforebe made to look rather ridiculous.Tim Airy has returned from Brussels, and hasacquired quite a lot of useful local knowledge.Garbo has received the MBE from the King,who having read the story was apparently verymuch intrigued. The actual presentation willprobably be done by the DG. The King wasanxious to know what the word "notional" meant.This was explained to him by Tommy Lascelles.Alec Kellar is off tomorrow to the Mid East.Dick seems rather keen about TAR running theatalogue ReferencekV/angsite a good suggestion.suTAR will I think Nant a certain amount ofhelp from Milmo on the purely administrativeside.Cyril has sent me a note about that isdescribed as a Harikari Club in one. of theGerman P/Wcamps in Canada. It is based onthe Wagnerian philosophy of the Gotterdammer-ung where the gods kill off each other ina final orgy of violence. When thedestruction of the German Army beeomes immi-nent, all veaklings in the camp are to bemurdered. The others will then break out,murder the commandant the IO and the Sergt.major, and then commit as many acts of sabotageas they can before they themselves are killed.The information has been given by an RC priestand a Lt.Col. who is a former Bavarian policeprefect. Both are described as serious maturemen, loy al Germans, interested only in the avoi.dance of bloodshed and the salvation of theircountry from Nazism.November 27thAnthony came to see me about the possibilityof getting assistance from Shillito. Hethought the latter might bring his Russianespionage up to London and do part time in BIB.I am rather doubtful as to whether this wouldbe a satisfactory arrangement, but L will havea talk with Roger.McIver came to talk to me about the Regions.He had made a tour and canvassed a number ofC.C.S who all seem to be in favour of theGatalfe feReferengeesVed1a last week's meeting.288I said that L could well believe that they were.On the other hand certain CCs in the easterncounties seem to think differently. Probablythe whole question could only be settled bytrial and error. I should have thought thata preliminary step of telescoping the Regionswould have been better than abolishing allregional offices. I rather feared that thewhole thing might just peter out into somethingrather colourless.Ede,Kirby -Green, Hart, TAR and I discussed Gib.OK-G is to see Cowgill and will say that heonly proposes to take over the SIS unit if heis to be responsible for running it. He wouldtake it over purely on an administrative basis.There is one officer and a wireless set. Hewould ppropose to put the officer under DavidScherr. There has been very little work inthis section for a long time and the officer.ssole duties is to run a couple of agents whoare collecting I.A. information in Spain. Inspite of our protests the officer and his wire-less operator just presented themselves to K-Gwith a note from SIS saying that they were toport themselves.Stopford and Burley came to talk about FLORMANwho has applied for a visa to come to thiscountry. The matter is to be decided by theHDSE. We are saying that FLORMAN has been intouch with German agents in Sweden and thatthere is an obvious security risk in his cominghere. If on the other hand it is thought thatthe commercial reasons outweigh the securityrisks higher authority must decide.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/195%November 28thI have received an extremely irritating letterfrom Arnold-Foster criticising my 5 points onwhich L thought we might go forward to theexamining committee. He seems to think that Ihave gone back On everything I said. He objectsto any thing being said about sub-dividing themain organisation into offensive and defensiveThis is a point on which L thought we hadcomplete agreement. It could of course be leftout but in my view it is the one thing thatmight get us over the ministerial difficultyand criticism that you cannot have one hugeorganisation savouring of the Gest po. Fosterputs forward ggain his proposals which arecolourless except in SO far as they advocatethe rump theory which L thought he had agreedto abandon.I spoke to Horrocks today about Mrs.Arbuthnotgoing to Cey lon with vourtney. He has ruledher out merely on her age and some vaguesuggestion that she is neurotic. 1 should havethought the proper decision should have beenmade on medical evidence. Somebody of 24might just as likely be overcome with the heatas somebody of 48. Mrs. A has harely been illfor a day since she has been in the office andhas spent many months in Cairo both in summerand winter without feeling any ill-effects.At the D.G.S meeting today t mentioned thequestion of the possible abolition of the navi-cert after Stage A. This will seriously affectboth censorship from the Argentine to the Penin-seatalagde EfePeneeRe/mgs agents at T'rinidad.28The Chiefs of Staff at Washington are worriedabout censorship but had not considered thequestion of the agents. The DG seemed to thinkworld trade considerations would be moreimportant and was not prepared to discuss thematter further. It is parta his generalfeeling that the war is more or less over asfar as this country is concerned and thatsecurity precautions may be relaxed. It hasmanifested itself in a very serious mannerin a circular which has recently been issued toSCOs in which the statement occurs "It is notnow thought that enemy agents are likely to besent into this country or that they could doappreciable harm if they were". This circularwas issued in spite of a dr ft circular whichI had put up in which L said amongst other thingsthat the Germans were themselves at this momentless likely than heretofore to send agents tothis country for intelligence purposes. Themeaning of this of course is very different tothatimplied in the circular. the worst featureis that a copy of the circular has been sent tothe H.0. It will now be held up against usin matters affecting general security precautionsand in particular cases.LspoketoAdamwno tells me that the final draf't circula ar wasmade by Harry and the DG and that the groundhad been completely cut f'rom under his feet.Charles tells me that the DG is worried aboutRobertson of the Mid East having appeared inthe office without his knowledge. Kobertson isin fact on the strength of SHAEF waiting to dosomething in CCMS. Meanwhile it was thoughtthat he might pick something up in this af fice.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/195Meanhile it was thought that owing to Kellar'sabsence in the Mid East TARcould put him in tohelp Brock.The Govt. have announced that up to the endof June 1944 this country provided her allieswith goodsservice and capital facilities amount-ing to 1,079 millions, 648, 000 pounds. This sumcan be divided up as follows: USA 604 million,730,000; Russia, E269,457,000 E269, Poland E12,000,000; Czechoslovakia 18,629,000; franceE13,600,000 up to June 1943 only; GreeceE12,368,000. There were also contributions toTurkey and Portugal. This is only part of thetotal contribution. The remainder cannot beexpressed in terms of cash value. It includessuch factors as the lives of our fighting men,technical information, which has been one ofmajor contributions, for example radiolocation,which we were the first to apply in the practicalway to war and which we gave freely to america,penicillin,& jet-propulsion which we gavewithout thoughts of patent rights to the USA.L had ameeting with the DG, Horrocks, Milmo andButler at which we discussed the paper whichhad been prepared about the war noom. It clearlylays down the general principles on which thisis to be run The main feature is the direcbiateof 3, a SHAEF representative, one from M. M.1.6and one from USS. If the SHAEF representativeis not a memper of M15, M15 should have separaterepresentation. This directorate will controland co-ordinate the work at present going on.It will not necessarily involve the moving ofB. IB into another building. Thisdraft is tocaldnogauRefereecerth4sitgon for his approval.98The DG does not want to give a copy to SIS. Hethinks that the negotiations had better beconducted through SHAEF. This will of coursetake some time. Meanwhile Butler is to findout whether in principle SIS will accept aSHAEF head and whether they are prepared tohave their papers recorded in our registry.If they will not accept our registry as thebasis of the agreement clearly the scheme cannotwork. The only thing to pe done then is togive us free access to the field SO that atleast the work that we are doing will reachthe C. L.units.nonnle Hay lor came to tell me about his visitto Brussels. He seemed very satisfied but Ithink inclines a little too much towards runningan independent show in Germany. He seems tohave persuaded or thinks he has persuaded NiallMcDermott in this sense. I tried to impressupon him that it would be a very long time beforeanybody in Germany would be able to say thatin an important case it would not be worthwhile passing the names over the records inLondon. Equally it would have to be borne inpind that wherever you put CSDIC or 020 theywould for a very long time have to be briefedby London otherwise their interrogations willnot get any of us very far. I quite agreedthat in the course of time our assistance wouldbe of diminishing value but I doubted whetherit could ever be ighoredy ayentirely. Certainlyfor a good many months if not years it would beof paramount importance. There will on the otherhand obviously be a number of minor cases inGermany which can be dealt with in the same wayheatafogegpererencefke4/1as dealt with cases in2910THE PROVINCES WITHOUT REFERENCE TO London.Bronx has been invited to visit Madrid.Zigzag has left London and there is some sugges-tion that he has gone to consult Compton Macken-zie about writing his memoirs.November 29ththe D.G. discussed with me and Butler thevarious candidates for head of the War Room.We agreed that it would be wrong to try and getDick back. We did not wish to object to colinBrook if SIS thought him a suitable candidateand could obtain his services with SHAEF. Wethought TAR or Milmo would both do the work welland failing them, Joe Spencer about whom noneof us knew a great deal but who makes a goodimpression. Butler is to find out fromArnold-oster whether SIS accepts SHAEF control andwhether they are prepared to use our registry.He may also try and get agreement about thehead of the War room.At the Wednesday meeting Teresa mentionedthat a saboteur had been captured in Paris whois the first example of one with a mission todo damage by poison. He had been supplied withtablets like aspirin, one of which could poison50,000 litres of water. It is not yet knownwhat the poison is.Baxter told us of the case of PARKS, a Britishsubject now in Brixton. He had been working forSIS and according to his own story, their arrange-Icatafoguerreferencenkvi4/a95essages were SO9 tinefficient that he was obliged to transmit moreoften than he should and as a result he says theGermans DF'd him and arrested him. They thenturned him round and from February of this yearhe was sending under control. He says he warnedSIS through certain channels that he was undercontrol. The Germans appear to have allowed hima certain amount of liberty to visit Paris eachweek, and through another SIS organisation hearranged with SIS for his escape. He gotdown to the Pyreneees,but says he was not satis-fied with the arrangements for picking him upthere; soreturned to Paris where he hid untilthe city was liberated, when he gave himself upto the allies. He was brought over here andis under examination at Brixton. There is acheck on his story through a man named MEISSMANnow in the hands of M. I. .19. M. says that heknows PARKS was under control much earlier thanhe admits, in fact from Oct. 1943 and that hehad been captured by the SD and handed over tothe Abwehr who had intended him to be a stay-behind agent. Baxter wondered whether he shouldgo to 020. Buster thought not, but that heshould be re-examined on MEISSMAN'S evidence andif necessary confronted with M. himself.I mentioned the proposal to stop the navicerts,and Grogan said that there had been a misunder-staading, that Washington had got hold of thewrong end of the stick, and that there was nointention of stopping navicerts until the endof the war in Europe and the termination ofcensorship.There have been 40 V.2's in the last week. AadatangireRefeeacegavarest at Deptford when aWoolworths was hit at midday and 157 people werekilled and 130 seriously injured. V.l's hadtailed off, only 12 having been launched duringthe week.Walker said that one of the pigeons he had haddropped in Belgium with phoney rings and markinghad been picked up by our people, and seemed tohave been used by the Germans as it had anothermark on its wing which had not been put thereby us, There was however no message on its leg.Adam talked to me this morning about a requestfrom Harry that he should consider cutting downon SCOs and FSP and handing over some of theirduties to I.0.s. Both Adam and I disagreed withthe general tendency to pack up and if we did notlook out we should find ourselves high and drywithout any controls at all. Harry talked to meabout this later,wher I expressed to him myanxiety. The trouble is that Adam has thoroughlyantagonised Perks and the I.0.S. and until thisatmosphere blows over we are not likely toget much support from the H.0. quarter. Harryis I think going to have a talk with Perks.Chambers of P.I.D. came tosee me this morning.I handed him a copy of LORENZ'S article onRibbentrop. He wanted to discuss what safeguardswould be necessary. There are various degrees inthe restrictions placed on people working forPWE. Chambers thought that in the case ofLORENZ it would suffice if he were kept within5 miles of the premises and compelled to be inbarracks by 10 pm. I said that I did not thinkhe could do very much harm provided it wasstaeguthRefereneeyevi49g5access to any wireless293transmitter. Col. hambers assured me that allhis broadcasts would be put over on a recordingwhich would be carefully vetted before going onthe air.I told Chambers that although we were inclined tbelieve LORENZ'S statement that at a certainstage he decided to desert, we were not certainwhether he had not had it in mind to fade intothe French landscape rather than give himselfup. It was impossible to be certain in casesof this sort but we felt on the whole that therisk in using LORENZ was worth taking.Only en passant and very midly did Chambersmentioned the incident which took place whenBagge of 020 took LORENZ along to see SeftonDelmer at Bush House, according to the arrange-ment I had made with Leonard Ingrams. Chamberswished to convey politely to me that in casesof this sort he would prefer that the matterwere dealt with through himself rather thandirect with Ingrams and Sefton Delmer.Chambers told me that the Germans had now givenup trying to jam the BBC and had concentrateat their efforts on Delmer's black senders.He felt that this was a very sincere tributeto Delmer's work.November 30thBriscoe came to talk to me about some devices foensuring that a safe had not been opened. Hethought that the best thing was to put a paperweight on top and then take high precisionneaatarogenkeefereince:R@fanyite easily be domel913Alternatively he thought you could put/sheetsof paper and draw some lines across in salivaacross the overlapping edges. These could bebrought up by iodine and would show if theyhad been moved. Probably either method wouldbe quite effective as long as the personresponsible does not get bored with makingtests. I rather had in mind a piece of papersensitive to light but Briscoe pointed out thatthat would on the whole be more troub lesome Ssince it would have to be developed.Vickery brought Smith who is head of DiB whenPilditch retired. Unfortunately I did not havetime to talk to him for very long but I hopeto see him again. He seems a pleasant sort offellow.We had a conference today called by the DG atwhich Horrocks, Milmo, Milmo,Dulter Dulter and I were present.Butler gave an account of his talk with Arnoldrorster yesterday. SIS do not appear to havemade up their minds about anything. .seems tothink that the War Room ought to be under hiscontrol but there is a general feeling that MI5would like to have one of their people atits head although of course he would be soldto C's organisation for the purpose.Itseemslikely that SIS are reconciled to the use of ourregistry but reservations are apparently beingmade as to the ultimate disposal of the documentIn other words when the war is over bis willwant to hav e them back. Horrocks said thathe could not possibly undertake to do the jobin those conditions. We agreed to accept hobinBrook if SIS could get him released and wantedhoatatogtalreefepehee:kitellgsnen alternatively195we suggested Joe >pencer and then TAR. thesuggestion of TAR was not very well receivedfor some unknown reason. Milne we said quitedefinitely we did not think was a big enoughweight. As regards Dick we were quite certainthat he should remain at SHAEF for the timebeing. To remove him would merely be pullingdown one house to build up another. Foster isgoing to try and get some positive answer fromabout the registry, about SnEF control andabout the head of the War Hoom.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMEN'T RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTIONACT 1958:3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSNovCatalogue Reference:KV/4/19599bCOPYSECTION3OFACT1958.Jim tells me that there is some suggestionof his taking. over E. Division.Heisnotvery.keen as he wishes to extricate himself fromthe office at the earliest moment.December lstJoe Spencer came to see me about the paper putout by the JIC in which it is recommendedthat M.A.S with our. various missions,particu-larly in the Balkans, should have-greaterfreedom in their liaison with the Russians.It was-stipulated however that they shouldreport back for the information of London andMoscow precisely what information they hadpassed in order that .duplicates could be handedto: the Russians. Joe pencer was all infavour of greater freedom of action but agreedwith me that while it was necessary for ourrepresentatives to keep headquarters.informedof the information they had given to the Russiarit might.be- a mistake to pass duplicates. toThe Russians. I felt and he agreed thatif we could-create a slightly bootlegging atmos:phere in the outstations we should be morelikely to penetrate the hard crust of SovietIntelligence.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/195997Walker came to tell me about the interrogationof a P/W who had been looking after Wehrmachtpigeons. It seems that the Abwehr sections ofthe Wehrmacht have made use of pigeons andthat during the invasion time and since theyattempted to train pigeons to work from thiscountry. Incidentally one of Walker's pigeonswith special rings has been picked up dead inBelgium or Holland. The P/W when questionedabout the possibility of our putting theWehrmacht stamp on pigeons in order to causeconfusion in the German ranks said that this wasimpossible as we could not fake the ringswithout the soldering which would be apparent.He is wrong of course bec use this is preciselywhat we have done.David boyl came to talk to me about atranslator of the armistice terms. The F.O. haddiscovered various discrepancies in the trans-lation and wished to get it checked up by areal expert. D.B. says and think rightlythat what is really wanted is both a Britishand a German who are by-lingual. A mancalled HOMEYER had been suggested. Our recordsshowed nothing against him exepet that he hasan aunt by marriage who is right wing, pro-Ger:man and anti-British. L said I thought thispoint could be settled but we were a littleworried whether it would be wise to put amatter of this kind within the reach of anyGermans. The vetting would have to be on quitea different footing to the ordinary vetting.Our files might show nothing against him buthe might be one of those Germans who dislikethe Nazis intensely but still remain faithfulta ReteHHCeYKVI4/18BggesteC as a prelim-98inary step that Jopson should be approached.He would probably be able to advise as toprecisely what is required. He could checkthe German translation by translating it backinto English. In this he would probablybe as good as anyone since his grammatical know-Fedge h would be first class and moreover, whichis always important in these matter, he has areally classical knowledge of the Englishlanguage.I talked with Vickery about his indian CSDICin Norfotk which had produced a rather badinterrogation report about two Indians whohad been trained by the SD in sabotage. listof further questions by Edwards of IPI hasbeen prepared, the first of which is "What isthe RHSA?". This seems to show a ratherlamentable ignorance and L wohdered whether IPIwould. get the best out of these Indians if theydid not employ someone with a fair knowledgeof the Abwehr. and the SD. L gave Vickeryspecimens of the interrogations done at 020and by ASSDIC. He is going to have a look atthese and will let me know later whether hewants any assistance fro us. L told himthat we could not send anyone from 020 butthat L might possibly get Miss Clay to godown to Norfolk.Thomas came to see me about eseapers and evaderswho were being sent back here by the Americansunheralded. they arrive at any landing-placeand there is subsequently a very difficultjob in tracing them. It would be quite easyfor an enemy agent to get into the countryCatalogue Reference:KV/4/195999in this way.1 had a long discussion ith TAR and Ede aboutO.C. C. L cannot say that we got very far.Personally I tound it difficult to see anyplace Dor 0.C. except on the administrativeside in A. Branch. This however means thatthere must be some place in B. Division wherethe Intelligence products of all stationsnot already covered are received. Ede as anex-DSO still feels that there is merit inkeeping all overseas stations centrally con-trohled by one person. L am afraid that this mamay lead to trouble particularly in places likethe Middle East, where Alex Kellar knows theintelligence product, knows the personalitiesand has a very good grip on what is requiredas regards organisation. Certainly O.C. havenothing to tell him on any score. If thereforethey attempt to perform any of the functionswhich he is now carrying out there is bound tobe a rub.December 2ndBuster came to talk to me about the forward20. Stephens is suggesting that he shouldspend halt his time in Brussels and half here.Buster points out that this will reduce hisusefulness to about a quarter. He has a veryforceful personality and during his absencethings are all apt to get held up. Meanwhilehe has increased the staff that he proposesto take overseas. This is presumably due tothe fact that civilians are now to be interro-gated as well as P/WS. He also wants to takertafdete REderenceusye1gsinks that this should3300be resisted since it can only lead to separa-tist tendencies. He should rely on home recordsCases in the field should be filed in PFSbut not carded. Carding has been allowed at020 to meet the demands for certain bodiesto be interrogated who might for example havea knowledge of some individual or locality.This has Led to extensive carding and to atendency in U20 to rely more on their recordsthan on the central registry. We do not wiswish the same thing to be started in the field.part from this we want the registry staffourselves.B-'Wdiscussed with me and buster the questionof passing reports on captured agents to therench,BeIgians and Dutch. It was decieedthat we should pass these reports in duplicatesto each service and that if they did notnotify us within 24 hours we should assumethat they had passed a copy on to theiropposite number in the Belgian or Dutch servleesL saw Niaht McDermott. He has had a talk withC. which does not in fact get us much further.He has made it quite Cle ar to C. that SHAEFcontrol is necessary but L do not think thispoint has been finally accepted. As regardsthe records he thinks that SIS will agree touse our regstry.Will of OSS has just returned from America. Hecame in to see Buster and obviously wanted toascertain our ideas about the War Room. He isclearly favourably disposed towards us as anorganisation. At the same time O.S.S. areafarogtee Reference:KV/4/195 to SIS for having given them access301to ISOS. There is therefore something in thenature of a contract between them. Donovanon the other hand has had his battles with SIBas he told me when I was in Washington. Heis expected here next week, and is apparentlyto be consulted about the War Room's future.will seems anxious to avoid SHAEF directionfor the War Room. This is probably because hedoes not want G.2 to have a finger in the pie.We must L think be prepared for OSS to weighin with SIS on the question of SIS controlfor which C. is standing out. Niall McDermoton the other hand is quite adamant aboutSHAEF control and SO is the D.G.December 4thCol.Cox of SOE who is working with Victor inFaris, came to see me about the possibilityof getting his secretary put on M.1.5 strength.His Establishment Officer is jibbing at havingto pay SOE personnel abroad working for otherorganisations. I pointed out to Cox that he andhis secretary were really working for the Armyand not for MI5. Rothschild was working for theArmy. Perhaps if he explained this to hisEstablishment Officer he might be more sym-pathetic. L told him 1 would not possibly puthis proposition to our Establishment Branchwho were already complaining that we had to paytoo many people who were working for the Army.I would however be very pleasedy to talk to hisstablishment Officer if he thought it would doany good.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1952Guy Thomson came in. I told him that we hadhad a wire from SIME requesting his return.Hill-Dillon wanted him for security dutiesin Greece owing to the disturbances likely toresult from the disarming of E.A.M. Thomsomwas not very keen, and asked me to reply thathe would be le iving on the loth Dec. This willbe after he has had a fortnight's leave. Heevidently dislikes Hill-Dillon.Briscoe and Grogn came to discuss a requestfrom SHAEF Censorship to hand over the new secreink devices of the SD to the French. We came tothe conclusion that there would be no advantagein giving this information to the French untilwe had discovered a satisfactory means ofdevelopment.Tangye came to tell me that Cowgill had approached him some time ago to find a job for VEHMERENin some press office. Tangye informed Harkerwho told him to get into touch with me.Apparently it is proposed to put V. as a kind ofadviser on German affairs to the "Daily Mail".This arrangement seems to me most peculiarand most dangerous. There is no earthlyreason for thinking that V. is anti-German.What sort of advice therefore is he going togive the Daily Mail and in a years time he willprobably have very -different views about thiscountry and its attitude towards the Germanpeople. By that time he will be bedded down ina press office with all the facilities that thatentails. On further enquiry L was told thatSIS ultimately hope to send him to Madrid.The idea that they have in mind is presumablyteatalogue CatalogueReferenee:k/4hs with local Nazi group:303which is of course quite futile since he isentirely compromised.The Germans have informed Sniper that a trans-mitter is waiting for him at Tunrhout in BelgiunIndia have provisionally agreed to let us havethe operator who has been working the Fathertransmitter. This will enable us to use thetrans smitter which the Germans say they havewaiting for Father in Belgium.SHAEF C.I. summary for week ending lst Dec.states as follows:Signs of increasing activity in all German S.S.work under Himmler and new leaders. Attemptsare being made to ascertain allied weak pointsparticularly communist activities includingSpanish, maquis in France, dissatisfaction,among workers, and relations between French andallies. An enemy sabotage action is to beconcentrated on ports, lines of cogmmunicationand fuel. Two of the most active W/T agentsin the Havre network have been arrested inONormandy. An agent of Schuchmann's navalespionage network has been arrested. Thisshould effectively aid the break up of Schuchmarorganisation along the channel coast. ain SDagent arrested by the FFI near Faris hasbeen found to have a long history of penetratingresistance movements. He was sent through thelines to contact a W/T operator in raris andreport on 8 high German officers suspected ofdesertion. As regards future plans, an attemptis likely to be made from Spain to contact byeatalegyeRetersese'vi4erans believed to behiding in Paris. The Abwehr agent captured bythe American 7th Army states th t importantagents are now flown to Spain by Lufthansatobe pushed across the Py ranees into France.Junkers planes are also used for similarmissions on flights from Berlin to Bareelona.Collated information from captured saboteursemphasises the increasing scale of SkorzenY'plan for sabotage and subversion. In additionto the sabotage commandos formerly run by thSection 2 of the Abwehr, he has created certainnew units apparently for para-military use.Skorzeny is also increasing subversive movementsbehind the allied lines. In Germany he isplanning maquis operations. The leader of theJeanne organisation in France has been arrestedAn important sagotage school and centre has beenidentified near Doorn in Holland. Lepage hasbeen replaced by Bihin, Pierlot's former Agentde Cabinet. The Surete now has 200 officers.In France military security is now under theMinister of War and directed by ol.Vavarre,the formerleader of the Precurseurs. ounter-sabotage is still under the head of the Servicespeciaux and now directed by Col. 1.Cretien assis-ted by Col.French. Paillol has been pro-moted Lt. Col. and given a post in the Gendarerie Nationale. By special act of amnesty MarcelThorez has been allowed to return to Francefrom Russia. He was enthusiastically receivedby political symp thisers in Paris. Resistancegroups are still active in carrying out arrestsand also conducting illegal trials, the latterbeing largely winked at by the Minister ofJustice. There are indications that the Volks-sturm may be the cover for Himmeer's partisanEllogueoretereacellewfre5and members of the S.A.3053in the Metz area and having their unfformsdyed to the same colour as those of the Volks-sturm. S.S.Brigade Fuhrer Anton Dunckernlate head of the secret police in AlsaceLorraine and the Saar has been captured.The Key Points Directorate have reviewed thewhole series of flying bomb attacks up to theend of Sept. They show that in all a total of3,916 flying-bombs have been destroyed by theend of August, and that of these 1,942 werecredited to fighters, 1,730 to A.A. and 244 toballoons. This represents an overall rate ofdestruction of 482% of the total launchedbut makes no allowance for the appreciablenumber of flying-bombs which fell in thesea from unknown causes before they could beattacked. The effects of the attacks byflying-bombs were primarily the damage to aconsiderable amount of property including194 schools, 174 churches, 126 hospitals and143 hospitals. Dy the end of August in Londonalone more than 1,100,000 houses had beendamaged. It is interesting to recall that inthe 9 months of bombing Sept. 1940 to May 1941nclusive, the peak period, the number ofhouses damaged in London was 1,150,000.Civilian casualties caused by flying-bombs areestimated at 5, 205 fatl, al,15,6l1 15, serious.total of 20, 816. Of these the grea majorityoccurred in London. The following summarisedthe roll of civilian casualties caused byenemy action in the U.K. up to the end ofSept. 1944:Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1953061940fatal 23,767serious 36,529.Most of these occurred in the 5 monthsAug. to Dec. inclusive.1941fatal 20,881serious 21,841Most of these occurred in the 5 monthsJan. to May inclusive.1942 fatal 3,236serious 4,1501943fatal 3,272serious 3,4501944 Jan-June.fatal 3,498serious 8,820July-Sept.fatal 3,714serious 0,388.Totals of the whole war to date: fatal 57,468serious 79,178.A captured document dated The Hague 26th June1942 gives an account of a conference of Abwehrofficials held in Berlin on the 15-17th June1942. A certain Kriminalrat Klemens spoke onthe British and omeriean Intelligence ServicesHe said that up till the outbreak Of war only 5British intelligence agents had been captured.Then follows the cryptic remark that theIntelligence Service is simply concerned withespionage, and the Secret Service with secretGataregae Refeneneekiiangntelligence Service is30divided into 8 sections of which the sectionN.I.5 is the best known. the network of Lnglislagents includes hundreds of people who havenearly all been excellently trained. Onespecial institution is the Passport ControlOfficer called P?C.0. In case the P.C.0. S shou!have to disappear a new Z. organisation was setup in 1939. (So much for the super-undergroundorganisation of Col.Dansey on the one hand andMaj.Grand on the other). "Counter-espionageactivity in England is partly iny the hands ofthe police and partly in those of the armedforces. The English Security Service (Abwehr)makes use of a Black List which more or lesscorresponds to the German one. Measures againstforeign agents include forbidding entry toand exit from the country."(T means thatsomewherethe Germans must have a copy of oldAdams Black List). "In regard to the U.S.A.Intelligence Service, is is anticipated thatit works in common with the English service.Nothing definite has been established aboutits activity in Germany (The answer to boththese statements need not be stated).Dentibegni, on behalf of Abt. III, said that therunning of all agents had been definitelyeasier for England and America than forGermany. They had sufficient manpower on thecontinent which could be drawn into theirservices. The Abwehr found it distinctly moredifficult. Consequently there were someremarkable characters who had to be used. Heasked for understanding for his point of viewas an Abt. III officer. Personally he oftenhesitated to put these men into action butatafogure Referenteathpmgsople he was thrown3back on any material to hand,December 5thAt the D.G. S meeting today, the question wasraised about the vetting of allied seamen.Those who cannot produce any papers toshow thatthey have been vetted by their Security Ser-vice abroad are automatically sent to theLRC. This is causing complaints from theMinistry of War Transport, and thematter isto be investigated by the HDSE. I said thatI doubted whether any of the allied serviceswere in a position to vet the seamen. I felttherefore that we should have to get itclearly understood that we could not acceptresponsibility since although we could conductsome sort of an examination we were obviouslynot SO well placed as allied police forces whocould make local enquiries, if they had thetime and personnel to do SO. This raised thegeneral question of security measures which arebeing dropped one by one. I said that itwould be quite easy to pull the whole securitystructure down if one considered each measureon its merits. It was the accumulativeeffect of all measures that was really thereason for good security. Harry said thathe wanted to review the whole position and wasanxious to get the views of .division. Isaid that I could easily give him a view ifhe could state what the forces really wantedto keep secret. We had only SO far had arather feeble document from the W.0. and nostatement from the Admiralty or nir Ministry.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1953I then said id had been deeply shocked bythe circular which had gone out in which itwas stated that it was not likely that enemyagents would come to this country and that ifthey did they could do no appreciable harmThe worst feature of this circular was thatit had gone to the H.O. I had not seen itbefore it had been issued but when asked myviews had put forward a dra: circular in whichit was said that at the moment it was thoughtless likely than heretofore that enemy agentswould be sent to this country. this was a verydifferent thing to the statement in thecircular.Curry came to see me about his write-up of thework of the office during the war. Fromsoundings he had taken it did not seem thatthe principal contributions would be readymuch before April. He rather wondered there-fore what he would be doing in the meantime.On reflection however he seemed to think thathe would have to do a good deal of the earlypart himself. L said that thought thiswas desirable and that he should certainlyreview the pre-war position and should as faras possible tack it on to the early develop-ment of German L S. immediately after thelast war. L had in mind the Uberzeedienstand the research work that is being done byMiss Scoones and Miss Leslie.I discussed with Brokk and Jenkins ourresponsibility for the security of VIPS inEgypt. The general practice lS for theMinister to call in Jenkins and ask his advice.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/1952Jenkins sometimes used his own FSP to seewhether the Egyptians were carrying out theirtask pro erly. If this is not the case heeither approaches the Egyptian police orreports the fact to the Minister. This isall right up to a point but it should not beallowed to develop into the assumption ofresponsibilities for protection of VIPS. It isis of course natural that Jenkins shouldbeconsulted in an advisory capacity since heis in closer li ison with the Eyptian policethan anyone else. This whole question hasarisen over the assassination of Lord Moyneand his refusal to accept protection. I saidthat the F.O. on the advice of the Ambassadorshould enforce protection on the grounds thatthe assassination of an important Britishsubject is likely to have serious politicalrepercussions. It is not otherefore a matterfor the individual concerned to decide butfor the British Lovt.Ultra shows that a submarine is proceedingtoCanada with a German agent on board. Thisinformation had been passed to DNI ottawawho had informed the RCMP. RCMP had askedMills for his views and Mills had telegraphedhome. Being an Ultra of course nobody hadthought of telling us. I am pointing out toSIS that for their own protection they wouldbe well-advised to do SO in the future sincethe RCMP might lay on all sorts of measureswhich would eniteely give the show away.Apart from this we were concerned if a Germanagent was going to Canada and"Was theommissioner, who controls the armed coastalCatalogue poas Rdertenceckyst/5tchers. Reference311December 6thI saw Tim Airy today just before he left andshowed him my draft letter to Lamplough whichhe seemed to approve.At the Wednesday meeting Baxter said thatPARKS, the British subject who had beencontrolled by the Germans and who was nowatBrixton, had been confronted with MEISERMANNstatement that-he had been- controlled-fromOct. 1943 and not from opril 1944 as he hadconfessed: He--denied- this-but onbeingconfronted with MEISEMANN himself he brokedown and gave further details. It is aquestion now what to do with him, as thereis no case for holding him under 18A or 18B.We .shall_probably release him on the under-standing that he will come up for further.qestioning-as-required.Walker-said-that so-far-there-h Tar-there-have-been there 300V.2s. the last two weeks have brought 39each.Baxter said that Dutch seamen were stillpouring in. At the moment he had about 180aon his hands which he could - not possiblyget through for another3 -weeks.He-dislikedconducting a superficial examination. I saidthat we-ishould have-to-face-the tact thattheallies were not in a position to vet thesepeople satisfactorily at: the monen't: me shoutherefore have to do the best we could withthenresources at our disposal. There was toCeaboeneeritgetoeavatighe-HDSD-in-onder-topresent the case to SHAEF. I doubt whetherTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958 Mou 200oSHAEF will be able to do very much. Atpresent thereare about 450 people at the LRC arand the number of examiners has of course beenconsiderably reduced since the opening of thesecond front.Joe Lynch brought two FBI inspecting officers,onea-Mr.Gurney; to see me. They are goingon to Paris. - One of their gbbss is to finout whether G.' are anxious to have any FB}representatives in Germany. and if SO whattheir assignment would be. Hoover is anxiousnot-to go-into.the the field excep.t- at e-requestof G.2I dined with anthony and Padgham. The lattertakeda tot about his past experiences and inparticular of those just prior to his depart-ure fromthe Hague. He had given U 35 thenames of 3 Dutch collaborators. The followingmorning when he came into the Embassy he sawSchultze-Burnett_standing-in the-passage-andeyeing him with considerable suspicion. Hethen -came-p-to-hin-and-said-Do-the-follovingnames mean any thing to you?" Padgham gave anevasive answer-saying that he thought hehad heard: of one of them, but made up hismind from that moment that the game was up.The same evening as )35 was leaving Padgham'shouse he passed SchultzeBurnett in the garden.The following morning Padgham left-by-specialaeroplane. He was driven to the aerodrome bya a--Dutch h-chauffeur-in the-employ of Stevens: Hethought that this man was singularly inquisitive: He told-Padgham that he spoke nglishwith a German accent. P. replied that perhapsCaraldgde eferehed KvMeg9in Germany for a long303 ttime. The driver then asked P. whether hewould like him to drive past the Lufthansaoffices. This remark was a propos of nothingand-drew the reply from P. that he he-had had noparticular desire to drive in that direction.P.said that until he actually landed atCroydor he always envisaged the possibilitythat the pilot of his aircraft might land hirin Germany. P. is of course convinced that.there was a leak in Stevens office. He sawStevens later in London but t-.the-latter pooh-the idea: Six weeks later however he waskidnapped-at Venlo. It may be-that-had-he-investigated the leakage more carefully thisincident might have been avoided.:1 talked to P. about the Seidlitz ommittee.He is somewhat apprehensive lest there maybe a get together with the Kussians on therolines af the postwar period He-thinksthatwe may. suffer from ussian appeasement in theP. same-way.as-we P.'s s morale is rather from low. German-appeasement. He obviously feelisposition acutely: He is horrified atGermany has done and thinks that he like allGermans must take his share of the blame. Bwas often in the presence of Hitler and c.ouhad he been sufficiently courageous have bumphim off. L said that L felt that-he-had-doneas much as. coul d be expected of any man -andthat-his-actions-had been extremely-courageouHe told me how he first came into touch withthe--British Govt. He had known 035 from verearly days and established close touch with hafter he arrived here in 1934. He trusted U 35CetapelyRaindeerpieysea9so. him a-very-definiteTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT. UNDER SECTIONK2iu23 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958. 200.0views about the Nazi regime. Through U35he was introduced to Clifford Norton who wasthen Vansittart's private secretary. He feltthat in dealing direct with Van he was onsure ground and that his actions would be inthe best interests of Germany. He realised ofcourse finally that his and Van's wordSswerefalling on deaf ears. L wonder. very muchwhether K. knew about this when he took SUa staff firm to stand take against on U 35 the Probably advice of he his knew-at that time that Padgham on )35 introduc-tion was-giving information to Van: It mayeven be that Van. thought it more convenientthat-we-should run the party hanthat thereshould be any thing in the nature of directcommunication with the F.O:I had a talk withyesterday about thefuture of the War Room. He says that SIS are.much more worrled about the constitutionalposition. They-are-afraid-of-a-stampede-tothe continent by M.I.5. For this reason "C"ishes-to-naintain-at-leastrnoninal-controlHe rather envisages the SHAEF representativeas being in a semi-autonomous position likthe head of G.C.& C.S. He is hoping to getO.S.S. support for this idea. d meeting washeld, which "C", Arnoid-Forster, Viv. Cowgill,and others werepresent. A-small-meeting-had been called--byCowgill of his own people prior to the mainmeeting; at which.those present were oldthatthey were required to give facts and not views.This 1S of course typical of Felix. He ischealoglerreeranekcuiagsllowed.to_have-vie cafalogule to views,and they are invariably the wrong ones. Howey31Sin spite of this his subordinates seem to havespoken up at the main meeting and a very clearimpression was given that the present warRoom had neither the personnel nor the machin-ery to give the field the service they requiredIt was apparently agreed that SIS ought tobase themselves on the M.I.5 re gistry,but no final decisions were made and noinstructions issued.There has been a very remarkable case of aCanadian deserter landing in this country.The man's name is Private F.DAIGLE. He hasbeen absent without leave from his unit inFrance since the 14th August until he surren-dered himself in Edinburgh on the 30thNovember. At that time he was wearing U.S.Army issue clothing. He got to this countrywith the assistanceof an American pilot whooffered to fly himback for 5,000 francs. Hemade this money in the Black Market in Parisby buying stuff from the Americ ns and sellingit to the Parisians. DAIGLE says that whilein Paris he want out with American negroeswho were selling equipment to the French. Theygot 4-5,000 francs for a carbine and sold themCO the FFI or civilians. Apparently thepilot of the aeroplane does an extremely goodbusiness on the exchange. With the 5,000francs given to him by DAIGLE he got El4. 10.0in sterling in England. With this sterlinghe can buy double the quantity, of French moneyin Paris. The pilot whose name is LEWISapparently supplied DAIGLE with what appeared tobe a genuine S.Army leave pass made out inthe name of Alphonso de la FUENTA. LEWIS'S jobGatalagueeReferenceikV4/tosnded back to England.On this particular trip 24 casualities werechecked into the aircraft by an Mmerican RedCross officer. DAIGLE himself stood by theaircraft while this was being done. The grewconsisted of 2 officers, a wireless operatorand LEWIS himself. LEWIS merely had to sayto one of these officers that DAIGLE was amedical orderley in the nir Medical corpswho had missed his ship the day before and wan-ted to return to his base in the U.K.Nobody thought it necessary to check hisidentity. On arrival in England the aircraftlanded near Wantage. Here the wounded weredisembarked while DAIGLE remained in the air-craft and flew on to No.17 base. Here theyhad to report to someone in a red brickbuilding. DAIGLE was merely asked for hisname and told to draw his blankets and rations.His identtty was not checked in any way norhad LEWIS to vouch for him. At abank inWantage he and LEWIS changed a considerablenumber of franck into English money. the bankmerely required their signatures on aslip ofpaper. On the black Market DAIGLE made hismoney purchasing cigarettes from the Americansand selling them to civilians, and by selling gasoline.December ZthHerbert wants to drop censorship to Eire andproposes to have a conference with Viv. andmyself on this subject. It will mean a savingin man-power of some3,30( people. The questiois a difficult one although it would be hardto say that Eire censorship produced any veryCatalogtenReterende$V/4/195317I had a long talk with Ede. about 0.C. Whilethere is undoubtedly much to be said on bothas sides, being I the still last feel word that in if all Ede matters is built affecting upoverseas stations we shall get back once moreto the old position of the administrative tailwagging the intelligence dog. We also dis-cussed the position of Jenkins, in relationto the protection of important people inEgypt. In reply to the F.O. we have said thatwe consider that the Ambassador should be theperson to say whether such people are to haveprotection and that his word should be finalon the grounds that it wasinot so much thepersonal safety of the individual concernedas the political repercussions which mightresult from an attempt on his life. Jenkinshimself could not be responsible for protectioand could only act in an advisory capacity.Michael Ryde tells me that SITTIG has startedto pipe up again.A -telegram from SACSEA to Washington gives anappreciation of Jap operations in China. TheJaps have succeeded in occupying or makinglargely ineffective allied air bases in centra.and south-east China and have reduced thescale of attack on their shipping. The contro.of the main communication sy stem will facil-itate the movement of troops and restrictmovement of the Chinese. Economically the Japshave secured adequate rice to maintain theirforces in China and at the same time have low-ered the war potential of Free china. theobject of further operations will be (a) toCatalogue eReference:kVr47195knock out the Chinese armies and cause collapsof the Central Govt. (b) to knock out the 14thU. S.A.F.Bases. (c) to open communications tothe S.E. Coast and (d) to secure a firm footingon which to fight a protracted war and todeny the use of Chinese coast ports to theallies. Japan has been trying to obtain acompromise peace with China and SOw mischiefbetween Chungking and the allies. Furthermilitary defeats might cause the leaders ofsouthern China to change their minds. Thiswould lead to the establishment of a newadminstration determined to fight on or toa sudden disorganisation or anarchy or to theestablishment of a new administration preparedto come to terms with Japan. The presentdistribution of Japanese forces points to anadvance at least as far as Qwei wang whichwill seriously interrupt communications betweerChungking and Yunan, & a simultaneous attemptto open communications to French Indo-hina.She has sufficient forces for both operationsbut may be delayed by supply difficultiesand the reconstruction of the railway southof Chingsa. The speed of the emerican advancein the Pacific may force Japan to strengthenher garrisons on the S.E. coast and to cons-truct adequate communications to them. Itis thought unlikely that Japan will open railcommunication to French Indo-hina for atleast 6 months but that she will open road-railriver routes at an early date.December 8thPerf'ect is leaving for Malta. I talked to himabout my views as to the future of RSLOS andhaldguerRelerenteeorve4nese, He agreed with me319that there was a possibility that the jobwould die on us. He thought it extremelyimportant that the good relations establishedwith the police should be maintained.Stephens came to see me at my request aboutthe future of his new camp near Brussels.Imade it Clear to him that I thought it un-desirable that he should carry out intelligencework at both camps. I saw no harm in hisstarting off the camp in Belgium or in visitingit once a month. I thought however that ifhe went bey ond this much of his usefulnesswould go. He seemed to agree about this.Hehas an idea however that he could remainnominal commandant of the camp near Brussels.I personally doubt whether this would. bepossible since if the camp is under 21st A.G.they will want the commandant to be at theirbeck and call. As regards the personnel, hehad included Hall and Ppeyer as the C. I. commit-ment would now be greater than at first wasanticipated As regards registry he entirelyagreed that he would not need to do any cardingmerely filing.Victor has just returned and is very full ofevery thing that is going on in Paris. Hesays that the D.G.S visit has been an unquali-fied success. Victor himself had a certainamount of trouble with SHAEF before he wentaway but he took the bull by the horns andhas received a vote of confidence from Strong.Dick I gather arrived back from his visithere ia a very depressed state and with theimpression that head office were living in a6atateguaeReferehqeekei4nospable of understanding2829the wider issues of the war. This I gatherapplied to me more than most. I had in factgained the same impression before Dick wentback to France. The trouble is I think thathe does not quite see the wider issues himselfand is rather tied up in the G.S blinkers ofSHAEF.An SCI report from Paris shows that an anony: -mous Turk has been D.F.d in a Ras de Calaisvillage. He was eventually unearthed througha house to house search.The total number of Abwehr agents apprehendedin France is 72. In Addition there are 25SD agents and 5 miscellaneous ones.December 9thBrock showed me some Istria indicating thatSnake has given the Palestine Police over 500names and addresses of terrorists and dumpsof arms. The police have already made over 250arrests.There is no doubt I think that themore moderate elements in the Zionist Movementare afraid that the actions of the extremistmay jeopardise the whole future of Zionism.Harris talked to me about the protest that theF.O. are making on our instigation about KNAPPE@ Frederico. We are drawing the attention ofthe Spaniards to this individual and asking forthe opportunity to question him as he has information as to the whereabouts of an importantagent in this country, namely GARBO. In factEataegieReferenee:kv4?i9s GARBO'S whereabouts39although of course he knows about his work. Itis not the least likely that we sh 11 have thechance of talking to him but if we do we havea questionnaire which should give the impressiorthat we are bluffing and that in fact we do notknow very much. We feel it desirable to makethis protest since it must be assumed thatthrough BUENAGA and others we know about Knappeand about GARBO. If therefore we do not regis-ter some protest it would appear ratherunusual in the present atmosphere. If thereis an interrogation it will be conducted bythe M. A. with Tommy in the offing to give himadvice.Anthony tells me that the F.O. have taken uni-lateral action about keeping the Japs out ofAnkara. This raised a protest from the JICwho of course have been considering the matteras a whole. L do not think we mind in the least.Johnny Bevan however has raised his voice ashe had asked ISLD to nurse a little deceptionin Ankara. How far this has materialised oris in fact ofany value I don't know.Easked Roger whether he would be prepared tolet Shillito give part of his time to Anthonywho is now deprived of Courtney. Roger ratherpetulently said he could not do this. He saidthat Shillito should have a full days work butthat he alway.s had to keep kieking him along.He says that he is lazy, but not without abilityUnlessshe has got something that really interesthim he is not inclined to do much work. He isnot very good at thinking out problems and get-ting over difficulties, and is generally somewhatCatalogue Reference:KV/4/19533a0ineffective. If this is SO I don't think heis likely to be of much use to Anthony. I ambound to say that ths was always my impressionwhen he was. working in B. .l0.Arnold-Forster rang me up about my letter to C.concerning the Geryan agent alleged to be onhis way by submarine to Canada. He wanted toknow how we had got on to the source. I saidthat we had rung up the Admiralty. He saidthat somehow or another that particular messagehad never been to Broadway at all but that hewould look into the whole matter. apparentlyMontagu should have consulted SI-before sendingthe wire, and this may account for his havingtaken the whole question SO light-heartedly,when Herbert tackled him about it. Whateverthe circumstances it is a bad show, becausenot only has Mills been let down but the sourceof the information has been seriously jeopar-dised. I gather that this particular form ofUltra is high-speed morse. this means that awhole message can be included in what soundslike one dot of a morse code.The Germans are now uwing a new device ontheir submarines which makes Asdic extremelydifficult. It is a kind of extended exhaustpipe and air intake which enables the sub.to recharge its batteries under water. tor-merly a sub. had to surface for this purposeowing to the chlorine fumes given off in therecharging process which would if allowedto collect, asphixiate the crew.Bonzo is being sent back to ltaly where SISladtatorgpreoRieferetoeukslel4i195IHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3233 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSACT 1958.NLOV 2000-Some time ago we made arrangements for a Pal-estine policeman named Catiing to go to theUSA where he would make contact with a manassociated with the Bergson Group. this groupfrom which radiated a number of committees hasbeen collecting funds for Irgunziei Leumi, andtransmitting them to Palestine for revolutionarypurposes. It was said that Bergson was to givea signal for revolt before very long. We gaveatling introductions to the FBI but he seemsco have seen the State Dept.G2 and almost every-body in the USA including Security Co-Ordina-tion. He made contact with the agent whosestory prima facie is quite plausible. I am nothowever altogether satisfied about this agent' Sreliability and feel that while he ought tobe ncouraged he shoul at the same time beclosely watched. Gort now suggests that weshould get Bergson and all his associatesarrested. This seems impossible since I gatherfrom the FBI that he has not committed anoffence. He may be expelled by the Immigrationauthorities for having over-stayed his permit bbut this is subject to every sort of appear andintrigue which may take months. On the otherhand Bergson might join theAmericanrces which would give him American citizen-ship within 6 weeks. I doubt however whetherhe would do this as it would prevent him fromcarrying out his present task. I am suggestingthat we should obtain the full so-operation ofthe FBI in having this man watched and in allow-ing us to continue to run the agent. Meanihilewe should get some checks going on the variouscommittees in the USA and also should getCatalogue BferEficek said to be therepresentative of the organisation here. On HAHALPERIN' arrival in Falestine on some futuredate it i said that the balloon is to go up.We may have some difficulty with the FBI asI understand that Bergson's affairs are tech-nically regarded as a religious matter andtherefore come within the sphere of the StateDept. There does not seem to be any thingparticularly religious about Bergson's presentintentions.The prices of certain commodities have reacheda fairly high level. A suit from a westendtailor now costs E23, hand made shoes El0.Asponge of moderate size E5. This includes100% luxury tax though what luxury there isin having a sponge L don't know. I should havethought it was purely utility. An old secondhand Gladstone bag in good condition ss E23.Antiques have risen to enormous prices. it isnothing to pay E20 or more for a small cardtable which before the war could be got forE4 or E5. Small cars are being sold for asmuch as 22-300 after considerable wear. InAmerica there is roughly a 30% increase inprices.Some Russian named SOKHOLINE is resident inSwitzerland and is apparently a kind of unoffi-cial Soviet representative. He has told theChinese charge 'affaires in Berne that Krauel,former German consul at Geneva, called on himand stated that Himmler had recently sent oneof his intimate associates to Switzerland withthe intention of discussing an armistice with aresponsible Refrence Soviet Rezsegage. out whether Himmler bokholine had325was an accredited Soviet representative andwhether he could undertake the first stepsin negotiations. Sokholine replied that hecould only undertake this matter if he receivedspecial authority from the Soviet ovt. Heasked who the personage sent by Himmler was andwhat was the broad outline of the German pro-posal. The German consul gave no reply exceptto say that he could only speak if Sokolinehowed that he had the necessary authority. Heurged Sokholine to give an early answer. Sokholown view is that the affair is curiously suddenand may be merely an attempt to find out whetherhe is or is not an accredited Soviet represen-tative in Switzerland and indirectly to discoverwhether there is a. possibility of an armisticebetween Russia and Germany.Recent reports indicate an increasing degreeof difficulty in inducing people to suggestnames of possible officials in Germany who couldtake control of newly occupied towns andvillages. In all places however where militarygovt. has been established and the initialdifficulty bf finding the most suitable personsavailable has been overcome, the adminis-tration is working quite smoothly. The americafirst army have convicted a German fordisobeying a circular restriction and sentencedhim to serve 45 days and to pay a fine of 20marks. The Inter-allied military govt.courtsitting at Kornlimunster has convicted a womanfor sencealing records of the Frauenschaft andsentenced her to 6 years imprisonment. Thereviewing authority has reduced the sentence toyears. A certain number of Germans are beingCatalogue Reference:KV/4/195encountered who are notnin possession ofidentity cards. Financial conditions inoccupied areas vary. Some banks are operatingsatisfactorily,others not at all. There isno iduntary coperation from the Reichsbank.The archives of Aachen seem to indicate thatall records dealing with Nazi personnelhave been removed.2Catalogue ReferenCe:KV/4/195327DECEMBER LITHAt 11 O'clock I had a talk with Bill Luke.He cannot speak with any great enthusiasmabout British Honduras which, though it haspotentialities, 1S Obviously a very 'one-horse'Colony.There are very few roads andpassage by sea to any of the Caribbean islamssomewhat precarious. The principalindustry is mahogeny, which is largely mar-keted by the Americans who take the majorityofthe profits. If the Colony shipped itsmahogany to New Orleans and sold it therethe revenue of British Honduras might be con-siderably increased. The Colony also pro-duces a certain amount of very fine citrusfruit.After the disastrous GOUGH case neither S.I.Snor ourselves were particularly popular. BillLuke has, however broken this down in SO faras M.I.5. are concerned. On the otherhand,the Governor will not tolerate any M. I.6representative in the Colony at all. Thereis no doubt that Sanderson and his black wife,led by some hysterical G-2 American officersfrom the Panama zone, displayed a superlativedegree of ineptitude in handling the GOUGHcase. Sanderson has, in fact, had to leavethe Colony and GOUGH does not intend to lethim return.There is practically nothing of real Securityinterest in British Honduras. Our interestshave been handed over to the Police Comman-dant. Harvey Clark and do not think aD.atalogue dogyReferenceeayartise Reference time would be justifiableThere is a small negro movement whichlatterly has been rather active. Some of itsmeetings have been of a seditious kind. Lukepointed out to the Governor that it seemed tohim undesirable that a negro should be allowedto stand up in the market square and run downthe Governor and the King, even though nobodywas inclined to give much support to hisremarks. This seemed to be a new idea tothe local authorities, but they arenevertheless considering the possibility oftaking some action.The housing problem in British Honduras isextremely serious and much needs to be donefor the welfare of the natives.The Governor, Sir John Hunter, seems toconsume rather more than his share of thegin.I am arranging for Luke to go into B. 3.1.a 1. aMichael Ryde and Anthony came to see meabout a suggestion received from Lenton thathe should see Smutts on the subject of theSITTIG transmitter. Michael thinks thatthis would undoubtedly cause trouble withDevilliers and that the only way is tobring the whole matter to the notice ofSmutts through Forsyth. It will then be forSmutts to suggest whatever action he thinksfit, either through Lenton or throughDevilliers.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSCatalogue ReferenCe:KV/4VA 1958. OV tooTHIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDINDEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 ACT (4) OF 1958. THE ON PUBLIC 2300 RECORDSAt 5 o'clock i went to a J.I.C., where wediscussed a telegram from the Chiefs of Staffin Washington on the subject of over-allsecurity between stages A and B. We came tothe onClusion that the Chiefs of Staff inWashington had got hold of the wrong end ofthe stick. They were asking for securityto be maintained at the pre-OVERLORD level.It was therefore necessary to introducemodifications which will give us latitude overhere.Having got the over-all directive tied up Isuggested, firstly, that it should be given afairly wide circulation, including the HomeOffice since this might put the brake on thewholesale removal of security measures whichwas at present going also suggestedthat, within the framework of the Chiefs ofStaff directive, it would be extremelyvaluable to get down to matters of detail.It made an immense difterence to our work ifwe could be told precisely whatwas secret.The three Services took up the usual attitudethat the whole question was extremely flexibleand that it would be difficult to lay downany thing a hard and fast Admiralty kind. represen- By way of930tatives what their view would be of infor-mation relating to a convoy of Liverpoolreaching the. Japs six weeks after the convoyhad sailed - at what date did the Securityaspect of such an operation cease to haveany significance. They began by saying thatit might be extremely important to preventthe information reaching the enemy, thoughon the time factor they seemed to be some-what doubtful. Later they came to theconclusion that convoys would be made upin Capetown and not in Liverpool. I thensaid, "Well, I suppose, then, that sailingsof ships from Liverpool would really not beof much significance at all", to which theanswer was "Well, I suppose they would not".Clearly the only chance of getting any senseout of the Service Ministry would be tosubmit to them a long list of things weimagine they might ant to keep secret andto get their answers to each one. The par-ticular example that L put to the Admiraltyis quite a significant one since it affectsTravel Control and Censorship and a wholenumber of Security measures.DECEMBER 12THAt the D.G'S meeting today Burley mentionedthe question of opening up a direct shippingroute with Spanish ships between this countryand the Iberian Peninsular. For some reasonor other the Foreign Office think that thiswould be a good thing. Neither the M. 0. .W.T. W. T.AAAlotRfe MiReSttE:KATI4IPS are in the Leastbit mntereste in the proposed cargoes, which331in any case would be small. I said that Lthought it was extremely undesirable to re-open this route until after stage A, since itwould only lead to the Irish demanding theright for their line to Lisbon to be reopened.Meanwhile Herbert was suggesting the can-cellation of all censorship to Eire, on whichhe at present had 3, 200 people employed, onthe grounds that Eire was a cul-de-sac andthat any information reaching it had to comeback through this country if it was to reachthe enemy. If the shipping route was to beopened from Dublin to Lisbon then Eire wouldno longer be a cul-de-sac.Bill Stephenson has telegraphed to the D.G.saying "I shall probably be bringing Hooverto London shortly. Will you send me and timeyou would wish to have him on nything youdesire other than meetings with the Cabinetwhich I am arranging". The D.G. G. has drafteda fairly polite reply, but makes it clearthat he expects to hear from Mr. Hoover eitherdireet or through his representative. Mean-while, if Hoover could give us some idea ofthe time he had available we could arrangea programme. Bill Stephenson is obviouslytrying to impress everyone over here that hehas got Hoover in his pocket. It may wellbe that he has; on the other hand he maymerely be angling for some wires from pro-minent people in this country in order thathe can wave them in Hoover's face and suggestto him that as everybody wants to see him inLondon a visit should be arranged.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/19533Arnold Foster has written to me making itclear that S.I.S. were at fault in not in-forming us about the submarine containinga German agent which was on its way toCanada. In future it is proposed that D.N.IOttawa should not pass anything of this kindto the R.C.M.P. P. except through Cyril Millsor at any rate after getting into touch withCyril. Meanwhile it is agreed that we hersshould be informed in order that we canpass the information on to Cyril. Montaguapparently slipped up by not consultingwith S.I.S. before sending off his wire toD.N.I. Ottawa.Herbert has put in an excellent report onthe S.D. in Belgium. The two questionsinvolved were (1) Have we the measure ofthe stay-behind organisation laid down inBelgium before the German withdrawal? (2)Have we made appropriate Security dispositiasto counter S.D. plans made since the with-drawal?As regards (1) he concludes (a) that the S.D.stay-behind organisation of W/T agents, knownas the I.Netz, has almost certainly beeneither destroyed or rendered impotent.(b) that apart from the casesof AdolfPITTERY and HOMBOURG mentioned in his report,there is no evidence that the S.D. has leftbehind any other effective espionageorganisation, (c) that if LA HAYE'S evidenceis successfully exploited the S.D. stay.-behind organisation of saboteurs will pro-bably have been destroyed, (d) that un-# and little likelihoodCatalogue Reference:KV/4/1950703e soseo queodut atou oya JIOI XOOToue are f urewta pInousS6wartAd tpobidAEsnoTAqOESTE feouts qqaJI SI stuT Xu197IPRaurI Aq Jano uexe aq ueo 7T uo teeIseorloStu JO ouo FO TOJuOu Jepun- 5qATTRPJ pinous 71 PouttteuI TeuoTTejedouttm AToset pauosuop 0q ITIM sesets ATaeeSI UT dureo 0y se '1pu7 syutu OTIMeY 7842Jeues I untteg Ut due Oc0-unoOIsoPIMIOI ou note osng UIM LEN e pet IumISteg our santosueynJOsUr SIOSSOIDOUI[ JO:sTdueth auITJSNII JO: Xse+ 94+ 01 peiterep. eq pLnoys:etqrssod se Teuuosaed pue SIPOIJOAT tanspsJO S5JOJ'e peonunsut Item se pue set se(p) "esuetsrodut Tunoureaed Jo se pepegeiaq Aewr etTeut stuede Mou jo uomesuteeut Butuaseid JO pue unttg ut sTuesepuryeqesens ueDot'Js sxse out ue6squotTesotteeJ IO etqedeo pue peptAtprore9oInOSOi onoseMitanses-noJ( (0.) XJIOM ITau IOJTIOS Iniinj e PUII pue uoiserep adeosaAeu-u eu-uunttgorutpar out peesut sut-AtTnsseponsae susge aseu JT (Q) tateos bet e toAtqTSsod Sepueqinsip turota SuToauippue Sutiedoid pue eSenoqes teors Aud JO97oq esodind eut JOI INCZHOXS Jepun SUTomIomeSTueDIo JO suese "sistnypeied pueIASSQTO OuII se ytoq 'umTaTe our asut o7Teos saetie AtqeqoJd 'iduenrelueioadxtsnu OM (e) sepntouoo au (7) spiesau SVsuesMou JO; uotiesut ou? Aq ueu 5e1uopSuturesot ut peepons suewep 0yt tuetxe euto7 pue JI snoesuep eq IIITS ITIM untTegut suee :a'S perenossipun pue peItueptTHIS.IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED334IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 .(4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDST 1958 Mo 20001If he is constantly. traventing between hereand Belgium a great deal of his value Luewill willbeilost.I saw D 25 today. He had just arrived backfrom Lisbon; where he has s-evidentlyibeerenjoy ing himself. He has been concernedrunning the agent ECCLESIASTIC; aCzech girl whois the' mistress of KOSICHthe FT.L. representative in Lisbon.Aroomhas been found for her in our AirAttache's office and she is now being usedextensively for the -purpose of deception,chicken-food being supplied from the AirMinistry-throughis.S. 35 seemsiconfident that things are working well: Hehas plarted a number of documentsrandte evenhas a photographof KOSICH photographingthe document which was taken by i EOCEESIASTICat KOSICH'S request: Helevidently sees itas a frontispiece to his memoirsiwhent hewriteshimself up as the master-spy. Detailsof this document are known from Most SecretSources ources-to-have-goneron-to-Berlin:+u3 to-havegoneron Berlin- U3Siss also feeding information to an Americanagentand has weekly meetings with KRAME1and other members"of the G:I.S. His mainline is to disrupt the Abwehr and the S.Dto cause suspicion of their bona fidese andto give them all the jitters: Recently hetold informant to that, whilelat-aParty at which a number of people from theBritish Embassy were present, he overheardone girl say to another "I wonder why it isatatoougnleteefn&f:kMistigs wart. criminalsithel+ho Emhacetiic headen nGold Fasanen/33S033 knew from COLUMBINE tha't "Gold Fasanen'was the nick name given to membersro theAbwehr on account.. of their brown uniformwith yellow lapels. This piece of infor:mation-got right home and was: followed up-by a remark that all those who had servedon the Eastern Front were to be put on theRussian Gold Fasanen list. I told w3>that I had seen none of this reports sincelast September. He is going to speak aboutthis. Meanwhile he tells me that Kim Philbyandare anxious to discuss-long termplans with him. In other words i expectthey y-want-to-offer-him-a-job-abroad want -a-job-abroadPersonally I think that if they had wishedto do any thing of this kind they heysshould should havespoken to us first, particularly if thequestion of funds is going to arlse. However035 will report in due course and he willalso see - that L get copies of his reports.DECEMBER 13THI had a meeting_ with Milmo and Butler in theD.G's room about the advanced Camp 020. Itwas agreed that Stephens-should-make-hisHeadquarters in London and that it would bedesirable: that M. I.19 -e should--supply-theCommandant for the advanced camp nearBrussels: Butler will be seeing Rawlinson-and, later on, Stephens:yAt the Wednesday meeting today Herbert gavea resume of his paper on the S.J Marriottsaid that there was a tendency to revive oldagents.. He had in mind GELATINE and L thinkCatalogrte Referenee X\e/Bemed to be an interest39in the movement of airborne troopsi par-ticularly Czech troops.Roger Hollis told us that a certain numberof searches and arrests had been made inconnection-with Anarchist pamphlets forcirculation within the Army.TAR and I had a talk with Bertram Ede aboutthe staff matters of Overseas Control. Thoreare still a certain number of posts to bfilled.In the evening I attended a meeting-attheColonial Office with Brock. Eastman was inthe chair. -Kim-Philby-rTony.Rumbolt, Harrington, Rymer Jones and Mac-Pherson of the Ministry of SupplyOfficeinWashington were present. ; The meeting wishedto discuss the running of the agentRymer Jones gave the history. ofthis man.; he was a member of the Irgun andhad given information to the Palestine PoliceFor reasons of personal safety applicationwas made o-theAme the eAmericansfor for. visa for-himto go to the U.S. He had been sent thereby: the F.B.I.; who passed him on-to MajorSnyder of G. 2 who was interested inPalestinian affairs. He had subsequentlybeen approached by the BERGSON group andhad become associated with a good many ofits members. In this way he had discoveredthat there was to be a plot for an uprisingin Palestine immediately after che-cessationof hostilities in Europe. He had thereforegot into-touch with Snyder who; through theState Department, had pladeaSHsmA inoeoluchORIGINAL A-DOCUMENTPREFAINEDIN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION44 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSCatalogue Reference:KV/4/ 1958.NOewith MacPherson of the Ministry of SupplyDelegation, MacPherson having been formera C.0. official in Palestine.It was inthis way thatknown as Y.32,came into touch with MacPherson, who hassince been conducting the business from theU.S. end. Macrherson, at Y.32's request,got Catling of the Palestine Police to cometo the U.S. Little transpired from thisisit except that Y. 32 wanted $2000 and500 a month in order to continue his en-quiries through Ruth KAPLAN, secretary toMERLIN who is BERGSON'S deputy. The meetinghad to discuss whether this money should bepaid, and how, in future,Y Y. 32 was to beoperated. I said that I thought we shouldmake contact with the F.B.I. representativehere, give him the full facts, tell himthat we were interested in extracting thefull facts from Y. Y.32 32 and also in checkingup on his bona fides. We would be glad ifthe F.B.I. could carry out this task for us.If they felt they required the StateDepartment backing we would be glad if theywould let us know if they would prefer toask for this themselves or to have theequest made through the British Ambassador.Harrington thought that it might be a goodthing if the payments were made by theAmericans. This would forestall anysuggestion that might subsequently be madethat we had been trying to run agents inthe U.S.THIS IS A COPYORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINEDiN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION3 (4) OF THE PUBLIC RECORDSCatalogue Reference:KV/Ac1995GoodDECEMBER 14THI saw Dashwood at his request. He had astory about a man called C.A. ATKINS, con-cerning whom an adverse report had been madeby REICHENHEIM, a German refugee working forthe Ministry of Information. ATKINS, whois in the Ministry of Supply, appears tobe a hot Rotarian with a burning desireto get into touch with good Germans. Heis obviously steeped in the atmosphere ofthe Anglo-German fellowship as s.it it was in1936. I asked Dashwood for a note abouthim to that we can see that he does not getinto the Control Commission. He is justthe type of person who can do a great dealof harm and will undoubtedly be an infernalnuisance to everybody. Thesesortofpeopleare much worse than spies.I have seen an interesting pamphlet withphotographs of the MULBERRY.There is afacsimile of the P.M's letter to the Chiefof Combined Operations or his Deputy whichis dated 30.5.42 and says, "They must floatup and down with the tide. Let me have thebest solution worked out. Don't arguethe matter. The difficulties will arguefor themselves.BRONX is leaving for Madrid on the 19th ona Peruvian Diplomatic passport with aSpanish Diplomatic visa.The Germans have now disclosed the locationof the hidden transmitter in Belgium whichwas intended for SNIPER. This has beenafaagye passed to eferente Harmer KYArtSBe who it up in a grave-339Torry came in to see me. He has just comeback from Belgium for two or three day sleave. He seems to be enjoying his work andthere is no doubt that, operating underextremely difficult conditions, he hasproduced some excellent reports. He hopesto go on as an interrogator in Germany asGerman is really his best language.DECEMBER 15THI saw Joe Lynch this morning and gave himthe details about Y.32. He isgoingtocommunicate with the Bureau and get somesort of check up on the man. He will alsotest out their reactions about handling thecase. I promised to let him have a resumeof the file.I had a meeting with Joe Spencer this morn-ing and asked him whether he had any ideasabout his future. He would I think be veryready to come into this office after the war.He is an accountant by profession but has nocommitments.TAR and Anthony discussed W th me the questioof my taking the daily meeting. it was feltthat this might keep me more in the picture aboth speed things up and lessen the flow ofpaper. 1 am going to give it a try.V. 2 is coming is at about 40 per week.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/195H case has come to notice of a P/W splittinga postcard and writing in secret ink inside.Cecil attended a meeting at the F.O. withAdam at which the project to start up theline of panish ships between here and thepeninsular was torpedoed. The Ministry ofFood and the Min. of "WNar Transport did notsee much dvantage but the F.u. wanted to takthis step as a gesture towards theSpaniards. Why it is necessary to make agesture to the Spaniards at this momentgoodness only knows. Cecil and Adam opposedtheproject on security grounds, Adam threaten-ed the NEP scheme for which the soldierspleaded shortage of man power, and Cecilpointed out that if Spanish ships could sailfrom here to the peninsular,Irelan oulddemand permission to open their line fromDublin to Lisbon. Herbert who had beenwarned them chimed in to say that he wastrying to close down censorship to Irelandon which he was employing 3,2U0 people.The basis of his case was that Ireland wasa cul de sac and that any information whichwent there would have to come back tothis country if it were going to reach theenemy. If therefore there was to be a holecut in the sack through the running ofships from Dublin to Lisbon, censorship wouldhave to be maintained. This I think wasthe coup de grace.Catalogue Reference:KV/4/195